7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/618
City of Lancaster
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 12
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 2018-12-53 adopted 12/10/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lancaster, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Lancaster, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City. The City of Lancaster, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/618
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city manager,” “city secretary,”
“chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary,
chief of police or such other municipal officer or department, respectively, of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Lancaster, Texas and shall mean the governing body of the City of Lancaster.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Dallas, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/618
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments and fixtures
thereto.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/618
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article
and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such
ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded
from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/618
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) (1) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs
fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, other than dumping of refuse, may not exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(2) A fine or penalty for a violation of a rule, ordinance or policy regulation that governs the
dumping of refuse, may not exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00).
(Ordinance 2016-06-11 adopted 6/13/16)
(c) A person convicted of an offense under title 7, subtitle C, Transportation Code (the Uniform Act
Regulating Traffic on Highways) for which another penalty is not provided shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $1.00 or more than $200.00 plus such other penalties and costs as may be provided by such subtitle C.
(d) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental state,
and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically stated
in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five hundred
dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(e) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(f) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(g) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 CITY COUNCIL*
Sec. 1.02.001 Meeting dates and time
The city council shall hold a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on the second and fourth Mondays of every month.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Charter reference–Meetings of city council, sec. 3.10.
Sec. 1.02.002 Mayor pro tem and deputy mayor pro tem
(a) Mayor pro tem. The city council at its first meeting or as soon as practical each year after its general
election shall, in accordance with the home rule charter, elect a mayor pro tem.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/618
(b) Deputy mayor pro tem. The city council shall, at the meeting provided in this section, elect a deputy mayor
pro tem. The deputy mayor pro tem shall serve in the absence of the mayor pro tem. In the event that the mayor
pro tem declines to act or serve in case the mayor's position is vacated as provided in the home rule charter, the
deputy mayor pro tem shall be deemed to fill the unexpired term of the mayor.
(c) Filling of vacancies; election of councilmember to serve as mayor.
(1) In the event that either the mayor pro tem or deputy mayor pro tem fills the vacated position of
mayor, then a special election shall be called to fill the unexpired term of the position of the
councilmember filling the unexpired mayoral term.
(2) In the event that either the mayor pro tem or deputy mayor pro tem declines to fill the
unexpired term, the council shall, within thirty (30) days of such declination, elect from its members
a mayor to fill the unexpired term. A special election shall be called to fill the unexpired term of the
city council member filling the unexpired mayoral term.
(Ordinance 2006-08-30, secs. 1.801–1.803, adopted 8/28/06)
Charter references–Mayor, mayor pro tem and deputy mayor pro tem, sec. 3.05; vacancy in office of mayor or councilmember, sec.
3.06.
ARTICLE 1.03 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.03.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (2002 Code, sec. 1.701)
Sec. 1.03.002 Additional definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the
city that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in
an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records liaison officers. The persons designated under section 1.03.009 of this article.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/618
effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.03.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.03.006 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.702)
Sec. 1.03.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.03.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even
though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use
of such records is prohibited. (2002 Code, sec. 1.703)
Sec. 1.03.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (2002 Code, sec. 1.704)
Sec. 1.03.005 Designation of records management officer
The office of city secretary and the successive holders of said office shall serve as records management officer
for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the
director and librarian of the state library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the
office, as applicable. (2002 Code, sec. 1.705)
Sec. 1.03.006 Records management plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to
the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the
efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city and to properly preserve those
records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management
officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or [the records in the department head's care from the application of this
article and] the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a
basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.706)
Sec. 1.03.007 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/618
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of, and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms
design and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers and other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of
city records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically and the estimated cost and
space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in
each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13) above;
(15) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city
personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local
Government Records Act.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.707)
Sec. 1.03.008 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/618
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.708)
Sec. 1.03.009 Designation of records liaison officers
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the
implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer
determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one (1) records liaison officer
should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers
specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly
familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of
the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action
of the department head of a person designated as records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly
designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her
department. (2002 Code, sec. 1.709)
Sec. 1.03.010 Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation
for the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.710)
Sec. 1.03.011 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall
prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by
the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other
information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and the records management officer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/618
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.711)
Sec. 1.03.012 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.03.006
shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures
of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for
an additional period.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.712)
Sec. 1.03.013 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (2002 Code, sec. 1.713)
Sec. 1.03.014 Records center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 1.03.006, shall be under the direct control
and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of
the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 1.03.006. (2002
Code, sec. 1.714)
ARTICLE 1.04 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.04.001 Emergency management organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the
director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.301)
Sec. 1.04.002 Duties and responsibilities of emergency management director
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/618
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property
within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order
or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization, as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code,
chapter 418).
(2002 Code, sec. 1.302)
Sec. 1.04.003 Emergency management plan; National Incident Management System adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/618
(a) A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The
plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this
article.
(b) There is hereby adopted for the city as the standard for incident management the National Incident
Management System (NIMS), 2005 edition, published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
and the same is hereby incorporated by reference herein as if fully copied. One copy of such code shall be kept
at all times in the office of emergency management.
(c) As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of
emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to
the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all
departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan
in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary
to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.303)
Sec. 1.04.004 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in
the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in
the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management
coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management
insofar as said program may affect the city. (2002 Code, sec. 1.304)
Sec. 1.04.005 Emergency regulations to override existing regulations
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith. (2002 Code, sec. 1.305)
Sec. 1.04.006 Nonliability of city
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health
and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of or damage to the property of such person. (2002 Code, sec. 1.306)
Sec. 1.04.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless
during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the
city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. (2002 Code, sec. 1.307)
Sec. 1.04.008 Offenses; penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/618
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any
act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the
termination of a warning shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by this article.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.308)
Sec. 1.04.009 Conflicts with state or federal statutes or military regulations
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval
order, rule or regulation. (2002 Code, sec. 1.309)
ARTICLE 1.05 SPECIAL EVENTS AND PARADES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.05.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Applicant. A person who has filed a written application for a special event.
Concession. A facility at a special event where food or drink is offered to the public.
Licensee. The promoter or person to whom the parade or special event permit has been issued.
Nonprofit. Not maintained or organized for profit, as recognized by the state and the federal tax code.
Parade. The assembly of three or more persons whose gathering is [for] the common design and purpose of
traveling or marching in procession from one location to another location on a public thoroughfare or right-ofway
to express feelings and beliefs on political, religious or social issues. “Parade” shall include runs, walks,
relays, marathons, or similar events.
Permit. The city's agreement giving the promoter permission to hold the special event on the terms and
conditions stated in the permit and subject to the rules, regulations, and requirements of this article.
Person. Any individual, assumed name entity, partnership, association, corporation or other organization.
Promoter. The person seeking to hold the special event, including the promoter's employees, agents, affiliates,
successors, permitted assigns, and other persons controlled by the promoter.
Reimbursable costs. All costs and expenses incurred by the city for activities associated with staging of the
event, including, without limitation, the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/618
(1) Utilities services provided to the special event, including all of the costs of installation,
maintenance, and connection.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.801)
(2) Barricades, cones, and traffic-control devices. (2002 Code, sec. 1.801; Ordinance adopting
Code)
(3) Special event parking.
(4) Food services inspection.
(5) Repair, maintenance and removal of facilities in the event of a failure of the promoter.
(6) Repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks and other public property.
(7) Police protection.
(8) Fire protection.
(9) Emergency medical service.
(10) Garbage disposal and cleanup.
(11) Traffic control.
(12) Other direct costs associated with the special event.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street intended for the use of pedestrians that is located between the curblines, or
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines.
Special event. A temporary event or gathering, other than those events defined in this article as a parade, using
either private or public property, which involves one or more of the following activities:
(1) Closing a public street;
(2) Blocking or restriction of public property and streets;
(3) Offer of merchandise, food, or beverages on public property or on private property where
otherwise prohibited by ordinance;
(4) Erection of a tent on public property, or on private property where otherwise prohibited by
ordinance;
(5) Installation of a stage, band shell, trailer, van, portable building, grandstand or bleachers on
public property, or on private property where otherwise prohibited by ordinance;
(6) Placement of portable toilets on public property, or on private property where otherwise
prohibited by ordinance; and/or
(7) Placement of temporary no parking signs in a public right-of-way.
No special event application or permit is required where otherwise allowed by ordinance.
Special event coordinator. The city employee, as designated by the city manager, responsible for reviewing the
initial special event application, coordinating meetings between the applicant and city representatives, collecting
special event permit fees, and enforcing the special events ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/618
Special event/parade permit. Approval from the city or its designated representative for a parade or special
event.
Special event review committee. A committee consisting of a representative from each of the following city
departments: building inspections, emergency management, fire, risk management, parks and recreation, police,
streets, and additional city staff as determined by the special event coordinator upon review of the special event
application. The special event coordinator shall head this committee. The special event review committee will
meet on a monthly basis.
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part is open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.801)
Sec. 1.05.002 Operating procedures
(a) A parade or special event shall not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic near the
parade or special event.
(b) The city has the right to postpone, cancel or close early the parade or special event because of hazardous
weather or other acts of God or for public safety and welfare. The city shall have no liability for such
postponement, cancellation, or closure. Further, the city shall have no liability for the failure to postpone, cancel,
or close early the parade or special event under such conditions.
(c) A parade shall move from its point of origin to its point of termination without unreasonable delays enroute.
(d) Each marching unit, organization or entry in the parade will conduct stationary performances only at
approved location(s) and for a specified time period.
(e) A parade or special event shall not interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service
to, areas near the parade or special event or unreasonably require the diversion of police and fire protection and
ambulance service from other parts of the city.
(f) A permit holder shall comply with all directions and conditions contained within the permit and with all
city ordinances and other applicable laws.
(g) The city, when reasonably necessary, may prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or
highway or part thereof on a parade route or part thereof or on the approach to a parade or special event. The city
shall post notice to such effect, and it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to park, leave, or stand any
unattended vehicle in violation thereof.
(h) The city, when reasonably necessary, may temporarily close or restrict the use of city streets or other
public property for a parade or special event. The director of public works is authorized to install temporary
traffic-control devices for the temporary closure or restriction of city streets and public property for parades or
special events. It shall be unlawful for any person to disregard or disobey any such temporary traffic-control
device.
(i) The driver of any vehicle or animal shall obey the instruction of any traffic-control device applicable
thereto placed in accordance with the city Code of Ordinances or the state Transportation Code, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
(j) Speeds greater than 15 miles per hour are not reasonable and prudent. A person operating a parade float or
other parade vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour is subject to removal from the parade by a police
officer or other parade official.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/618
(k) Operators of parade floats and other parade vehicles will make every attempt to keep a maximum of 30
feet between their float and the float operated directly in front of them. Operators of parade floats and other
parade vehicles that continually lag behind the steady course of the parade may be removed from the parade by a
police officer or other parade official.
(l) Operators of specialized vehicles or performance-enhanced vehicles in the parade shall be mindful of state
Transportation Code section 545.420(a)(5): “a person may not participate in any manner in an exhibition of
vehicle speed or acceleration.” Any operator of a vehicle participating in an exhibition of acceleration will be
cited by law enforcement officers and immediately removed from the parade.
(m) The throwing, tossing, or distribution of candy, beads, or other material from a parade float or other
vehicle is specifically prohibited. Candy, beads, or other material may be distributed to spectators by walkers
adjacent to parade floats or other vehicles provided that such distribution does not interfere with the orderly
movement of the parade and no spectators are required to move into the parade path to retrieve said material.
Any violation of this provision will result in the parade float or vehicle removal from the parade.
(n) The spraying of water or any other liquid is specifically prohibited.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.808)
(o) All floats or decorated vehicles shall carry a 2A:10BC fire extinguisher with a current inspection tag
and/or an approved fire repression system approved by the city fire marshal. (2002 Code, sec. 1.808; Ordinance
adopting Code)
(p) Float length shall not exceed 55 feet, including the two vehicles, nor shall the width or height exceed 13
feet.
(q) Each equestrian/animal unit shall provide their own cleanup crew and equipment. The cleanup crew shall
be positioned directly behind the unit. Equestrian riders shall be a minimum of twelve years of age, able to
control the animal in crowded situations, and have adult supervision. Any rider or handler showing an inability
to control their animal will be deemed unsafe by a law enforcement officer or parade official, and shall be
removed from the parade.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.808)
Sec. 1.05.003 Indemnification of city
An applicant for a parade or special event permit must execute a written agreement to indemnify the city and its
officers and employees against all claims of injury or damage to persons or property, whether public or private,
arising out of the special event. This indemnification shall include the following statement: “LICENSEE shall
defend, protect and keep CITY forever harmless and indemnified against and from any penalty, or any damage,
or charge, imposed for any violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulations arising out of the use of the
property by the LICENSEE, whether occasioned by the neglect of LICENSEE, its employees, officers, agents,
contractors, or assigns or those holding under LICENSEE. LICENSEE shall at all times defend, protect, and
indemnify and it is the intention of the parties hereto that LICENSEE hold CITY harmless against and from any
and all loss, cost, damage, or expense, including attorney's fees, arising out of or from any accident or other
occurrence on or about the property causing personal injury, death or property damage resulting from use of
property by LICENSEE, its agents, employees, customers and invitees, except when caused by the negligence or
willful misconduct of CITY, its officers, employees or agents, and only then to the extent of the proportion of
any fault determined against CITY for its willful misconduct. LICENSEE shall at all times defend, protect,
indemnify and hold CITY harmless against and from any and all loss, cost, damage, or expense, including
attorney's fees arising out of or from any and all claims or causes of action resulting from any failure of
LICENSEE, its officers, employees, agents, contractors or assigns in any respect to comply with and perform all
the requirements and provisions hereof.” (2002 Code, sec. 1.809)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/618
Sec. 1.05.004 Offenses
A person commits an offense if he:
(1) Commences or conducts a parade or special event without the appropriate permits or fails to
comply with any requirement or condition of a permit or this article or starts at the wrong time or
date.
(2) Participates in a parade or special event for which a permit has not been granted.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.810)
Secs. 1.05.005–1.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 1.05.031 Required; exceptions
(a) A person commits an offense if he engages in, participates in, aids, or commences a parade or special event
within the city without first making written application for and receiving a permit from the city.
(b) No permits shall be required under this article for the following:
(1) The armed forces of the United States of America, the military forces of the state, political
subdivisions of the state, e.g., city ISD and county, and the forces of the police and fire departments
acting within the scope of their duties.
(2) A funeral procession proceeding by a vehicle under the most reasonable route from a funeral
home, church, or residence to the place of service or place of interment.
(3) A peaceful demonstration at a fixed location which is not a street.
(4) A sidewalk procession which observes and complies with the traffic regulations and trafficcontrol
devices, using that portion of a sidewalk nearest the street, but at no time using more than
one-half of the sidewalk.
(c) City-recognized HOA and neighborhood association/political subdivisions that meet the following
conditions with special event application, will be subject to refund and/or permit [sic].
(1) Clean up, leave all public property in a neat, orderly working condition.
(2) Must return all city property in the condition as was obtained.
(3) Must have completed an HOA/neighborhood city registration form.
(4) Must be in compliance with all federal, state, and municipal codes.
Exempt from application and permit fee. Must place a $25.00 deposit.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.802)
Sec. 1.05.032 Application
(a) A person desiring to hold a parade or special event shall apply for a permit by filing with the special event
coordinator a written application upon a form provided for that purpose. Each parade and special event permit
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable, except where otherwise noted, application fee in the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/618
amount determined and set out in the city's master fee schedule approved by the city council. An application for
a parade or special event shall be made not less than thirty days prior to the date and time of the commencement
of the parade or special event. The special event coordinator and/or the special event review committee may
waive the thirty-day filing requirements for a parade or special event if the special event coordinator and/or the
special event review committee determines that the application can be processed in less than thirty days, taking
into consideration the type of parade or special event. If the application is submitted later than the required time
as stated above, an expedited review fee may be required; the amount shall be included in the city's master fee
schedule approved by the city council.
(b) An application must contain the following information:
(1) The name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, date of birth, and driver's license number
of the applicant, and of any other persons responsible for the conduct of the parade or special event;
(2) A description of the parade or special event and the requested dates and hours of operation of
the parade or special event;
(3) The estimated number of persons participating in the parade or special event and a set of
detailed plans showing the area or route to be used during the parade or special event, including
proposed structures, tents, fences, barricades, signs, banners, and restroom facilities, which will
include Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accountability;
(4) The time and location of street closings, if any are requested;
(5) Details of the offer of merchandise or serving of food or alcoholic beverages at the special
event;
(6) Details of how the applicant will clean up the area used after the parade or special event;
(7) The parade's commencement and termination time, the specific route to be traveled, and the
starting and termination points;
(8) The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade;
(9) The estimated number, if any, of animals, animals and riders, animal-drawn vehicles, floats,
motor vehicles, motorized displays, and marching units or organizations, such as, but not limited to,
bands, color guards, and drill teams;
(10) Application fees required by the city. All city-sponsored events shall be exempt from fees;
(11) Prior approval by the parks and recreation department to use the trail system or park facilities
for a special event, if applicable;
(12) Proof of nonprofit status, if applicable; and
(13) Copy of the contract, agreement, or details outlining the arrangement between the applicant
and the promoter.
(c) The applicant must also provide the certificate of liability insurance and an endorsement agreement not
less than ten days prior to the date of the parade or special event.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.803)
Sec. 1.05.033 Approval of plans
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/618
(a) A permit shall be subject to the promoter receiving city approval prior to the start of the special event for
(without limitation) the plans described below.
(b) The city, by approving such plans, assumes no liability or responsibility therefor.
(c) The following plans shall be required:
(1) Facilities. A comprehensive set of plans and specifications relating to all temporary facilities to
be constructed or utilized for the special event. A building permit from the building inspections
department is required.
(2) Fire protection. A comprehensive plan for prevention of fires and for adequate protection of
persons and property in the event of a fire, including, without limitation, adequate exits, fire
extinguishers, and adequate access for fire trucks and emergency vehicles. The fire protection plan
shall be coordinated through the office of the fire marshal.
(3) Food and beverage service. A comprehensive plan to provide food and beverage concessions.
The community development department shall approve the plan. Food permits may be required.
(4) Emergency medical services. A comprehensive plan to provide adequate emergency medical
services at the parade or special event. The plan shall be coordinated through the city fire department.
(5) Parking; assembly or disassembly of parade participants. A comprehensive plan to provide
adequate parking for the proposed parade or special event, including written permission by all of the
owners of land to be used for the parade or special event.
(6) Police protection. A comprehensive plan providing for adequate safety, security, traffic and
crowd control in connection with the parade or special event. The plan shall be coordinated through
the city police department.
(7) Promotional plan. If applicable, a comprehensive plan to promote, market, and advertise the
parade or special event. Signs and banners shall be permitted through the building inspection
department.
(8) Sanitation plan. A comprehensive plan to insure that the highest standards of cleanliness and
sanitation are maintained at the special event, including adequate restroom facilities and appropriate
refuse containers to accommodate refuse generated by its patrons and operations and a plan to empty
the containers frequently so as to prevent overflow.
(d) Emergency medical service, police protection, and fire protection beyond that level normally provided will
be supplied by the appropriate city department as deemed necessary by the chief of police, the fire chief, or their
designee, at the applicant's expense.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.804)
Sec. 1.05.034 Issuance or denial; revocation; advance payment of city's costs
(a) Upon receipt of an application for a parade or special event permit, the special event coordinator shall
schedule the event on the appropriate special event review committee monthly agenda.
(b) The special event review committee shall meet on a monthly basis to review pending special event permit
applications. If required, specially called special event review committee meetings may be scheduled. The
committee shall make findings deemed appropriate and approve or deny the application.
(c) Should the applicant for a parade or special event permit reveal that the route requested would interfere
with the orderly flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the special event review committee shall have the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/618
authority to establish a reasonable alternate route and regulate the width of the event.
(d) The special event review committee may deny a parade or special event permit when said event for which
the permit is requested would:
(1) Take place at the same place and/or time as a previously approved parade or special event;
(2) Begin during or within two hours of the start or after the end of a parade or special event for
which a permit has been granted and follow a route that passes within one-half mile of any point of
the route of the parade or special event for which a permit has been granted;
(3) Unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic and no reasonable means of rerouting traffic or
otherwise meeting traffic needs is available;
(4) Begin and/or end outside the city limits, unless or until the applicant receives approval from the
city council and the adjacent city where the parade or special event begins or ends; or
(5) The applicant does not ensure all electrical work is installed by a licensed electrician in
accordance with current version of National Electrical Code.
(e) The special event review committee may deny a parade or special event permit if:
(1) The applicant fails to adequately provide for:
(A) The protection of event participants;
(B) Maintenance of public order in and around the special event location;
(C) Crowd security, taking into consideration the size and character of the event;
(D) Emergency vehicle access; or
(E) Safe, sanitary conditions for preparation or operation of food concessions;
(2) The applicant fails to provide a certificate of liability insurance naming the city as additional
insured in the amount designated by the human resources/risk management representative to the
special event review committee. The applicant must also provide the certificate of liability insurance
and an endorsement agreement not less than ten days prior to the date of the parade or special event;
(3) The applicant fails to comply with or the proposed parade or special event will violate a city
ordinance or other applicable law, unless the prohibited conduct or activity would be allowed under
this article;
(4) The applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a parade or special
event permit;
(5) The applicant fails to provide proof that he possesses or is able to obtain all licenses and/or
permits required by this code or other city ordinances or by other applicable law for the conduct of all
activities included as part of the parade or special event;
(6) The applicant fails to notify the businesses affected by the parade or special event, in writing, of
street closures ten days prior to the event;
(7) The applicant has had a parade or special event permit revoked within the preceding twelve
months or the applicant has committed two or more violations of a condition or provision of a parade
or special event permit or of this article within the preceding twelve months;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/618
(8) The applicant fails to pay any outstanding costs owed to the city for past parade or special event
permits;
(9) The applicant fails to submit the required fees and agree in writing to reimburse the city for the
estimated costs for the proposed parade or special event;
(10) The proposed parade or special event would unduly burden city services;
(11) After evaluation by the special event committee members, it is determined the city, or its
citizens, would not benefit from the parade or special event.
(f) The city may revoke a parade or special event permit if:
(1) The permit holder made a false statement of material fact on an application for a parade or
special event permit;
(2) The applicant has had a parade or special event permit revoked within the preceding twelve
months or the applicant has committed two or more violations of a condition or provision of a parade
or special event permit or of this article within the preceding twelve months;
(3) The applicant fails to comply with or the parade or special event is in violation of a condition or
a provision of the parade or special event permit, an ordinance of the city, or any other applicable
law;
(4) The applicant failed to provide a certificate of liability insurance and endorsement agreement
naming the city as additional insured in the amount designated ten days prior to the event;
(5) The applicant failed to pay any outstanding fees or estimated costs owed to the city for the
parade or special event permit; or
(6) The parade fails to begin in a timely manner as determined by the police chief, fire chief,
special event coordinator, or their designates.
(g) Parades shall be limited to no more than two per location or organization per year.
(h) The special event review committee may prescribe licenses and permits required by other city ordinances
or applicable law, restrictions, regulations, cost for city services, safeguards, and other conditions necessary for
the safe and orderly conduct of a parade or special event, to be incorporated into the permit before issuance.
(i) The special event review committee shall provide the special event coordinator the estimated cost for city
services provided by their respective departments to ensure the safe and orderly operation of the special event.
The special event coordinator will prepare and provide the applicant with an invoice detailing these estimated
costs. Payment will be required not less than five days prior to the date of the parade or special event. If the
actual costs for city services are less than estimated, the city will issue a refund to the special event applicant no
less than two weeks after the special event.
(2002 Code, sec. 1.805)
Sec. 1.05.035 Appeals
If the special event review committee denies the issuance of or revokes a permit, the special event coordinator
shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the
denial or revocation, and of the right to an appeal. The decision of the special event review committee is final
unless the applicant or permit holder appeals the decision within three business days to the city manager, in
writing. The city manager shall, within three business days after the appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/618
support of or against the action appealed and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the denial or
revocation. The decision of the city manager shall be final. (2002 Code, sec. 1.806)
Sec. 1.05.036 Contents
Each parade or special event permit application shall state the date(s), starting time, ending time, location, and
other special conditions or requirements necessary for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade or special
event. (2002 Code, sec. 1.807)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Personnel policies manual
Though not reproduced herein, the duly adopted personnel policies manual pertaining to employees of the city is
hereby specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. (2002
Code, art. 9.1300)
Sec. 2.01.002 Forfeiture of position upon becoming candidate for city council
Any appointed officer or any member of any board or commission or any employee of the city who shall become
a candidate for a place on the city council shall automatically be terminated from such position held by him.
(2002 Code, art. 9.600)
ARTICLE 2.02 CODE OF ETHICS†
Sec. 2.02.001 Definitions
Benefit. Anything reasonably regarded as economic gain or economic advantage, including benefit to any other
person in whose welfare the beneficiary is interested, but does not include a contribution or expenditure made
and reported in accordance with law.
Board. A board, commission or committee:
(1) Which is established by city ordinance, charter, interlocal contract or state law; or
(2) Which serves as the board of a nonprofit development corporation that acts as an
instrumentality of the city; and
(3) Any part of whose membership is appointed by the city council;
but does not include a board, commission or committee which is the governing body of a separate political
subdivision of the state.
Employee. A person employed and paid a salary by the city, whether under civil service or not, including those
individuals on a part-time basis, but does not include an independent contractor or city council member.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/618
Negotiating concerning prospective employment. A discussion between a city officer or employee and another
employer concerning the possibility of the city officer or employee considering or accepting employment with
the employer in which discussion the city officer or employee responds in a positive way.
Officer. A member of the city council and any member of a board who is appointed by the city council. For
purposes of the city charter [this article], officer does not include a member of a board:
(1) That functions only in an advisory or study capacity and which does not have the power to
make findings as to the rights of specific parties; or
(2) Of a nonprofit development corporation that acts as an instrumentality of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.101)
Sec. 2.02.002 Policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government
requires that:
(1) Public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of
the city;
(2) Governmental decisions and policy be made using the proper procedures of the governmental
structure;
(3) No officer or employee have any financial interest, direct or indirect, or engage in any business,
transaction or professional activity or incur any obligation of any nature, which is in conflict with the
proper discharge of his duties in the public interest;
(4) Public office not be used for personal gain; and
(5) The city council at all times be maintained as a nonpartisan body.
(b) To implement this policy, the city council has determined that it is advisable to enact this code of ethics for
all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, advisory or administrative, to serve not
only as a guide for official conduct of the city's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who
refuse to abide by its terms.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a member of the board of directors of a reinvestment
zone established under the Tax Increment Financing Act, as amended, may:
(1) Own property within that reinvestment zone; and
(2) Participate in discussions and voting on matters before the board of directors that may directly
or indirectly affect the member's property within the reinvestment zone.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.102)
Sec. 2.02.003 Standards of conduct
(a) An officer or employee of the city shall not:
(1) Accept or solicit a benefit that might reasonably tend to influence the officer or employee in the
discharge of his official duties.
(2) Use his official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/618
(3) Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to a person or organization beyond that
which is available to every other person or organization. This shall not prohibit the granting of fringe
benefits to city employees as part of their contract of employment or as an added incentive to the
securing or retaining of employees.
(4) Disclose information that could adversely affect the property or affairs of the city, or directly or
indirectly use any information understood to be confidential which was gained by reason of his
official position or employment for his own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of
others.
(5) Transact any business on behalf of the city in his official capacity with any business entity with
which he is an officer, agent or member or in which he has a financial interest. In the event that such
a circumstance should arise, then he shall make known his interest and:
(A) In the case of an officer, leave the room during debate or hearing, refrain from discussing
the matter at any time with the members of the body of which he is a member or any other body
which will consider the matter and abstain from voting on the matter; or
(B) In the case of an employee, turn the matter over to his superior for reassignment, state the
reasons for doing so and have nothing further to do with the matter involved.
(6) Personally provide services for compensation, directly or indirectly, to a person or organization
who is requesting an approval, investigation or determination from the body or department of which
the officer or employee is a member. This restriction does not apply to outside employment of an
officer if the employment is the officer's primary source of income.
(7) Accept other employment or engage in outside activities incompatible with the full and proper
discharge of his duties and responsibilities with the city or which might impair his independent
judgment in the performance of his public duty.
(8) Personally participate in a decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, investigation or
rendering of advice in a proceeding, application, request for ruling or determination, contract, claim
or other matter under the jurisdiction of the city, if the officer or employee is negotiating or has an
arrangement concerning prospective employment with a person or organization which has a financial
interest in the matter, and, in the case of an employee, it has been determined by the city manager that
a conflict of interest exists. If an officer or employee begins negotiation or enters an arrangement
concerning prospective employment with a person or organization that has a financial interest in a
matter in which the officer or employee has been participating, the officer or employee shall:
(A) In the case of an employee, immediately notify the official responsible for appointment to
his position of the nature of the negotiation or arrangement and, if the city manager determines
that a conflict of interest exists, follow the instructions of the city manager with regard to
further involvement in the matter; or
(B) In the case of a board member, immediately notify the board of which he is a member of
the nature of the negotiation or arrangement and:
(i) Refrain from discussing the matter at any time with other board members or
members of the city council if the city council will also consider the matter;
(ii) Leave the room during debate or hearing on the matter; and
(iii) Abstain from voting on the matter; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/618
(C) In the case of a member of the city council, file an affidavit with the city secretary
describing the nature of the negotiation or arrangement and:
(i) Refrain from discussing the matter at any time with other councilmembers or
members of a board that will consider the matter;
(ii) Leave the room during debate or hearing on the matter; and
(iii) Abstain from voting on the matter.
(9) Receive any fee or compensation for his services as an officer or employee of the city from any
source other than the city, except as may be otherwise provided by law. This shall not prohibit his
performing the same or other services for a public or private organization that he performs for the city
if there is no conflict with his city duties and responsibilities.
(10) (A) In the case of a member of the city council or an employee, personally represent
or appear on behalf of the private interests of others:
(i) Before the city council or any city board or department;
(ii) In any proceeding involving the city; or
(iii) In any litigation to which the city is a party.
(B) In the case of a board member, personally represent or appear on behalf of the private
interests of others:
(i) Before the board of which he is a member;
(ii) Before the city council;
(iii) Before a board which has appellate jurisdiction over the board of which he is a
member; or
(iv) In litigation or a claim to which the city or an employee of the city is a party if the
interests of the person being represented are adverse to the city or an employee of the city
and the subject of the litigation or claim involves the board on which the board member is
serving or the department providing support services to the board.
(11) Use the prestige of his position with the city on behalf of a political party.
(12) Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act in order to deliberately thwart the execution
of the city ordinances, rules or regulations or the achievement of official city programs.
(13) Use city supplies, equipment or facilities for any purpose other than the conduct of official
city business.
(14) Engage in any dishonest or criminal act or other conduct prejudicial to the government of the
city or that reflects discredit upon the government of the city.
(b) The restrictions in this section do not apply to business associates of officers or employees, but only
personally to the officers and employees themselves.
(c) The restrictions and requirements of subsection (a)(5) above do not apply to an officer or employee of the
city serving as a member of any board, commission or other entity when transacting business on behalf of the
city in an official capacity with that board, commission or entity, if the officer or employee:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/618
(1) Was appointed by the mayor, city council or city manager to represent the city on the board,
commission or entity; and
(2) Has no financial interest in the board, commission or entity or in the business being transacted.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.103)
Sec. 2.02.004 Financial interests
Any officer, whether elected or appointed, who has a financial interest in any matter that is pending before or
that might be considered by the body of which the officer is a member shall:
(1) Disclose such interest to the other members of the body;
(2) Refrain from discussing the matter at any time with any other member of the body of which the
officer is a member or with a member of any other body that might consider the matter;
(3) Leave the room during debate or hearing; and
(4) Refrain from voting on the matter.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.104)
Sec. 2.02.005 Political activities of officers
(a) In any election, a member of the city council may not:
(1) Use the prestige of the member's position with the city on behalf of a candidate;
(2) Solicit or receive contributions; or
(3) Serve as the designated campaign treasurer for a candidate as required by chapter 252, Texas
Election Code.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.105; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) In any election, a member of a city board, commission or committee, whether governmental or advisory,
may not:
(1) Use the prestige of the member's position with the city on behalf of a candidate;
(2) Serve as the designated campaign treasurer for a candidate as required by chapter 252, Texas
Election Code; or
(3) Personally solicit or receive contributions for a candidate. A member, however, is not
prohibited from serving on a steering committee to plan a program of solicitation and listing the
member's name without reference to the office held when the committee as a whole is listed.
(c) Subsections (a)(1) and (b)(1) do not prohibit a member of the city council or of a board from lending the
member's name in support of a candidate so long as the office held with the city is not mentioned in connection
with the endorsement.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.105)
Sec. 2.02.006 Enforcement; disciplinary actions; appeals
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/618
(a) The failure of any officer or employee to comply with this article, or the violation of one or more of the
standards of conduct set forth in this article which apply to him/her, shall constitute grounds for expulsion,
reprimand, removal from office or discharge. In the case of an employee of the city, disciplinary action and
appeals therefrom shall be in conformance with procedures established by the city charter and personnel rules
and regulations. Where no specific appeal procedure is otherwise prescribed, the appeal shall be to the city
council. In the case of a city councilmember, the matter shall be decided by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
entire membership of the city council in accordance with the city charter, article III, section 3.14, as established
by council in its city council rules and procedures. In the case of members of boards or commissions, the matters
shall be decided by the city council. The decision of these bodies shall be final in the absence of bias, prejudice
or fraud.
(b) If the city council determines that a person has violated this section, the city council may direct the city
attorney to initiate whatever administrative or legal action is necessary to seek enforcement of its provisions.
(Ordinance 2013-07-07, sec. 2, adopted 7/22/13)
ARTICLE 2.03 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 2.04 FINANCES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.04.001 Establishment of fees and charges; master fee resolution
(a) To the extent allowed by law, the general and special fees and charges to be assessed and collected by the
city as authorized by this code or any other code or ordinance of the city shall be as established by appropriate
city council resolution.
(b) The purpose of this section is to provide reference to such fees and charges, which shall be assembled and
maintained in a master fee resolution, and may be amended from time to time.
(c) In the event there is a conflict between a fee established by a code or ordinance and the provisions of such
master fee resolution, the code or ordinance shall prevail.
(Ordinance 2007-05-11 adopted 5/14/07)
Secs. 2.04.002–2.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Memorial Building Fund
Sec. 2.04.031 Creation
There is hereby created a fund to be known as city memorial building fund, into which fund the city may receive
gifts of money from persons desiring to make such gifts to or through the city for disbursement by the city for
public or quasi-public purposes. (2002 Code, sec. 1.201)
Sec. 2.04.032 Deposit of funds; records
The city secretary shall deposit all such funds described in section 2.04.031 hereof in an account at the city
depository, in an account denominated as “City of Lancaster Memorial Building Fund,” and the city secretary
shall keep a record showing the sources from which such funds were received and indicating the purpose or
purposes, if any, for which such funds were donated. (2002 Code, sec. 1.202; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.033 Use of funds
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/618
The city council shall be and is hereby authorized to direct the withdrawal of any such funds described in section
2.04.031 hereof for any purpose or purposes for which such funds shall have been designated if such purpose or
purposes shall have been stated at the time of such donation, and, if not, then the city council may authorize the
withdrawal of any such funds for any public or quasi-public purpose as the city council may from time to time
deem right and proper. (2002 Code, sec. 1.203)
Secs. 2.04.034–2.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. 911 Emergency Service Fee
Sec. 2.04.061 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
911 emergency service system. A system of processing emergency 911 calls.
911 service. A telecommunications service through which the user of a public telephone system has the ability to
reach the city's public safety answering point by dialing the digits “9-1-1.”
Local exchange access line or equivalent local exchange access line.
(1) Means the physical voice grade telecommunications connection or the cable or broadband
transport facilities, or any combination of these facilities, owned, controlled, or relied upon by a
service provider, between an end user customer's premises and a service provider's network, that,
when the digits “9-1-1” are dialed, provides the end user customer access to a public safety answering
point through a permissible interconnection to the dedicated 911 network. In the case of multichannel
services or offerings, channelized by a service provider, each individual channel provided to
an end user customer shall constitute a separate “local exchange access line” or “equivalent local
exchange access line” (e.g., ISDN-PRI service consists of 24 individual channels). The terms “local
exchange access line” or “equivalent local exchange access line” include lines as defined above that a
service provider offers at a fully or partially discounted rate from the provider's base rate to a class of
end users (e.g., the service provider's employees/retirees). Such discounting is not a basis for
eliminating or reducing the 911 emergency service fee on such lines, except in the instance of an
emergency communication district imposing its 911 emergency service fee based on a percentage in
lieu of a flat rate.
(2) The term “local exchange access line” or “equivalent local exchange access line” does not
include coin-operated public telephone equipment, public telephone equipment operated by card
reader, commercial mobile radio service that provides access to a paging or other one-way signaling
service, a communication channel suitable only for data transmission, a line from a
telecommunications service provider to an Internet service provider for the Internet service provider's
data modem lines used only to provide its Internet access service and that are not capable of
transmitting voice messages, a wireless roaming service or other non-vocal commercial mobile radio
service, a private telecommunications system, or a wireless telecommunications connection subject to
Texas Health and Safety Code, section 771.0711.
Public safety answering point. The city communications facility that:
(1) Is operated continuously;
(2) Is assigned the responsibility to receive 911 calls and to dispatch emergency response services
directly or to transfer or relay emergency 911 calls to other public safety agencies;
(3) Is the first point of receipt by a public safety agency of a 911 call; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/618
(4) Serves the city.
Service provider. An entity providing local exchange access lines and/or equivalent local exchange access lines
to a service user in the city.
Service user. A person or business entity that is provided local exchange access lines or equivalent local
exchange access lines in the city.
Sec. 2.04.062 Imposition and use of fee
There is hereby imposed on each telephone subscriber's local exchange access line, or its equivalent, in the city,
a 911 emergency service fee as established by the city council. Such fees shall be used only to provide for the
purchase, installation, operating and maintenance expenses of 911 emergency services, including required
personnel.
Sec. 2.04.063 Execution of contracts with 911 service providers
The city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized to execute a contract or contracts on behalf of the city
with any service provider, pursuant to the provisions of this division, to provide for the billing and collection of
fees imposed by the city pursuant to the provisions hereof.
Sec. 2.04.064 Restrictions and limitations
The 911 emergency service fee imposed by this division shall be subject to the following restrictions and
limitations:
(1) The 911 service fee may only be imposed upon service users' local exchange access lines and
equivalent local exchange access lines.
(2) The 911 service fee may not be imposed upon more than one hundred (100) local exchange
access lines per service user per location, or more than one hundred (100) local exchange access lines
for a single business entity at a single location unless the lines or services are used by residents of the
location. The fee limitation of this section shall not apply to equivalent local exchange access lines.
(3) The 911 service fee may not be imposed upon any coin-operated or coin/card reader operated
telephone equipment.
(4) The 911 service fee shall be stated separately on each service user's bill.
(5) The 911 service fee shall have uniform application within the municipal boundaries of the city.
(6) Each service provider not already remitting 911 service fees should be advised in writing of the
amount of the 911 service fee to be applied to each type of service at least ninety (90) days prior to
the first billing date.
(7) No service provider will be obliged or authorized to take any legal action to enforce the
collection of any billed 911 service fee.
(8) No service provider will disconnect any service user's telephone service for failure to pay the
911 service fee.
(9) Each service provider will assess a 911 service fee to each service user on a monthly basis and
will remit the collected 911 service fee to the city no later than thirty (30) days after the close of the
month in which such 911 service fees were assessed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/618
(10) Each service provider shall complete a remittance report in the form provided by the city, and
the remittance report shall accompany the remitted 911 service fees.
(11) Each service provider will provide the city with a list of any service users who have refused to
pay the 911 service fee. This list shall be provided a minimum of once per calendar year.
(12) Each service provider will retain records of the amount of 911 service fees collected for a
period not to exceed two (2) years from the date of collection.
(13) Should the city desire to audit the records of collected fees from any service provider, it may
do so at the city's sole cost and expense.
(14) All federal service users located in the city are exempt from the 911 service fee.
(Ordinance 2007-08-38 adopted 8/13/07)
ARTICLE 2.05 MUNICIPAL COURT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2.05.001–2.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Municipal Court of Record No. 1†
Sec. 2.05.031 Created; jurisdiction
(a) There is hereby created a Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in and for the city, to be designated as “The
Municipal Court of Record in the City of Lancaster.” The court shall have no term and may sit at any time for
the transaction of business of the court. Where the term “municipal court” is used in the city's charter or this
Code of Ordinances, it shall mean the municipal court of record created herein. Any provision of the city charter,
city ordinances, or state law that is applicable to a municipal court shall be applicable to the municipal court of
record created herein unless the provision is in conflict or inconsistent with chapter 30 of the Texas Government
Code, as amended, which governs the municipal courts of record.
(b) The municipal court of record shall be a unified municipal court and shall have and exercise that
jurisdiction conferred by section 30.00005 of chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. The
municipal court of record shall also have:
(1) Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under subchapter
A, chapter 214, Local Government Code, or subchapter E, chapter 683, Transportation Code;
(2) Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under subchapter B,
chapter 54, Texas Local Government Code, as amended, within the city's territorial limits and
property owned by the city located in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of
enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances; and
(3) Authority to issue:
(A) Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance
abatement ordinance violation; and
(B) Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending
property and removing the debris from the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/618
State law reference–Jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00005.
Sec. 2.05.032 Judge
(a) Appointment; compensation. The municipal court of record is presided over by a municipal judge, who
shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years and shall be entitled to compensation as set by
the city council. The amount of the judge's compensation may not be diminished during the judge's term of
office. The compensation may not be based directly or indirectly on fines, fees, or costs collected by the court.
(b) Qualifications; vacancies. The municipal judge must be a citizen of the United States, a resident of the
state, a licensed attorney in good standing, and have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in the
state. In the event of a vacancy in the office of the municipal judge, the city council may appoint a qualified
person to fill the vacancy and to preside over the municipal court of record for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
(c) City employees ineligible to serve as judge. A person may not serve as a municipal judge if the person is
employed as an employee of the city. A municipal judge who accepts employment with the city vacates the
judicial office.
(d) Alternate judges. The city council may appoint alternate judges, subject to the same qualifications as the
municipal judge, who shall have all the powers and shall discharge all the duties of the municipal judge while
serving as municipal judge. Each appointment shall be for a term of two (2) years. The municipal judges may
exchange benches and act for each other in any proceeding pending in the court. An act performed by any of the
judges is binding on all parties to the proceeding.
(e) Authority and duties. The municipal judge and alternate judges shall take judicial notice of state law and
the ordinances and corporate limits of the city and shall have all powers and authority as provided by section
30.00006 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. The judges may grant writs of mandamus, attachment,
and other writs necessary to the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the court and may issue writs of habeas corpus
in cases in which the offense charged is within the jurisdiction of the court. A municipal judge is a magistrate
and may issue administrative search warrants.
State law reference–Judge generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00006.
Sec. 2.05.033 Court clerk
(a) The city manager or his designee shall appoint the clerk of the municipal court of record, who may hire,
direct, and remove the personnel authorized in the city's annual budget for the clerk's office. The clerk or the
clerk's deputies shall have all duties and authority as provided by section 30.00009 of the Texas Government
Code, as amended.
(b) The court clerk shall acquire and maintain a seal in conformance with state law for the municipal court of
record in the city.
(c) The court clerk shall supervise the selection of persons for jury service in the municipal court of record.
State law reference–Appointment of clerk and other personnel, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00009.
Sec. 2.05.034 Record of proceedings; fees
Upon request of the judge or upon written request of one of the parties to a trial, proceedings of the municipal
court of record, limited to trial testimony and hearings on motions before the court, shall be recorded. For the
purpose of recording the proceedings and preserving a record in cases tried before the municipal court of record,
a good quality electronic recording device shall be used. When the recording device is used, a court reporter
need not be present at the trial to certify the reporter's record. The recording shall be kept and stored for a 20-day
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/618
period beginning the day after the last day of the proceeding, trial or denial of motion for a new trial, whichever
occurs last. If the case is appealed, the proceedings shall be transcribed by an official court reporter.
State law reference–Court reporter and recording devices, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00010.
Sec. 2.05.035 Appeals
(a) A defendant has the right of appeal from a judgment or conviction in the municipal court of record. The
state has the right to an appeal as provided by article 44.01, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(b) The appellate court shall determine each appeal from the court on the basis of the errors that are set forth
in the appellant's motion and that are presented in the clerk's record and reporter's record, if any, prepared from
the proceedings leading to the appeal. An appeal from the court shall not be by trial de novo.
(c) To perfect an appeal, the defendant must file a motion for new trial not later than ten (10) days after the
date on which the judgment and sentence are rendered. The motion must be in writing and must be filed with the
clerk of the municipal court of record. The motion constitutes the assignment of error on appeal. A ground or an
error not set forth in the motion is waived. If the court does not act on the motion before the expiration of thirty
(30) days after it is filed with the clerk, the motion is overruled by operation of law.
(d) After an order overruling a motion for new trial, the defendant shall give written notice of appeal and pay a
fee as established by the city council for the preparation of the clerk's record not later than ten (10) days after the
date on which the motion is overruled. The court shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of the court. If
the case is reversed on appeal, the fee shall be refunded to the defendant.
(e) The appellant shall pay for any reporter's record containing a transcription of the proceedings unless the
court finds, after a hearing in response to an affidavit by the defendant, that the defendant is unable to pay or
provide security for the reporter's record. If the court so finds, the court shall order the reporter to prepare the
record without charge to the defendant. Before the recorded proceedings are transcribed, the defendant shall,
unless found by the court to be unable to pay for the reporter's record, post a cash deposit with the municipal
court for the estimated cost of the record. The cash deposit shall be based on an estimate provided by the court
reporter or the length of proceedings as indicated by the amount of tape used to electronically record the
proceedings, if any, and the cost of the court reporter, typing, and other incidental services. The municipal court
may post a current schedule of the charges for transcription fees, including deposits. If the cash deposit exceeds
the actual cost of the reporter's record, the court reporter shall refund the difference to the defendant. If the cash
deposit is insufficient to cover the actual cost of the transcription, the defendant must pay the additional amount
to the court reporter before the transcription may be submitted. If a case is reversed on appeal, the court shall
promptly refund to the defendant any amounts paid for the reporter's record.
(f) The record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a record on
appeal in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(g) If the defendant is not in custody, the defendant may not take an appeal until the defendant files an appeal
bond with the municipal court of record. The bond must be approved by the court and must be filed not later
than the 10th day after the date on which the motion for new trial is overruled. If the defendant is in custody, the
defendant shall be committed to jail unless the defendant posts the appeal bond. The appeal bond must be in the
amount of $100.00 or double the amount of the fines and costs adjudged against the defendant, whichever is
greater. The bond must:
(1) State that the defendant was convicted in the case and has appealed; and
(2) Be conditioned on the defendant's immediate and daily personal appearance in the court to
which the appeal is taken.
State law reference–Appeals, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00016.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/618
Sec. 2.05.036 Court costs
Upon conviction, a defendant shall also remit to the city such court costs as are authorized by law, imposed by
the state, and established by the city.
(Ordinance 2008-01-01, adopted 1/14/08)
Secs. 2.05.037–2.05.070 Reserved
Division 3. Fines, Costs and Special Expenses*
Sec. 2.05.071 Collection fee
(a) A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed in the amount of thirty percent (30%) of [items] such as
unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds, or restitution imposed and ordered by the municipal court serving
the city when such debt or account receivable is more then 60 days past due and has been referred to an attorney
or private vendor for collection.
(b) A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, in the amount of thirty percent (30%), when such
amounts are more than sixty (60) days past due and referred for collection in cases in which the accused has
failed to appear:
(1) As promised under subchapter A, chapter 543, Transportation Code, or other law;
(2) In compliance with a lawful written notice to appear issued under article 14.06(b) Texas Code
of Criminal Procedure or other law;
(3) In compliance with a lawful summons issued under article 15.03(b), Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure;
(4) In compliance with a lawful order of a court serving the city; or
(5) As specified in a citation, summons, or other notice authorized by section 682.002,
Transportation Code, that charges the accused with a parking or stopping offense.
(Ordinance 2006-09-34 adopted 9/25/06)
State law reference–Contracts for collection services, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 103.0031.
Sec. 2.05.072 Building security fund
(a) A municipal court building security fund is hereby created and shall be administered by the finance
director of the city. The municipal court building security fund shall be utilized in accordance with the provisions
of article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(b) Any defendant convicted in the municipal court of the city of a misdemeanor offense that occurs after
September 1, 1997, or the passage of this section shall pay a security fee as established by the city council as a
cost of court. The term “convicted” includes any convictions obtained by way of a plea of guilty, a trial and any
case's deferred adjudication, probation or pretrial diversion in order for the defendant to take advantage of one of
the alternative programs offered by the municipal court, including but not limited to a driving safety course,
deferred adjudication, alcohol awareness and shoplifter's alternative.
(c) The clerk of the municipal court of the city shall collect the fee and shall pay such costs to the finance
director for the city for deposit into the municipal court building security fund.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/618
(2002 Code, art. 7.200)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 2.05.073 Technology fund
(a) There is hereby created a municipal court technology fund for the city.
(b) A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court in the city shall pay a technology
fee as established by the city council for each conviction as a cost of court.
(c) For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted if a sentence is imposed on the person, the
person is placed on community supervision, or the court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(d) The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the finance director for deposit in a
fund to be known as the municipal court technology fund.
(e) The municipal court technology fund may be used only to finance the purchase of computer systems,
computer networks, computer hardware, computer software, imaging systems, electronic kiosks, electronic ticket
writers, and docket management systems.
(f) This section shall take effect immediately from and after its passage; provided, however, that the court
costs imposed hereby shall apply only on conviction for an offense committed on or after March 25, 2002. Court
costs for convictions for an offense committed before March 25, 2002, are covered by the law in effect at the
time the offense was committed and the former law is continued in effect for that purpose.
(2002 Code, art. 7.300)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 2.05.074 Defensive driving course fee
The municipal court shall collect a special expense as established by the city council for services performed in
cases in which the defendant is discharged by virtue of having attended, subsequent to the date of the alleged
offense, a defensive driving course in compliance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section
543.111 et seq. (2002 Code, art. 12.2400)
State law reference–Additional court fees for driving safety course, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 103.021.
Sec. 2.05.075 Special expense fee
There is hereby established a special expense fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which shall be
collected, after due notice to the defendant, for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense
under section 38.10 of the Texas Penal Code titled “Bail Jumping and Failure to Appear”; or, section 543.009 of
the Texas Transportation Code titled “Compliance with or Violation of Promise to Appear.” (Ordinance 2014-08-
12 adopted 8/11/14)
ARTICLE 2.06 ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS*
Sec. 2.06.001 Responsibility for enforcement of laws and ordinances
Enforcement of the city Code of Ordinances and any and all applicable codes and ordinances within the city and
the state shall be the responsibility of the city manager, supervisor of code enforcement, and any designated code
enforcement officer or licensed peace officer of the city.
Sec. 2.06.002 Authority to issue citations; service; failure to appear
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/618
Any officer, as designated by this article, shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation in
accordance with the Code of Ordinances and any and all other codes or ordinances of the city. If the person
being cited is not present, the person designated hereunder may send the citation to the alleged offender by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If a person who receives a citation by personal service or as provided
under this section fails to appear on the return date of the citation, the court may issue a warrant for the person's
arrest for the violation described in the citation.
Sec. 2.06.003 Interference with enforcement officer
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any code enforcement officer in the performance of his
duties under this section and to enforce the ordinances of the city.
(Ordinance 2008-04-14, sec. 2, adopted 4/14/08)
ARTICLE 2.07 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2.07.001–2.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Department*
Sec. 2.07.031 Established; duties; chief of police
(a) There shall be a police department for the city, the head of which shall be a chief of police.
(b) The chief of police of the city shall be appointed and serve at the pleasure of the city manager.
(c) The police department shall be composed of the chief of police and such other officers, patrolmen and
other employees as may from time to time be authorized and appointed under the authority of the city manager.
(d) The chief of police shall be authorized to establish rules and regulations governing the policies and
personnel of the police department.
(e) It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the ordinances of the city, the state laws, and any
other laws subject to enforcement.
(Ordinance 2008-04-14, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/08)
Sec. 2.07.032 Arrest without warrant
Any policeman of the city may arrest without warrant persons found in suspicious places and under
circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace,
or that they are committing or are about to commit some offense against the laws. Where it is shown by
satisfactory proof to any policeman, upon the representation of a credible person, that a felony has been
committed and that the offender is about to escape so that there is no time to procure a warrant, such peace
officer may without warrant pursue and arrest the accused. (2002 Code, sec. 9.402)
State law reference–Authority to make arrest without warrant, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. sec. 14.01 et seq.
Sec. 2.07.033 Arrested person to be taken before magistrate
Any policeman making any arrest shall take the person arrested forthwith before a magistrate of this county,
where he will be informed of his rights by the magistrate, given reasonable time and opportunity to confer with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/618
counsel and be admitted to bail if allowed by law. (2002 Code, sec. 9.403)
Sec. 2.07.034 Policemen to wear badges and uniforms
While performing their duties, policemen shall wear badges and uniforms as prescribed by the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.404)
Sec. 2.07.035 Use of unmarked vehicles
(a) The city council hereby approves the use of unmarked vehicles by the police department when used for the
purpose of performing official duties and when, in the opinion of the chief of police, such use is reasonably
necessary for effective law enforcement, and such use is hereby determined and declared to be in the public
interest and for the preservation and protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) This section is intended as a specific exclusion to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
chapter 721, and is not intended to exclude any other type of city-owned motor vehicle or piece of heavy
equipment required to be marked by such statute.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.405)
Sec. 2.07.036 Fingerprinting services
The police department of the city may provide fingerprinting services to individuals, whether resident or
nonresident, for the purposes of employment, adoption and other personal and professional reasons. All
individuals requesting and receiving such service shall be charged a reasonable fee as established by resolution
of the city council. (2002 Code, sec. 9.406)
Secs. 2.07.037–2.07.070 Reserved
Division 3. Police Reserve*
Sec. 2.07.071 Established; composition
There is hereby established a police reserve force which shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered
to join the organization and whose applications have been accepted and who have complied with all the rules,
regulations, and orders provided for the conduct and control of the member thereof in accordance with this
division. The police reserve shall be a separate division of the police department reporting to and headed by the
chief of police. The total strength of the reserve force shall be established from time to time by the chief of
police. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.07.072 Authority of chief of police; standards for reserve officers
(a) The members of the police reserve shall be under the authority, control and command of the chief of police
of the city, subject to all of the provisions of the city charter, ordinances of the city, laws of the state, policies of
the city police department and this division. Members of the police reserve shall be appointed at the discretion of
the chief of police and shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of their official duties but are not
considered classified members of the department. The chief of police shall ensure that the individual member
meets the standards established by the state for reserve police officers. No individual will be authorized to act as
a peace officer until proper training has been completed and such individual is a licensed peace officer in
accordance with state law. (2002 Code, sec. 9.502; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The chief of police is hereby delegated to establish by executive order from time to time the number of
positions within such reserve force. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.07.073 Selection of eligible applicants
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/618
Selection of eligible applicants to serve as reserve officers is subject to the same standards and procedures as
those established for the selection of regular police officers by the city and the state. (2002 Code, sec. 9.503)
Sec. 2.07.074 Duties
The duties of the police reserve force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of
police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the
maintenance of peace and order when assigned to duty by the chief of police. Reserve police officers shall act
only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of
regular police officers without first complying with all requirements for such regular police officers. The chief
may by order establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserve force, to fix specific duties of its
members and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. When assigned to duty, the police reserve force will
be under the control and supervision of regular police officers when carrying out their assigned duties. The chain
of command established for the regular department will be strictly adhered to, depending on the duty
assignment. (2002 Code, sec. 9.504)
Sec. 2.07.075 Identification and uniforms
All members of the reserve force shall wear the uniform and badges issued by the city police department when
performing their official duties. Civilian clothing may be worn by reserve officers when assigned to duty with
the criminal investigation division or at such other times as deemed necessary by the chief of police. The badge
and identification card issued by the department will be carried at all times by all members of the department.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.505)
Sec. 2.07.076 Powers as peace officers; carrying weapons; call to service
(a) No person appointed to the police reserve force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer
until such person has met all of the requirements for the appointment of a peace officer as set forth by the state
commission on law enforcement officer standards and education. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) A reserve police officer shall have the same powers of arrest and authority of a regular police officer as
prescribed by the laws of the state when performing his official duties. This power and authority will be
exercised under the supervision and control of the chief of police or his designated representative. Members of
the police reserve force serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into service at any time
the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.506)
Sec. 2.07.077 Compensation and benefits
Members of the police reserve force shall serve without compensation. Members of the police reserve force who
sustain injury in the course of performing official duties shall be provided hospital and medical assistance in the
same manner as provided for a full-time police officer, and reserve officers shall be eligible for death benefits as
provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code, chapter 615. In no event, however, shall a member of the police reserve
force become eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state law to which a regular
officer may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. (2002 Code, sec. 9.507)
State law reference–Hospital and medical assistance and death benefits for police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 142.003.
Sec. 2.07.078 Removal from membership
Membership of any person as a reserve officer may be terminated with or without cause by the chief of police at
any time sufficient by the chief of police and such persons serve at the pleasure and do not have any property
right or expectation of continued engagement. Any member may resign from the police reserve at any time, but
it shall be his duty to notify the chief of police of his resignation. In addition to the penalties provided by law,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/618
any violation of law under color of the performance of his duties as a member of the police reserve force, or any
breach of the rules or regulations established by the chief of police, shall subject a member of the police reserve
force to summary expulsion by the chief of police. (2002 Code, sec. 9.508; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 2.07.079–2.07.110 Reserved
Division 4. City Marshal
Sec. 2.07.111 Office created; deputies; qualifications
There is hereby created the office of city marshal, to be filled by a qualified person appointed by the city
manager. The city manager shall appoint as many deputy city marshals as are deemed necessary and as are
authorized by the city council in establishing the budget and classification of employees. The city marshal and
all deputies shall meet all qualifications necessary to be certified as peace officers by the state commission on
law enforcement officer standards and education. (2002 Code, sec. 9.1401)
Sec. 2.07.112 Duties
The city marshal, acting under the direction of the municipal court judge, shall perform the following duties:
(1) Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas and other legal process issued by a judge of the
municipal court;
(2) Execute other warrants of arrest, subpoenas and legal process as authorized by law and as
determined by the municipal court judge;
(3) Serve as bailiff of the municipal court when necessary; and
(4) Report activities of work performed, warrants served, and prisoners transferred and shall
coordinate his or her work and vacation schedule(s) and other miscellaneous administrative matters
with the court administrator or, in the absence of the court administrator, then with the city secretary
or his or her designate.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1402)
Sec. 2.07.113 Police powers; employment status; benefits
(a) The city marshal and deputies shall serve as peace officers of the city and have full police authority in the
exercise of their assigned duties; however, they shall not be assigned the duties which are presently assigned to
members of the police department.
(b) The city marshal and deputies shall neither be members of the police department nor eligible for civil
service of the city, but shall be eligible for membership in the Texas Municipal Retirement System in the same
manner as other city employees and shall be paid law enforcement officers for the purposes of qualifying for
survivor's assistance benefits under the provisions of in V.T.C.A., Government Code, chapter 615, as amended.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1403)
Sec. 2.07.114 Oath
The city marshal and deputies shall be required to take the oath of office before entering upon the discharge of
their duties. The oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the office of
the court administrator. The form of the oath shall be the same as required for members of the city council. (2002
Code, sec. 9.1404)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/618
ARTICLE 2.08 CIVIL SERVICE*
Sec. 2.08.001 Civil service positions in police and fire departments
The city council shall establish the classifications and the number of authorized positions within each
classification for police and fire personnel in accordance with state law. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.08.002 Assignment and certification pay for police officers
The city council may authorize the payment of assignment or certification pay as established in the annual
budget. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.09 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM†
Sec. 2.09.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
The specific ordinances regarding participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS), as adopted
by the city, are not included in the code, but they are specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on
file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.10 SOCIAL SECURITY*
Sec. 2.10.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
The specific ordinances regarding participation in the social security system, as adopted by the city, are not
included in the code, but they are specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of
the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.11 INDEMNIFICATION PLAN
Sec. 2.11.001 Established
There is hereby established the city officer and employee liability plan. (2002 Code, sec. 9.1701)
Sec. 2.11.002 Definitions
City vehicle. Any vehicle or mobile equipment either leased or owned by the city.
Loss. An amount which a plan member is legally obligated to pay resulting from an act or omission of the plan
member which is covered under this plan.
Plan. The city officer and employee liability plan.
Plan member. A person who is:
(1) An employee of the city;
(2) A member of a city board, commission, or committee created by ordinance or resolution of the
city;
(3) A member of the city council or a retained professional, independent firm and/or person who
renders professional services to the city;
(4) A volunteer who has been approved as a volunteer by a departmental volunteer coordinator and
who is working under the direction of an employee of the city;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/618
(5) Any individual who, by law, is performing duties for and on behalf of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1702)
Sec. 2.11.003 Coverage generally
(a) The city shall indemnify and defend a plan member, in accordance with the terms of this plan, against a
loss arising out of any claim, suit, or judgment resulting from an act or omission of the plan member during the
discharge of his duties and within the scope of his office, employment, or assigned volunteer work with the city.
(b) A plan member whose position with the city terminates is entitled to coverage in accordance with this plan
for any event that occurred while the person was a plan member.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1703)
Sec. 2.11.004 Defense of plan members
(a) The city will defend any suit against a plan member who is covered under this plan even if the suit is
groundless or fraudulent.
(b) The city may investigate, negotiate, and settle any claim or suit as it determines necessary.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1704)
Sec. 2.11.005 Limits of coverage
(a) The city will pay losses covered by this plan that a plan member is legally obligated to pay, except that, in
cases arising from incidents or occurrences where the city's liability exists by virtue of the Texas Tort Claims Act
(chapter 101, Civil Practice and Remedies Code), whether or not the city is a party defendant, the city will pay
those losses covered by this plan that a plan member is legally obligated to pay up to but not exceeding the limits
of liability provided by that act, as amended, for units of local government.
(b) In addition to the coverage provided in subsection (a), the city will pay:
(1) The city's expenses in investigating and defending the claim or lawsuit;
(2) Costs taxed against a plan member in a suit covered by this plan and interest that accrues after
entry of judgment before the city has deposited payment with the court on that part of the judgment
which does not exceed the limits of coverage;
(3) Reasonable expenses of the plan member incurred at the city's request; and
(4) Attorney fees ordered by the court to be paid by the plan member.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1705)
Sec. 2.11.006 Notice of occurrence, claim or suit; cooperation
To be entitled to coverage under the plan, a plan member must:
(1) Notify the city attorney as soon as practicable upon receipt of written notice of a claim or
lawsuit, but no later than five working days after receipt;
(2) Cooperate with the city attorney and/or counsel retained by the city's insurance carrier, and,
upon such counsel's request, assist in making settlements in the conduct of suits, and in enforcing any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/618
right of contribution or indemnity against a person or organization who may be liable to the city
because of injury or damage covered under this plan;
(3) Attend hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining the
attendance of witnesses;
(4) Not, except upon advice of the city attorney or other counsel, or when questioned by a police
officer at the scene of an accident, give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or
agreement concerning a claim or lawsuit, except such as may be required by statute;
(5) Not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any
expense with respect to a claim or lawsuit without the consent of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1706)
Sec. 2.11.007 Plan period
This plan covers only acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred:
(1) While the plan is in effect;
(2) Before the plan was in effect and which are not barred by any statute of limitations; and
(3) If the plan is cancelled, while the plan is in effect and which are not barred by any statute of
limitations.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1707)
Sec. 2.11.008 Exclusions
Coverage under this plan does not apply to a claim or lawsuit that is brought against a plan member:
(1) By the city;
(2) Arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of a penal statute or ordinance committed by
or with the knowledge or consent of the plan member, or any claim arising out of acts of fraud
committed by or at the direction of the plan member with intent to deceive or defraud;
(3) Arising either while the plan member is operating a city vehicle with no authority to operate the
vehicle, or while the plan member is operating a city vehicle in the course of personal or private
business;
(4) For liability assumed by the plan member under a contract, unless the contract is entered into at
the request of the city;
(5) If the plan member joins or attempts to join with the suit against the plan member a claim
against the city for benefits under this plan; or
(6) If the plan member fails to comply with section 2.11.003 [2.11.006] of this plan.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1708)
Sec. 2.11.009 Subrogation
If payment or legal representation is provided under this plan, the city is subrogated to the plan member's rights
of recovery against any person or organization to the extent [of] the city's liability and payments, and the plan
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/618
member must execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are necessary to secure those rights.
The plan member must not do anything after a loss to prejudice those rights. (2002 Code, sec. 9.1709)
Sec. 2.11.010 Legal representation
(a) The city will provide legal representation for a plan member in a claim or suit in which the plan member is
covered under this plan if not otherwise provided by counsel for an insurance carrier, or in the event the claims
should exceed the city's coverage at the option of the plan member.
(b) If the city attorney determines that there is a conflict of interest for the city attorney in representing a plan
member, and the plan member is otherwise entitled to coverage under this plan, the city will pay the reasonable
fee of a private attorney to represent the plan member. The private attorney will be selected by mutual agreement
of the plan member and the city attorney.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.1710)
Sec. 2.11.011 Determination of coverage
If the city denies coverage to a plan member, the plan member may seek a determination of coverage by a court
of proper jurisdiction in the county. If the court rules in favor of the plan member, the city shall provide the plan
member all benefits under the plan and shall reimburse the plan member for reasonable attorney fees, expenses
and costs incurred in obtaining the determination of coverage. (2002 Code, sec. 9.1711)
Sec. 2.11.012 No creation of cause of action
Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as creating a right or cause of action against a plan member nor
as giving a right to a third party to institute or maintain a suit which would not otherwise exist under law as a
legal claim against a plan member; further, nothing contained herein shall be construed to create or be used as
evidence of the legal relationship. (2002 Code, sec. 9.1712)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 4.01.001 Definitions
The following terms, words and phrases, as used in this chapter, are defined as hereinafter set out, unless
specifically provided to the contrary herein:
Animal. Any living creature of whatever genus or species.
Animal control officer. The person appointed as the animal control officer of the city or his/her representative.
Cat. The domestic mammal Felis catus commonly found in the environs of the city.
Dog. The domestic mammal Canis familiaris commonly found in the environs of the city.
Dog at large. Not completely confined by a building, wall or fence of sufficient strength or construction to
restrain the animal, except when such animal is either on a leash or held in the hands of the owner or keeper, or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/618
under direct supervision of the owner within the limits of the owner's private property. An animal within an
automobile or other vehicle shall not be deemed running at large.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.106)
Grazing animal livestock. Domestic grazing animals that feed on grass or other lower vegetation and may be
kept in open fields or structures for training, boarding, sales, or breeding and production, including, but not
limited to, horses, mares, miniature horses, mules, jacks, jennies, colts, cows, calves, bulls, oxen, sheep, goats,
lambs or llamas traditionally raised or kept in a farm or ranch environment. This definition does not define
household pets, i.e., dogs, cats and potbellied pigs, as livestock. (Ordinance 2011-08-17, sec. 1, adopted 8/8/11)
Inoculated. An injection of a type of rabies vaccine approved by the state veterinarian and applied by a
veterinarian licensed under the laws of the state.
Kennel. Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where five (5) or more adult animals are kept. An
adult animal is an animal that is six (6) months of age or older.
Livestock. Domestic fowl, horses, mules, cows, hogs, goats and sheep and all four-footed animals with the
exception of domestic dogs and cats, of any and all kinds, and shall include both the male and female gender.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.106)
Microchip. An electronic device that is injected into an animal by means of a sterilized implanting device for
purposes of identification and/or recovery of the animal by its owner or by local or other animal control
authorities. (Ordinance 2017-11-51 adopted 11/13/17)
Vicious animal. Any individual animal that has on two previous occasions without provocation attacked or bitten
any person or other animal, or other individual animal which the local health authority or his representative has
reason to believe has a dangerous disposition likely to be harmful to humans or other animals.
Wild animal. Any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl which is of a species which is wild by nature, and of a
species which due to size, vicious nature or other characteristic is dangerous to human beings. Such animals
shall include but not be limited to deer, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, raccoons, skunks, apes,
gorillas, monkeys, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, alligators, crocodiles and all forms of poisonous reptiles. The
term “wild animal” as used in this code shall not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice or rabbits.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.106)
Sec. 4.01.002 Administration
All duties and responsibilities herein provided and mandated for the city manager may be delegated or assigned
either directly or indirectly by the city manager to any person employed or appointed by the city to carry out
such functions. (2002 Code, sec. 2.101)
Sec. 4.01.003 Animal control officer
The city manager may designate a qualified person to be the animal control officer, who shall be responsible for
the enforcement of the provisions of this code and may, when justified, issue citations or take other appropriate
action hereunder. (2002 Code, sec. 2.111)
Sec. 4.01.004 Ownership of animal defined; responsibilities of owner
(a) The owner of an animal or fowl shall be any person who actually has the right of control, or the right to
sell and otherwise deal with the animal or fowl, or, if such person is a minor, then the natural or legal guardian of
said minor. If any animal or fowl shall make its home upon any property within the city limits, or shall have been
provided food and shelter and no person claims to be the owner of said animal or fowl, said animal or fowl shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/618
be deemed to be the property of any adult resident, inhabitant or person in possession of the property or
improvements thereon located where such animal or fowl makes its home.
(b) Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, the owner shall be obligated to comply with all of the terms
and provisions of this code and may be prosecuted for any actions or conduct of any animals which are owned,
possessed or permitted to remain on property and improvements owned or controlled by the owner in violation
of this code.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.102)
Sec. 4.01.005 Running at large prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or person who possesses, keeps or harbors any dog or other animal other
than a cat to fail to keep such dog or animal from running at large as defined herein, within the corporate limits
of the city.
(b) The local health authorities are authorized to impound such animals running at large.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.207)
State law reference–Restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 4.01.006 Animals in parks or playgrounds
(a) General restrictions.
(1) No person having the control or care of any dog shall suffer or permit such dog to enter or
remain in a park or public playground unless it is held by a leash not more than six (6) feet long,
except in park areas designated and posted by the parks and recreation department director to be “dog
friendly areas,” and such hours also designated and posted by the director of parks and recreation.
(2) No person shall bring more than three (3) dogs at any given time to any park area.
(3) The owner of the dog and/or the person in control or care of the dog shall be responsible for,
and to make good, any damage caused in any event by such dog, whether or not leashed. The
provisions of this subsection do not relieve the owner and/or person in control or care of said dog
from liability to the city for violation of this section.
(4) This section shall not be applicable wherein a dog or cat is participating in a show or exhibition
held at a park or playground, provided such show or exhibition has received prior approval of the
director of parks and recreation or his/her designate, and it was made known to the director of parks
and recreation or his/her designate prior to approval that dog or cat participation would be a part of
the event.
(5) No person shall bring dogs, cats, or other animals into any city park for show or exhibition
unless penned, caged or on a leash of [not] more than six feet (6) in length.
(6) This prohibition shall not apply to a police service dog while under the supervision of a duly
authorized peace officer in the performance of official duties or to dogs which have been specially
trained and are being used by blind or disabled persons to aid and guide them in their movements.
(b) Removal of animal waste. No person shall allow or permit their dog or other animal to defecate upon park
property and fail to remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner any feces left by such animal.
(2002 Code, secs. 2.208, 2.209)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/618
Sec. 4.01.007 Noisy animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal, mammal, bird, or any other creature within the city limits
which shall cause frequent, long, continued, excessive or unusual noise which is audible to persons on adjoining
property or public rights-of-way and which disturbs the comfort or repose of persons of ordinary temper,
sensibility or disposition. (2002 Code, sec. 2.103)
Sec. 4.01.008 Beekeeping
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain upon any property within the city limits in excess of eight
(8) hives of bees. (2002 Code, sec. 2.104)
Sec. 4.01.009 Cruelty to animals
A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly:
(1) Tortures or seriously overworks an animal;
(2) Does not provide necessary food, care or shelter for an animal in his custody;
(3) Abandons without placing in the custody of others an animal in his custody;
(4) Transports or confines an animal in a cruel manner;
(5) Kills, injures or administers poison to any animal, although it shall be a defense to prosecution
hereunder if a person practicing veterinary medicine destroys an animal in accordance with
appropriate veterinary practice, or an animal control officer or police officer destroys an animal
pursuant to defending himself or herself or another person or animal from an attacking animal, or an
animal control officer or police officer destroys an animal pursuant to appropriate procedures
concerning disposing of sick, injured or abandoned animals; or
(6) Causes an animal to fight with another.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.105)
State law references–Cruelty to livestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09; cruelty to nonlivestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal
Code, sec. 42.092.
Sec. 4.01.010 Confinement and restraint of dangerous or vicious animal
It shall be the duty of every citizen of the city who is the owner or possessor of a dangerous or vicious animal,
who has knowledge of the likely dangerous or vicious propensities of an animal, to keep such animal muzzled,
under confinement, under restraint or within a house or garage or upon a leash or chain strong enough to restrain
such animal and prevent such animal from running loose or breaking loose. The city manager may at any time
specify conditions for the maintenance of a dangerous or vicious animal within the city or may order the removal
of such an animal as hereinafter required. (2002 Code, sec. 2.109)
Sec. 4.01.011 Destruction of vicious animal; order to remove animal from city
(a) Any vicious animal found running at large and endangering the safety of persons and property may be
destroyed by the local health authority or any police officer or animal control officer in the interest of public
safety if such danger is imminent and a real or apparent necessity exists to destroy such vicious animal.
(b) The local health authority may order any owner or person having care, custody or control of any vicious
animal to take such animal permanently from the city. This order may be appealed in writing within five days of
receipt of the order to the judge of the municipal court of the city. The judge of the municipal court may uphold,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/618
reverse or modify the order and may stipulate restrictions on the animal as a condition to allow the animal to
remain in the city. If the judge of the municipal court upholds the order, the owner or person having care, control
or custody shall not bring the animal back inside the city limits. If any animal subject of an appeal under this
section has been placed in quarantine, such quarantine shall continue until the appeal as provided herein has
been exhausted.
(c) If the owner or person having care, custody or control of the vicious animal has failed to remove such
animal as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, such animal may be impounded and humanely
euthanized.
(d) The owner or person having care, custody or control of a vicious or wild animal must report the disposition
and relocation of such animal to the local health authority, in writing, within ten days after the expiration date for
removal of such animal from the city. Each day thereafter such information is not provided shall constitute a
separate offense.
(e) The local health authority shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is probable
cause to believe that an animal ordered to be removed from the city for being vicious has not been so removed,
or any other violation in which the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure authorizes issuance of search warrants.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.110)
Sec. 4.01.012 Notice of vicious or dangerous propensities of animal
Any person who has knowledge of any animal who is or demonstrates vicious or dangerous propensities may,
upon application to the clerk of the city municipal court, cause written notice to be given by said clerk to the
owner of such animal, such notice to be mailed to the owner by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested. A copy of such letter with the receipt showing delivery shall be prima facie evidence that the owner
of such animal has notice of the vicious or dangerous propensity of such animal. The city manager may cause an
investigation to be made of such complaint and may, under such circumstances as deemed appropriate, require
the removal of any animal of a vicious or dangerous propensity from the city. (2002 Code, sec. 2.112)
Sec. 4.01.013 General cleanliness
(a) Any owner of an animal shall be required to keep the premises on which such animal is kept or housed in a
clean and sanitary condition. All droppings shall be removed at regular intervals and disposed of in a sanitary
manner, which shall be daily or more frequently if necessary.
(b) No offensive odors or noises shall disturb the peace and tranquility of persons of ordinary sensibilities who
reside in proximity to the place or location where an animal is kept or housed. The owner or person keeping the
animal shall construct and/or maintain such facilities as are necessary to insure the maintenance of the health,
safety and well-being of the citizens, residents and inhabitants of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.113)
Sec. 4.01.014 Inspections
(a) The owner of any animal or any person in charge of any animal shall, upon request of the chief of police,
the city manager or their designee, permit access to the premises on which an animal is kept in order that a
reasonable inspection can be made to determine whether or not such animal is being kept and housed in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this code and whether other requirements of law have been met.
(b) In addition, such inspections may occur for the purpose of determining whether or not additional
restrictions, conditions, limitations or requirements shall reasonably be imposed as a condition for the
maintenance or habitation of any animal within the city. Failure to permit an inspection upon reasonable notice
shall be deemed a violation of this code. No advance notice of inspections shall be necessary when there exists a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/618
condition which is likely to adversely affect the health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and
inhabitants of the city. In the event any person shall restrict or refuse to permit inspections, the city manager may
cause the issuance of such court orders and/or administrative decrees as shall be necessary to secure the required
inspections.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.114)
Sec. 4.01.015 Keeping wild animal
The keeping or maintenance of a wild animal within the city without express consent of the city manager and
under such circumstances and conditions as may be established by the city manager is prohibited. (2002 Code,
sec. 2.115)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 4.01.016 Keeping animal in violation of zoning restrictions
No person may keep any animal in any place or area within the city limits in violation of zoning code
restrictions. (2002 Code, sec. 2.116)
Sec. 4.01.017 Keeping grazing animals, livestock or fowl
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person in control of real property located within any district to
keep or allow to be kept grazing animals and/or livestock on the property unless the owner or person in control
complies with all the requirements set forth in this section.
(1) Large grazing animals or livestock. In all non-agricultural districts, large grazing animals or
livestock must have a minimum fenced or enclosed area of 15,000 square feet per animal. Small
grazing animals or livestock must have a minimum fenced or enclosed area of 3,000 square feet per
animal, and a minimum lot size of one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Unoccupied lots. In all platted zoned residential districts, it shall be unlawful for the owner or
any person in control of an unoccupied lot where no residence is maintained to keep or allow to be
kept a grazing animal or livestock, regardless of size.
(3) Swine. In all districts and notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) above, it shall be unlawful
for owner or any person in control of real property to keep or allow to be kept swine, including pigs
and hogs, within the city limits.
(4) Poultry and fowl. Poultry and fowl shall be limited to those properties not located within any
platted zoned residential subdivision. In those zoning districts other than a platted zoned residential
subdivision, all poultry and fowl are to be kept within a fenced enclosure or coops and not allowed to
run at large.
(b) Notwithstanding the conditions above:
(1) Accumulation of manure. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of real
property to allow the accumulation of manure to the extent that such accumulation creates an
offensive odor, causes the accumulation of flies, poses any health hazard to any person or animal
(whether defined in this section or not), or creates a nuisance to any person or animal.
(2) Fences and enclosures. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of real property
to construct or maintain any perimeter fences, gates or other property boundary enclosures wherein
animals defined in this section are enclosed in such a manner that any animal contained within the
enclosure is able to get through or beyond the fence, gate, or enclosure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/618
(3) Proximity to residences. All fences, pens, corrals, or other enclosures wherein animals defined
in this section are enclosed shall be located at least 75 feet from any adjacent residence.
(4) Animal care. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of real property to keep or
allow to be kept grazing animals and/or livestock on the property for any period of time without
necessary food, care or shelter of adequate size and construction so as to protect all grazing animals
and/or livestock on the property from the elements of nature.
(5) Livestock exhibitions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the temporary exhibition of farm
livestock at any show, fair, exhibition or exposition provided such show, fair, exhibition, or exposition
has received prior approval of the city manager and it was made known to the city manager prior to
approval that livestock participation would be a part of the event; however, the exceptions made in
this subsection shall not relieve the persons in charge of such livestock from the operation of this
section and other ordinances of the city relative to the health, safety and well-being of the livestock
and the citizens of the city.
(Ordinance 2011-08-17, sec. 1, adopted 8/8/11)
Sec. 4.01.018 Livestock exhibitions
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the temporary exhibition of farm livestock at any show, fair, exhibition or
exposition provided such show, fair, exhibition, or exposition has received prior approval of the city manager
and it was made known to the city manager prior to approval that livestock participation would be a part of the
event; however, the exceptions made in this section shall not relieve the persons in charge of such livestock from
the operation of this article and other ordinances of the city relative to the health, safety and well-being of the
livestock and the citizens of the city. (2002 Code, sec. 2.118)
ARTICLE 4.02 DOGS AND CATS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Number allowed
No more than four (4) dogs and/or cats over the age of six (6) months shall be kept on their owner's premises
within the city limits, nor shall any person keep, house, feed, breed or maintain more than four (4) dogs or cats
over the age of six (6) months at any time within the city without having first obtained a permit to increase the
number as hereinafter provided. (2002 Code, sec. 2.201)
Sec. 4.02.002 Permit for additional dogs or cats
The city manager, under such procedures as shall be from time to time established, may issue permits for the
keeping of numbers of dogs and/or cats in excess of the maximum as herein provided. The city manager,
however, shall not issue a permit unless there appears, as demonstrated by the application of the person
requesting the permit, such conditions or circumstances reasonably necessitating the maintenance of dogs and/or
cats in the numbers sought. The city manager shall investigate the applications and may in his/her discretion
issue or deny the requested permit. The city manager shall specify conditions, limitations and restrictions in the
permit. (2002 Code, sec. 2.202)
Sec. 4.02.003 Microchipping of dogs and cats required
Any dog or cat over the age of four (4) months, kept, harbored, or maintained by their owners or keepers in the
city shall have a microchip implanted with contact information for the dog or cat's current owners. The
microchip shall be implanted within thirty (30) days after the dog or cat has reached four (4) months of age, or
within thirty (30) days of after the dog or cat is newly acquired or brought into the city or permitted to come into
the city, whichever event occurs first. Upon a change in ownership of the dog or cat, the new owner shall update
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/618
the chip information within thirty (30) days of the change in ownership. It shall be an affirmative defense to
prosecution of a violation under this section that proof of microchip implantation is presented to the court within
twenty (20) days of the date a citation for failure to comply with this section is issued. (Ordinance 2017-11-51
adopted 11/13/17)
Secs. 4.02.004–4.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Licensing of Dogs†
Sec. 4.02.031 Required; procedures
(a) License required. All dogs over the age of four (4) months kept, harbored, or maintained by their owners
or keepers in the city shall be licensed and registered annually. In addition, such animals which are kept by
owners outside the city limits, but regularly come within the city limits, shall also be licensed and registered
annually. All dogs must have an implanted microchip with current owner information encoded on the microchip
prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit. (Ordinance 2017-11-51 adopted 11/13/17)
(b) Application for license; fee. A dog license shall be issued by the city without fee. The owner shall provide,
at the time the application is made for such license, upon printed forms as provided for such purpose, his name,
address and telephone number, and the name, breed, color, sex and rabies inoculation date and tag number of
each dog owned or kept by him.
(c) Additional information. All owners seeking to license animals hereunder shall also provide such additional
information as shall be required by the city manager. In addition, the city manager is authorized either before or
after the issuance of a license to request additional information at any time concerning the animal, the premises
wherein it is to be kept, and conditions in which the animal is to be kept.
(d) Time for obtaining license. A license shall be applied for within thirty (30) days after the dog has been
inoculated, or within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches four (4) months of age, or within thirty (30) days after
the dog is newly acquired or brought into the city or permitted to come into the city, whichever event occurs
first.
(e) Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs whose owners are persons who reside
temporarily within the city limits for a period not to exceed two (2) weeks, nor to dogs brought into the city for
the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor to “seeing eye” dogs properly trained to assist blind persons
when such dogs are actually being used by blind persons for the purposes of aiding them in going from place to
place. The city manager may at any time require licensing of any dog if deemed necessary for the protection of
the health, safety, and well-being of the residents, citizens, and inhabitants of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.203)
Sec. 4.02.032 Appeal of denial or suspension of license
(a) Any person denied a dog license shall have the right to file a written appeal with the city manager within
ten (10) days from the date of receipt of notice of such denial or suspension of a permit or license.
(b) In the event of an emergency termination where no notice is given, then, within a period of ten (10) days
subsequent to the notification that termination has occurred, a written appeal may be taken to the city council by
filing a request with the city secretary within the time specified.
(c) Such written appeal shall specify in full such reasons, allegations or statements relied upon by the
appellant as a basis for such appeal.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.107)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/618
Sec. 4.02.033 Issuance of tag; wearing of tag and collar
Upon compliance with the requirements for the issuance of a permit, a pre-struck license identification tag shall
be issued. The tag shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding
with the number on the dog license certificate. Each owner shall be required to provide each dog in the owner's
possession or under the owner's control with a collar to which the city license tag and inoculation tag must be
affixed, and the owner shall be required to insure that the collar and tags are constantly worn, affixed or attached
to the dog. Dogs regularly used for law enforcement canine operations under the direction of a police officer are
specifically exempted from this provision. (2002 Code, sec. 2.204)
Sec. 4.02.034 Replacement tags
In the event any dog shall lose a dog tag, or the owner of such dog should permit a dog tag to be lost or
destroyed, a duplicate of the dog tag will be issued upon request of the owner of the dog. (2002 Code, sec.
2.205)
Sec. 4.02.035 Transfer of tag
Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another. (2002 Code, sec. 2.206)
Secs. 4.02.036–4.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Dangerous Dogs*
Sec. 4.02.061 Definition
As used in this division, “dangerous dog” means a dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other
than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog
from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those
acts caused a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.601)
Sec. 4.02.062 Investigation; determination that dog is dangerous
(a) If a person reports an unprovoked attack as described in section 4.02.061, the chief of police or his or her
designee may investigate the incident. If after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses the chief of police
or his or her designee determines that the dog is a dangerous dog, he/she shall notify the owner of that fact.
(b) An owner, not later than the 30th day after the date the owner is notified that his/her dog is a dangerous
dog, may appeal the determination of the chief of police or his or her designee to the municipal court of
competent jurisdiction. An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as appeal
for other civil cases.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.602)
Sec. 4.02.063 Requirements for owner
(a) Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog, he/she shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/618
(1) Register the dangerous dog with the chief of police or his or her designee;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a
secure enclosure; and
(3) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous
dog causing bodily injury to a person.
(b) For purposes of this section, a person learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in section 4.02.061; or
(2) The owner is informed by the chief of police or his or her designee that the dog is a dangerous
dog.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.603)
Sec. 4.02.064 Registration
(a) The chief of police or his or her designee shall formally register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(1) Presents proof of:
(A) Liability insurance or financial responsibility as required by section 4.02.063(a)(3);
(B) Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and
(C) The secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept; and
(2) Pays an annual registration fee as established by the city council.
(b) The chief of police or his or her designee shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a
registration tag. The owner must place the tag on the dog's collar.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address within the city, he/she,
not later than the 14th day after the date of sale or move, shall notify the chief of police or his or her designee.
On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and payment of a fee as
established by the city council, the chief of police or his or her designee shall issue a new registration tag to be
placed on the dog's collar.
(d) Every owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the chief of police or his or her designee by whom
the dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.604)
Sec. 4.02.065 Attacks by dangerous dog
(a) A person commits an offense if his/her dangerous dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person
outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. Should the attack cause serious bodily
injury or death, the person may be subject to other criminal prosecution under the laws of the state in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(b) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this division, the court may order that the dangerous dog be
destroyed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/618
(c) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00.00). The city attorney may file suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the
city.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.605)
Sec. 4.02.066 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person
employed by a recognized animal shelter or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state
to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody or control of the dog in connection with and
while performing the duties of that position.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is an employee of the institutional division
of the state department of criminal justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law
enforcement or corrections purposes and such person has temporary ownership, custody or control of the dog in
connection with and while performing the duties of that position.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard
dog company under the Private Security Act found at V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1702, and while
performing the duties of that position.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.606)
ARTICLE 4.03 ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS
Sec. 4.03.001 Exemption for small pets
(a) This article shall not apply to small birds such as parakeets, finches and canaries, guinea pigs, hamsters,
gerbils, white mice, rabbits or such other animals as shall be declared exempt from the terms and provisions of
this article by the city manager.
(b) In addition, the city manager is authorized to temporarily remove from this exemption such small pets if
facts and circumstances existing from time to time make it necessary and desirable for the health, safety and
well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.301)
Sec. 4.03.002 Veterinary examinations; keeping diseased animal
(a) All animals maintained within the city limits shall be examined by a doctor of veterinary medicine at any
time there exists a reasonable basis to suspect such animal is ill, diseased or likely to become ill or diseased.
(b) The city manager may require such examination as a condition to the maintenance or keeping of any
animal within the city.
(c) It shall be a violation of this code for any owner to knowingly keep or maintain a sick or diseased animal.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.302)
Sec. 4.03.003 Seizure and impoundment authorized; right of entry
(a) Seizure of wild animals. The chief of police of the city and the city manager are hereby authorized at any
time to seize any wild animal found to be within the city limits in violation of this article or any provisions of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/618
this code and to impound the same at such location as shall be deemed desirable and necessary, or cause the
same to be done by their designees.
(b) Right of entry. The chief of police and the city manager are authorized to enter any building within the city
limits, or to enter upon any unfenced lot, tract, or parcel of land, for the purpose of seizing any animal which is
housed, kept, maintained or otherwise located therein, found in violation of the terms and provisions of this
code, or cause the same to be done by their designees.
(c) Refusal to permit entry. All persons must comply with the terms and provisions of this section and must
permit entry or it will constitute a separate violation of this code for each time such refusal shall occur, and,
further, such refusal shall be grounds for the issuance of a warrant by any magistrate authorized to issue warrants
for the search of property or the seizure of property. However, no warrant shall be necessary if reasonable cause
exists for a determination that a violation is occurring or will likely occur within the city limits during such time
that a warrant might be reasonably requested or sought.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.303)
Sec. 4.03.004 Nonliability of person seizing animal
No person seizing or attempting to seize an animal maintained in violation of this article shall at any time be
liable for injuring or destruction of any animal, nor shall any person attempting to make a seizure be liable for
any reasonable or necessary destruction of private property in order to seize, confine or remove an animal
maintained in violation of the terms and provisions of this article. (2002 Code, sec. 2.304)
ARTICLE 4.04 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 4.04.001 Generally; payment of fees
(a) The provisions of this article shall be applicable to the impoundment of all animals.
(b) All animals impounded shall be held at such location as designated by the chief of police or the city
manager, at the owner's expense, and all impoundment fees, which shall include the cost of capture, cost of
transportation, medical care and food and housing of such animal, shall be paid by the owner of said animal prior
to the return of the impounded animal to the lawful owner. In addition, the city manager or the chief of police
may require the animal to be inoculated prior to the release of the animal.
(c) If any owner shall refuse to pay the required impoundment and other fees as established by the city
council, no animal so impounded shall be returned to such owner unless specifically authorized by the city
manager, and the city shall have the right to commence such proceedings as shall be necessary in a court of
competent jurisdiction to order recovery all such costs incurred.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.401)
Sec. 4.04.002 Authority
The chief of police is hereby authorized to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this article, all
animals found within the city limits in violation of the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such animal
shall be in the immediate presence of its owner or custodian. (2002 Code, sec. 2.402)
Sec. 4.04.003 Registry of impounded animals
The poundmaster, upon impounding or receiving any animal, shall make a complete registry of such animal,
entering the breed (if known), the color and sex of the animal, whether the animal has been vaccinated and the
time and place of taking such animal into custody. (2002 Code, sec. 2.403)
Sec. 4.04.004 Establishment of fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/618
The city manager is directed and authorized to establish from time to time a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses assessed for impoundment, which shall include but not be limited to such costs incurred by the city in
the capture of the animal, transportation of the animal, costs incurred during the time the animal was impounded
and such other costs and expenses as shall be from time to time incurred during the term of the impoundment,
including veterinarian and other expenses reasonably incurred. (2002 Code, sec. 2.404)
Sec. 4.04.005 Redemption of animal by owner
(a) Upon showing by clear and convincing proof of the right of possession of an animal impounded under the
terms and provisions of this article, any person may redeem the impounded animal within three (3) days of the
date of impoundment upon payment of all costs incurred by the city in seizing, caring for and maintaining such
animal, provided that:
(1) Such animal is not infected or believed to be infected with rabies or any other disease; and
(2) Such person submits to the city a sworn affidavit stating that the animal will be kept outside of
the city limits; or
(3) Such person has secured a permit duly issued by the city manager permitting such animal to be
kept within the city.
(b) If such animal is not redeemed within three (3) days of the date of initial impoundment, the city manager is
hereby authorized to offer such animal to publicly owned zoos. If such animal is not accepted by a zoo within
the period of time deemed reasonable by the city manager, which in any case shall not be less than three (3) days
from the date of initial impoundment, the animal may be destroyed.
(c) The city manager may at any time provide for a period of impoundment greater than specified herein if the
same is deemed necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and well-being of the community.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.405)
(d) If the same animal is impounded more than once by the city, it shall be a condition of redemption that the
animal be neutered or spayed by a licensed veterinarian prior to redemption. In the alternative, and in the
discretion of the animal control officer of the city, an owner may sign an agreement to have the animal neutered
or spayed by a licensed veterinarian to present proof of the completion of the procedure within thirty (30) days
of the date of the agreement.
(e) If an owner of an animal impounded agrees to neuter or spay the animal, either under the provisions of
subsection (d), or voluntarily for animals not subject to the mandatory sterilization provisions of that subsection,
he or she shall be entitled to a discount of fifty percent (50%) of the impound fees.
(Ordinance 2017-11-51 adopted 11/13/17)
Sec. 4.04.006 Vaccination for rabies and other diseases prior to redemption
(a) Any owner of any impounded domesticated animal which has not been vaccinated or inoculated against
diseases as required by this chapter, upon satisfactory proof of ownership, may redeem the animal.
(b) Prior to the release of the animal, such animal shall be vaccinated at the expense of the owner for rabies
and such other communicable diseases as shall be deemed necessary and desirable by the chief of police of the
city in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.406)
Sec. 4.04.007 Redemption of animal by person other than owner
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/618
If the owner of any animal impounded under this article shall fail to redeem his animal within the time allowed
for redemption, any other person, subject to the approval of the city manager, may, upon complying with all
provisions of this article, redeem the animal from the pound and be the lawful owner of the animal thereafter.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.407)
Sec. 4.04.008 Nonliability of city
(a) The city shall at no time ever incur liability because of the impoundment of any animal. In the event of
loss, destruction, illness, deformity or other injury to an animal subject to impoundment at any time during the
tenure of impoundment, such loss shall be the loss of the owner.
(b) The city council specifically finds and declares that the establishment of rules for impoundment is in the
direct discharge of their governmental obligations and functions as provided under the laws of the state.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.408)
ARTICLE 4.05 RABIES CONTROL
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Rabies inoculation
(a) It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of any animal in the city requiring inoculation under regularly
accepted veterinary practices to have such animal inoculated at the age of four (4) months and annually
thereafter against rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state. Each animal so inoculated shall wear a
tag affixed to its collar at all times showing it has been inoculated and the date thereof. This provision shall be
directly applicable to dogs and cats and other animals requiring inoculation under regularly accepted veterinarian
practices. The owner or possessor of any animal shall provide reasonable proof of rabies vaccination upon
request of the chief of police or city manager, or the representative of either. It shall be an offense for the owner
of any animal, including dogs and cats, to keep an animal within the city that requires inoculation for rabies
without having in the possession of the owner a certification issued by a registered doctor of veterinary medicine
evidencing rabies inoculation within the last one (1) year period.
(b) No license shall be issued under provisions of this chapter in the absence of a certificate showing that the
animal sought to be licensed has been inoculated as required by this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.108)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Secs. 4.05.002–4.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Reports and Quarantine*
Sec. 4.05.031 Exemptions
Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are
exempt from the provisions of this division, except where expressly stated. (2002 Code, sec. 2.501)
Sec. 4.05.032 Report of suspected rabid animals
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian conducting business within the city, or treating an animal
believed to be housed whether temporarily or permanently within the city, to report to the city manager any
animal considered to be a rabies suspect. (2002 Code, sec. 2.502)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/618
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041.
Sec. 4.05.033 Report of bite cases
It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner conducting business within the city, and/or
treating a person who resides either permanently or temporarily within the city, to report to the city manager the
names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals together with such other information as will
be helpful in rabies control. (2002 Code, sec. 2.503)
Sec. 4.05.034 Surrender of suspected rabid animal; reclaiming by owner
(a) It shall be the duty of any owner upon demand by the city manager to forthwith surrender any animal
which has bitten any person or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine,
the expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Said animal may be reclaimed by the owner, if it is free of
rabies, upon payment of the costs incurred by the city.
(b) It shall be the duty of the owner to claim such animal within seventy-two (72) hours after notification that
the quarantine period has expired. If said animal remains unclaimed seventy-two (72) hours after notification,
the animal may be destroyed.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.504)
State law reference–Release or disposition of quarantined animal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.043.
Sec. 4.05.035 Quarantine of suspected rabid animal
(a) Any animal which bites or scratches a person or which otherwise gives symptoms of having rabies shall
immediately be reported to the city manager, and it shall be the duty of the owner to securely quarantine and
restrict such animal for such period of time as shall be directed by the city manager. The conditions of quarantine
shall further be specified, and it shall be the duty of the owner or the keeper of said animal to comply with the
conditions of such quarantine.
(b) In the event the quarantine shall not be permitted to occur upon the premises of the owner, the owner shall
be required to deliver such animal to such person or location as shall be reasonably required for the purposes of
keeping the animal in quarantine. The cost of quarantine, as well as any other costs incurred in the capture,
housing or transportation of a quarantined animal, shall solely be at the expense of the owner. The owner shall be
required to pay such costs to the city.
(c) If the owner shall fail to pay the cost incurred, the city shall have the right to bring suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover such cost.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.505)
State law reference–Quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042.
Sec. 4.05.036 Area-wide quarantine
(a) Authority. The city manager, in the event of suspected or diagnosed rabies, shall have the power and
authority to impose a quarantine within a designated area and within such period of time as shall be determined.
Upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets
during the period of quarantine, and no animal may be taken or shipped from the city without permission of the
city manager.
(b) Vaccination program. During the area-wide quarantine period and as long thereafter as he decides it is
necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the city manager may require that all animals four (4) months of age or
older shall be vaccinated against rabies. All vaccinated animals shall be restricted (leashing or confinement on
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/618
enclosed premises) for thirty (30) days after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the city manager is
hereby empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary
emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located through the area impacted.
(c) Adoption of stray animals restricted. No animal which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray,
unclaimed by its owner, shall be allowed to be adopted from any animal shelter during the period of rabies
emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the city manager.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.506)
State law reference–Area rabies quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.045.
Sec. 4.05.037 Destruction or isolation of animal bitten by rabid animal
(a) Animals bitten by a known rabid animal(s) may be immediately destroyed by the owner or by the order of
the city manager.
(b) If the owner chooses not to destroy the exposed animal, such animal shall be kept in strict isolation in a
kennel designated by the city manager for such a time as deemed necessary. If such animal has been previously
vaccinated within time limits established by the public health service, the animal shall be revaccinated and
restrained (through leashing or confinement) for thirty (30) days.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.507)
Sec. 4.05.038 Killing suspected rabid animal or removing from city
No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to
rabies or any animal biting a human, nor remove such animal from the city limits. Any animal suspected of
having been exposed to rabies or an animal biting a human shall be reported to the city manager or a doctor of
veterinary medicine. (2002 Code, sec. 2.508)
Sec. 4.05.039 Disposition of carcass when animal dies while under quarantine
When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian
and the animal dies while under such observation, the owner of that animal shall have no claim for the return of
the animal carcass, but the same shall be disposed of as directed by the city manager. (2002 Code, sec. 2.509)
Sec. 4.05.040 Surrender of carcass of animal exposed to rabies
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the city manager. (2002
Code, sec. 2.510)
Sec. 4.05.041 Compliance; obedience to animal control officer
(a) Any person who shall refuse to comply with the request or requirements imposed by an animal control
officer designated by the city manager shall be deemed to be in violation of the terms and provisions of this code
and shall be punished by fine to the maximum extent as provided for by law.
(b) Any person who shall violate any provisions of this division or refuse to comply therewith shall be
punished by fine to the maximum extent provided for by law.
(2002 Code, sec. 2.511)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/618
CHAPTER 5
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.01.001 Board and commission appointments, terms, removal, and meetings
(a) Unless stated to the contrary herein, all appointments to boards, commissions and committees of the city
shall be made by the city council.
(b) All appointments to boards, commissions and committees of the city shall expire on December 1st of the
year in which they would normally expire. At the first meeting of the board or commission following December
1st, a chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected by the members of the board or commission. Should no
appointment be made at the time a term would otherwise expire, the sitting board, commission, or committee
member will continue to serve in an interim capacity until the replacement appointment has been made.
(c) Unless expressly stated to the contrary herein, each board, commission or committee of the city shall be
composed of five (5) members, and the term of appointment for regular members shall be for two (2) years, one
(1) alternate member, the alternate member serving a term of one (1) year.
(d) Unless expressly stated to the contrary herein, the board and commission members serve at the pleasure of
the city council and may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the council.
(e) All boards, commissions and committees must meet at least two (2) times per year; once for open meeting
act and public information act training, and once for a regular business meeting. Additional meetings may be
held separately for work sessions, educational training, and city updates.
(f) Unless expressly stated to the contrary herein, a simple majority of each board or commission shall serve to
establish a quorum for a board or commission.
(g) Subject to the provisions of subsection (d), above, a board or commission member should regularly attend
meetings in order to ensure that a quorum can be met and business transacted. Three (3) consecutive absences, or
a total of five (5) absences during a twelve-month period shall cause the city council to consider removal of the
board or commission member. Failure to meet these attendance requirements will also bar the member from
being re-appointed for a subsequent term, absent the showing of good cause presented to, and accepted by the
city council based on special circumstances.
(h) All city councilmembers, with the exception of the mayor, may serve at as the council liaison to the boards
and commissions of the city for a period of one year. A council liaison for each board or commission shall be
selected by the city council by order of seniority. Unless provided for to the contrary by specific ordinance, the
liaison shall not vote, count towards a quorum, or otherwise be considered a regular member of the board or
commission to which he or she is appointed.
(i) A staff liaison shall be appointed by the city manager for each board or commission.
(j) The boards, commissions and committee matrix, attached to Ordinance 2018-12-53, as appendix A, setting
forth a summary of the membership, requirements, terms, dates and times, and other information, is hereby
incorporated herein and adopted by the city council. To the extent that a there is a conflict between the boards,
commissions and committees matrix and the text of this chapter, the text of this chapter will control.
Sec. 5.01.002 Qualifications of board and commission members
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/618
(a) Unless stated to the contrary herein, each board or commission or committee member must reside within
the corporate limits of the city at the time of the appointment to the board or commission; must not be in arrears
in the payment of any taxes or other liability due to the city; and must be a registered voter within the city.
(b) Additional board, commission or committee qualifications may be specified in the board and commission
specific portions of article 5.02 herein.
(c) Any board, commission or committee member ceasing to possess any of the qualifications set forth in this
section, or in the board and commission specific portions of article 5.02, herein, applicable to their particular
board, shall immediately forfeit his or her office.
Sec. 5.01.003 Advisory boards and statutory boards
Each city board, commission or committee shall be identified as “advisory” or “statutory,” or as special purpose
corporations such as economic development corporations. Advisory boards shall serve only in an advisory
capacity and shall make recommendations to the city council for further action and consideration. Statutory
boards and special purpose corporations may possess decision-making and/or quasi-judiciary powers and
functions as designated by their applicable enabling statute.
Sec. 5.01.004 Applicability of Texas Open Meetings Act
All city boards or commissions shall operate according to the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act,
(chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code), as amended.
Sec. 5.01.005 Form bylaws
The city council shall promulgate a set of form bylaws for use by the advisory boards which shall become
effective when adopted. An advisory board or commission that seeks to amend its bylaws must submit the
proposed change to the city council for consideration and approval before it becomes effective.
ARTICLE 5.02 BOARD AND COMMISSION SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.02.001 Airport advisory board
(a) The airport advisory board was established on April 17, 1978 by Resolution No. 4-78 and is designated as
an advisory board of the city.
(b) It is recommended that members have a working knowledge of airport and/or aviation operations, rent or
own a hanger or other space at Lancaster Regional Airport, or operate a business at Lancaster Regional Airport.
Members of this board are exempt from the requirements of section 5.01.002(a).
(c) The board is established pursuant to section 3.19 of the home rule charter to advise the city council
regarding the expansion and capital improvement of Lancaster Regional Airport.
Sec. 5.02.002 Animal shelter advisory committee
(a) The animal shelter advisory committee was established on March 10, 2008 by Resolution No. 2008-03-22,
is subject to the interlocal agreement for animal control services between the city and the City of Hutchins, and
is designated as an advisory board of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
(b) The committee shall be composed of five (5) regular members including one (1) alternate, and shall
include at least one (1) licensed veterinarian, one (1) county or municipal official, one (1) person whose duties
include the daily operation of an animal shelter, and one (1) representative from an animal welfare organization.
Three (3) members shall be appointed by the city, and three (3) members shall be appointed by the City of
Hutchins.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/618
(c) The committee is established pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code, section 823.005, to ensure that the
city animal shelter meets the state operating requirements.
(d) The committee shall meet no less than three (3) times per year.
Sec. 5.02.003 Capital improvements advisory committee
(a) The capital improvements advisory committee was established on June 18, 1990 by Resolution No. 21-90
and is designated as an advisory board of the city.
(b) At least two (2) members of the committee shall be representatives of the real estate, development, or
building industries who are not employees or officials of a political subdivision or governmental entity. If the
Texas Local Government Code chapter 395 impact fee is to be applied to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city, one member of the committee must be a representative from the area where the impact fee will be apply.
(c) The committee is established pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 395.058, to:
(1) Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions;
(2) Review the city's capital improvements plan and file written comments;
(3) Monitor and evaluate implementation of the city's capital improvements plan;
(4) File semiannual reports with respect to the progress of the city's capital improvements plan and
report to the city council any perceived inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the impact
fee; and advise the city council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital
improvements plan, and impact fee.
Sec. 5.02.004 Citizen advisory committee (photographic traffic-control signal enforcement system)
(a) The citizen advisory committee was established on December 10, 2007 by Resolution No. 2007-12-138.
(b) The committee was established pursuant to Texas Transportation Code provisions regarding the
installation and operation of photographic traffic-control signal enforcement systems. Given that there are no
such systems currently operating or contemplated within the city, this committee is hereby disbanded.
Sec. 5.02.005 Civil service commission
(a) The civil service commission was established pursuant to the May 8, 1995 Resolution No. 21-95 which
canvassed the results of the election in which Texas Local Government Code chapter 143 civil service was
established by the electorate, and is designated as a statutory board of the city.
(b) The commission shall be composed of three (3) members, with no alternate members, who shall be
appointed by the city manager and confirmed by the city council. Members shall serve staggered three (3) year
terms with the term of one member expiring each year. Each person appointed to the commission must:
(1) Be of good moral character;
(2) Be a United States citizen;
(3) Be a resident of the city who has resided in the city for more than three (3) years;
(4) Be over 25 years of age; and
(5) Not have held a public office within the preceding three years.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/618
(c) The commission is established pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 143.006, to ensure that
the city conforms to the requirements of chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code, and to investigate
and report on all matters relating to the enforcement and effect of chapter 143, including appeals from
firefighters or police officers. The commission is empowered to:
(1) Administer oaths;
(2) Issue subpoenas to complete the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers,
documents, and accounts relating to the investigation; and
(3) Cause the deposition of witnesses residing inside or outside the state, pursuant to section
143.009 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Sec. 5.02.006 Economic development corporation - (type A)
(a) The Lancaster Economic Development Corporation is a type A economic development corporation, and
had its initial bylaws approved on October 9, 1995 by Resolution No. 38-95, and currently operates under such
amended bylaws as approved by city council.
(b) The corporation shall consist of five (5) directors, with no alternate members. The board of directors shall
appoint, at a minimum, a president and a secretary, and such other officers as designated in its then-current
bylaws.
(c) The committee is established pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 504.051, to promote
economic development in the city and the area, and to perform all duties as authorized by chapter 504 of the
Texas Local Government Code for type A corporations.
Sec. 5.02.007 Historic landmark preservation committee
(a) The historic landmark preservation committee was established on December 5, 1994 by Ordinance No. 31-
94 and is designated as an advisory board of the city.
(b) Members of the committee shall be appointed by the planning and zoning commission and confirmed by
city council. Each member appointed to the committee shall have a demonstrated interest in or knowledge of
historic preservation practices and principles. Of the regular members, at least three (3) shall have experience
and/or expertise in the following fields: architecture, planning, landscape architecture, building construction or
real estate appraisal. At least one (1) member shall be a member of the city's historical society. At least one (1)
member shall be the owner of a designated historic landmark or property within an historic district.
(c) The committee is established pursuant to section 3.19 of the home rule charter to:
(1) Adopt criteria for the designation of historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and the
delineation of historic districts for submission to planning and zoning and city council;
(2) Recommend to the planning and zoning commission (for subsequent submission to the city
council) recognition of individuals and organizations who own designated historical landmarks or
properties within designated historic districts through the conferral of certificates, plaques, or
markers;
(3) Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and architectural preservation by
developing and participating in public education programs;
(4) Recommend the designation of sites, buildings, structures, objects or areas as landmarks or
historic districts;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/618
(5) Make recommendations to the planning and zoning commission (for subsequent submission to
the city council) regarding the utilization of funds and funding methods (such as tax deferments,
grants, fees, and donations); to promote the preservation and vitality of landmarks and historic
districts within the city;
(6) Review and make recommendations on applications for certificates of appropriateness and
certificates of economic hardship; and
(7) Ensure compliance with U.S. Department of the Interior standards for historic landmarks.
Sec. 5.02.008 Lancaster Recreational Development Corporation - (type B)
(a) The Lancaster Recreational Development Corporation is a type B economic development corporation
incorporated and approved on September 25, 1995 by Resolution No. 37-95, and currently operates under such
amended bylaws as approved by city council.
(b) The corporation shall consist of seven (7) directors with no alternate members, who shall serve two (2)
year terms. The board of directors shall appoint, at a minimum, a president and a secretary, and such other
officers as designated in its then-current bylaws.
(c) The committee is established pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 505.003, to promote
authorized projects and to perform all duties as authorized by chapter 505 of the Texas Local Government Code
for type B corporations.
Sec. 5.02.009 Lancaster State Auxiliary Museum Advisory Board
(a) The Lancaster State Auxiliary Museum Board Advisory Board was established on March 23, 2015 by
Resolution No. 2015-03-22 and is designated as an advisory board of the city.
(b) The board is established pursuant to section 3.19 of the home rule charter to report to city council on all
matters concerning the city's state auxiliary museum and to promote public interest in the museum.
Sec. 5.02.010 Lancaster Veterans Memorial Library Advisory Board
(a) The Lancaster Veterans Memorial Library Advisory Board was established on December 17, 1984 by
Ordinance No. 51-84 and is designated as an advisory board of the city.
(b) The board is established pursuant to section 3.19 of the home rule charter to report to city council on all
matters concerning the city's public library system, including:
(1) Recommending library programming;
(2) Giving guidance regarding the expansion of library facilities; and
(3) Encouraging the development and improvement of the library.
Sec. 5.02.011 Parks and recreation advisory board
(a) The parks and recreation advisory board was established on February 11, 2008 by Ordinance No. 2008-02-
07 and is designated as an advisory board of the city.
(b) The committee is established pursuant to section 3.19 of the home rule charter to advise the city council in
regard to all matters relating to the city's parks and recreation department, to study the city's parks and
recreational programs, and advise the city council regarding the future acquisition, development, enlargement
and use policy of the parks and recreation system, including an annual review of the city's master parks plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/618
Sec. 5.02.012 Planning and zoning commission
(a) The planning and zoning commission was previously established by the city pursuant to section 211.007 of
the Texas Local Government Code, and is designated as a statutory board of the city.
(b) A city planner, or the designee of the city manager shall serve as the secretary of the commission.
(c) The commission is established pursuant to section 211.07 of the Texas Local Government Code, and is
vested with the following powers and duties:
(1) To advise the city council and make recommendations concerning adoption of, or amendments
to, zoning regulations and the zoning map;
(2) To advise the city council and make recommendations concerning adoption of, or amendments
to the city's comprehensive plan, thoroughfare plan, and open space plan and implementation thereof;
(3) To oversee the city's regulations governing the platting and recording of subdivisions, including
matters pertaining to the dedication of public facilities, and to advise the council on matters
pertaining to public improvements, traffic, utility extension and the provision of public facilities and
services, in order to implement the city's comprehensive plan;
(4) To undertake such actions as are necessary to exercise its delegated powers, as indicated by
adopted ordinance, including the granting of exceptions to zoning standards and the city's
development code;
(5) To approve certain matters relating to platting and recording of subdivisions as dictated by the
city's ordinances (including the city's development code);
(6) Other duties and powers as authorized by chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code
and other applicable state law.
Sec. 5.02.013 Property standards and appeals board
(a) The property standards and appeals board was established on July 24, 2006 by Ordinance No. 2006-07-24,
and is designated as a statutory board of the city.
(b) The board is empowered to hear the appeal of any person directly affected by a decision of the city's chief
building official and/or code official or a notice or order issued under the International Property Maintenance
Code (and other model codes governing building, construction, and property maintenance standards) as adopted
by the city and amended from time to time, provided that the code in question provides for an appellate process.
(c) Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice
or order until the appeal is heard by the board.
(d) The board shall meet upon notice from the city's code official, (as that term is used in the version of the
International Property Maintenance Code currently adopted by the city), within twenty (20) days of the city's
receipt of a notice of appeal, or at stated meetings that may be called from time to time. The appellant, the
appellant's representative, and any other person whose interests are affected by the hearing shall be given an
opportunity to present their case to the board.
(e) The city manager, or his or her designee(s) shall present all cases before the board. The city's code official,
as that term is used in the version of the International Property Maintenance Code currently adopted by the city,
shall have a standing designation, which may be modified at the will of the city manager.
(f) The board may, by a majority vote:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/618
(1) Affirm the order of the code official being appealed and enforce the recommendation of the
official;
(2) Modify the order of the code official being appealed; or
(3) Reverse the order of the code official being appealed.
(g) Any person affected by the code official's order or the board's decision, may apply to the appropriate court
for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made within thirty (30) days of the
board's decision.
Sec. 5.02.014 Sign control board
(a) The sign control board was previously established by the city council and is designated as a statutory board
of the city, when considering exceptions, and an advisory board of the city, when operating in its advisory
capacity.
(b) The planning and zoning commission shall serve as the sign control board.
(c) The board is established pursuant to section 3.19 of the home rule charter to:
(1) Consider exceptions from the sign control provisions of the city's development code, evaluating
requested exceptions by considering:
(A) The degree of exception;
(B) The reasons for the exception;
(C) The location of the exception;
(D) The duration of the exception;
(E) The effect on public safety;
(F) Protection of neighborhood property;
(G) The degree of hardship or injustice involved; and
(H) The effect of the exception on the general plan for signage throughout the city; and shall
have the power to grant, deny, or grant with lesser exceptions any proposed exception before it;
(2) To conduct continuing studies of sign ordinances in neighboring municipalities and other Texas
cities and make recommendations to the city council where appropriate;
(3) To conduct a continuing review of all nonconforming signs and exceptions granted and
determine the desirability and effects upon the immediate area of the nonconforming signs and
exceptions and the city as a whole and make recommendations to the city council where appropriate;
(4) To evaluate new signage methods and materials and make recommendations to city council
regarding their benefits and disadvantages; and
(5) Conduct such other sign related studies and plans as directed by city council.
Sec. 5.02.015 Tree advisory board
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/618
(a) The tree advisory board was previously established by the city council and is designated as an advisory
committee of the city.
(b) The planning and zoning commission shall serve as the tree board. When meeting in this capacity, they
shall be an advisory board.
(c) The committee is established pursuant to section 3.19 of the home rule charter to advise the city council in
regard to all matters relating to the city's tree preservation and urban forestry activities.
Sec. 5.02.016 Youth advisory committee
(a) The youth advisory committee was established on July 14, 2008 by Ordinance No. 2008-07-28 and is
designated as an advisory board of the city.
(b) The board shall be composed of ten (10) student youth members, who shall be enrolled in a public or
private accredited secondary school and who shall be fifteen years of age or older, and two sponsors, who shall
be adults and residents of the city, and who shall be appointed to staggered terms. The city manager (or his or her
designee) shall appoint the student youth members. City council shall appoint the sponsors. Terms of office shall
be two (2) years for the sponsor, and two (2) years for five (5) of the student youth members and one (1) year for
five (5) of the remaining student youth members. The mayor serves as an advisor, and one (1) city council
member serves as a council liaison to the committee.
(c) The committee is established pursuant to section 3.19 of the home rule charter to provide participation in
municipal government by the local youth, and to advise the city council on matters of relevance to young
members of the community.
Sec. 5.02.017 Zoning board of adjustment
(a) The zoning board of adjustment was established on April 24, 2006 by Ordinance No. 2006-04-13 and is
designated as a statutory board of the city.
(b) The board is established pursuant to section 211.009 of the Texas Local Government Code, and the board
is vested with all the powers and duties set forth therein, including the authority to:
(1) Hear and decide an appeal that alleges an error in an order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of chapter 211, subchapter A of
the Texas Local Government Code, under the provision that reversing such order, requirement,
decision or determination of an administrative official must be supported by a vote of at least
seventy-five (75%) percent of the board; and
(2) Authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of a zoning ordinance if the variance is
not contrary to the public interest and due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the ordinance
would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance is observed and
substantial justice is done , under the provision that granting a variance from the terms of a zoning
ordinance must be supported by a vote of at least seventy-five (75%) percent of the board.
(Ordinance 2018-12-53 adopted 12/10/18)
CHAPTER 6
BUILDING REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/618
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 6.01.001 Garage conversions
(a) Conversion of a garage or carport converted for human occupancy, constructed without a permit, shall be
allowed to remain conditioned on compliance with the requirements set forth herein.
(b) The city council hereby grants a moratorium on enforcement of the city building, electrical and plumbing
codes for a period of two (2) years for all owners or occupants of residential structures for converted garages and
carports which have been converted for human occupancy, subject to the following conditions:
(1) That every such owner(s) or occupant(s) who has caused, permitted, suffered or allowed such
conversion without the appropriate permit(s) notify the city code official of such conversion within
one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the effective date of this section.
(2) That, upon such notice, such owner(s) or occupant(s) shall consent to inspection of such
converted garage or carport for compliance with applicable building, electrical, plumbing and fire
codes.
(3) That every such owner(s) or occupant(s) shall pay an inspection fee as established by the city
council.
(4) That the code official shall, after such inspection, give notice of related code deficiencies, if
any, to such owner(s) or occupant(s).
(5) That every such owner(s) or occupant(s) shall make the necessary and/or appropriate repairs to
bring such converted garage or carport into compliance with the building, electrical, plumbing or fire
code, and such owner(s) or occupant(s) shall obtain the appropriate permit to conduct such repairs.
(c) If a home with a converted garage or carport was brought into compliance by the owner(s) or occupant(s),
and then the home was destroyed over fifty (50%) percent of its value, the owner(s) or occupant(s) may rebuild
the home with the additional room and would not have to rebuild with the two (2) car covered parking space.
(d) The provisions hereof are not applicable to any residential structure currently under permit or being
constructed, and nothing contained herein shall be construed to create any right or entitlement past the expiration
date as provided herein.
(e) The moratorium granted herein shall expire without further action on July 1, 2002.
(f) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section or the development code of
the city, as amended hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal
court of the city, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code, and each and every day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
(2002 Code, art. 3.1700)
ARTICLE 6.02 REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS*
Sec. 6.02.001 Required
No person, corporation or entity shall conduct work for hire under any building, plumbing, mechanical,
electrical, or sign permits under the Code of Ordinances in the city without first being registered with city as
provided in this article.
Sec. 6.02.002 Registration information and documentation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/618
The following information must be submitted on a form promulgated at the time of registration:
(1) A completed contractor's registration form, signed by the owner, managing partner or chief
executive officer of the contractor.
(2) A legible copy of the driver's license of the owner, managing partner or chief executive officer
who signs the registration form.
(3) Home builders must submit a copy of their state residential construction commission
registration certificate.
(4) A registration fee as established by resolution of the city council.
(5) All registrations expire one (1) year from the date of issuance.
(6) General liability insurance in the minimum coverage amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00). The city must be named as the certificate holder.
Sec. 6.02.003 Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation
A contractor's registration may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city manager or designee for any of the
following reasons:
(1) The contractor fails to finalize permits by obtaining the required inspections.
(2) The contractor allows use or occupancy of a structure for which a permit was obtained without
first obtaining the required certificate of occupancy.
(3) The contractor has performed substandard work.
(4) Abandonment of a construction project.
(5) The prior abandonment of one or more construction projects by a contractor or any owner,
partner or an officer of the contractor.
(6) A finding of fraud or deceit in securing a registration or a permit.
(7) Conviction in municipal court of three (3) or more violations of any of the provisions of the
building code committed within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
(8) Accumulation of two (2) decisions of the board to suspend registration.
(9) Accumulation of three (3) stop work orders within a period of twelve (12) months or two (2)
forfeitures or failure to appear at an appeal of stop work orders.
Sec. 6.02.004 Hearing on denial, suspension or revocation
(a) A person who has received a denial, suspension or revocation may request an appeal of the city manager or
designee's decision to the property advisory and appeals board.
(b) The board shall conduct the hearing on any proposed denial, suspension, or revocation of a contractor's
registration.
(c) The contractor shall be notified by mail ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/618
(d) Should the contractor fail to appear at the scheduled time for the hearing, the board may proceed to hear
the case.
(e) During the period of time preceding the hearing, the contractor may not secure a permit for work or
register under any different identification or corporate entity or other organization.
Sec. 6.02.005 Fees
All fees established by this article shall be set by the appropriate resolution of the city council.
Sec. 6.02.006 Effect of revocation
Revocation of registration shall be a full and final cancellation of such registration and shall be effective
immediately after the expiration of the time period for an appeal to the property advisory and appeals board, if
no appeal is timely made, or upon the final decision of the property advisory and appeals board after an appeal is
provided. A contractor whose registration is revoked shall not be allowed to reapply for a registration for a
period of two (2) years.
(Ordinance 2007-11-52 adopted 11/12/07)
ARTICLE 6.03 FEES
Sec. 6.03.001 Adopted
The fees as established by the city council shall be charged by the city. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1501)
Sec. 6.03.002 Commencing work without permit
Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said
permit, the fees shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully
complying with the regulations prescribed in this chapter in the execution of the work or from any other
penalties prescribed herein. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1502)
Sec. 6.03.003 Second inspections
Where work for which a permit is required and has been issued is inspected by the code official and red-tagged
for noncompliance with city codes, and a second inspection is required, an additional fee as established by the
city council shall be charged for each necessary subsequent inspection. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1503)
Sec. 6.03.004 Exemption for public schools
Any Lancaster Independent School District public school shall be exempt from payment of the fees provided by
this article, provided that such public schools shall not be excused from the necessary permit approval processes
enumerated in this chapter or in any other code or ordinance of the city. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1504)
ARTICLE 6.04 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.04.001–6.04.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 6.04.051 Adoption
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/618
There is hereby adopted as the building code for the city for the purpose of regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary
and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of building and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use and the demolition of such structure in the city the International Building Code, 2015 edition, published by
the International Code Council, Inc., as amended, and the same is hereby incorporated by reference herein the
same as if fully copied, subject to the exceptions and amendments described in this article. That one copy of
each volume of such code shall be kept at all times in the office of the city secretary, together with the exceptions
and amendments.
Sec. 6.04.052 Exceptions and amendments
The building code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the International
Building Code, 2015 edition, as follows:
To amend section 101.4 to read as follows:
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.7 and referenced
elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this
code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the
referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to
reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the electrical code shall mean the
electrical code as adopted.”
To amend section 101.4.8 by adding the following:
101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the electrical code shall apply to the installation of electrical
systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and
appurtenances thereto.
[To amend section 103.1 to read as follows:]
“City of Lancaster Building Inspections Division”
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The City of Lancaster Building Inspections Division is
hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.
Section [A] 104.2.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings and
structures in flood hazard areas; delete this section in its entirety.
Section 104.10.1; Flood hazard areas. Delete this section in its entirety.
To amend section 105.2 Work exempt from permit; under subtitle entitled “building” delete items 1, 2, 10 and 11
and renumber as follows:
“…..
Building:
1. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18
925 L)…..
…..
…..”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/618
To amend section 109 by adding section 109.7 to read as follows:
“…..
109.7 Reinspection fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when:
1. The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives;
2. No building address or permit card is clearly posted;
3. City approved plans are not on the jobsite available to the inspector;
4. The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called;
5. The jobsite is red-tagged twice for the same item;
6. The original red tag has been removed from the jobsite.
7. Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection.
Any reinspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that jobsite.”
To amend section 109 by adding section 109.8, 109.8.1, 109.8.2 and 109.9 to read as follows:
“…..
109.8 Work without a permit.
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been
commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a
permit may be issued for such work.
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not
a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit
fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such
investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of
either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law.
109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required
inspection in violation of section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee schedule.”
To amend section 110.3.5 by deleting exception in its entirety.
To amend section 202 by amending definitions and adopting new definitions to read as follows:
“…..
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical,
surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are
rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be
limited to the following:
- Dialysis centers
- Sedation dentistry
- Surgery centers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/618
- Colonic centers
- Psychiatric centers
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis,
who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment
which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency
situation without physical assistance from staff.
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories.....
………
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor
vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and
servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or
replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs.
SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency who shall
prove to the satisfaction of the registered design professional in charge and the building official as
having the competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring special
inspection.
……”
To amend section 303.1.3 by adding a sentence to read as follows:
303.1.3 Associated with group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is
associated with a group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy. Except when applying
the assembly requirements of chapter 10 and 11.
To amend section 304.1 by adding the following to the list of occupancies to read as follows:
“304.1 .....
Fire stations
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or less”
To amend section 307.1.1 by adding the following sentence to exception 4 to read as follows:
“307.1.1……..
4. Cleaning establishments ...with section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with section 711 or both. See also IFC chapter 12, dry cleaning plant provisions.”
To amend section 403.1. exception 3, change to read as follows:
“403.1 .....
…….
3. The open air portion of a building .....”
To amend section 403.3 by deleting exception #2 in its entirety.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/618
To amend section 403.3.2 to read as follows:
“403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (36.5 m) in
building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water
mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection
to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and
the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate.
Exception:.....”
To amend section 404.5; by deleting the exception in its entirety.
To amend section 406.3.5.1 by adding a sentence to read as follows:
“406.3.5.1 Carport separation. A fire separation is not required between a group R-2 and U carport
provided that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least
10 feet (3048 mm)”
To amend section 506.2.2 by adding a sentence to read as follows:
“506.3.2.1 Open space limits. Such open space shall be either on the same lot or dedicated for public
use and shall be accessed from a street or approved fire lane. In order to be considered as accessible,
if not in direct contact with a street or fire lane, a minimum 10-foot wide pathway meeting fire
department access from the street or approved fire lane shall be provided.”
To amend section 712.1.9 by changing # 4 to read as follows:
“712.1.9 .....
……
4. Is not open to a corridor in group I and H occupancies.”
To amend section 901.6.1 by adding subsection 901.6.1.1 to read as follows:
“901.6.1.1 Standpipe testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems
as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing
that is required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the fire department connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be back
flushed when foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any
type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA
25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems.
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply
capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant
or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water
through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions
properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry
standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function
properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system.
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/618
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such
caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas
Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM)
Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as
“Fifth Year” for type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read “5 Year Standpipe
Test” at a minimum.
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to
Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required
notification of the local authority having jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if
applicable, as required by the state rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be
conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing
conditions.
9. Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from class II and III
standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting
equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved
cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official.”
To amend section 903.1.1 to read as follows:
“903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with
section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the
applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official.”
To amend section 903.2 to read as follows:
“903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall
be provided in the locations described in sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. Automatic Sprinklers
shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoist ways,
other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any
circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be
provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating ‘ELEVATOR MACHINERY -
NO STORAGE ALLOWED.'”
To amend section 903.2.9 by adding subsection 903.2.9.3 to read as follows:
“903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
all self-service storage facilities.”
[To amend section 903.2.11.3, 903.2.11.7 through 903.2.11.9 to read as follows:]
903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings that have one or more stories with an occupant load of 30 or more, other than
penthouses in compliance with section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 55 feet (16
764 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished
floor.
Exceptions:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/618
1. Open parking structures in compliance with section 406.5 of the International
Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage.
2. Occupancies in group F-2.
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet
(4572 mm), see chapter 32 of the IFC to determine if those provisions apply.
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.
903.2.11.9 Buildings Over 6,000 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
all buildings with a building area 6,000 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged
to be 6,000 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate
buildings.
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with section 406.5 of the International Building
Code.
To amend section 903.3.1.1.1 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall
not be required in the following rooms or areas where such.... because it is damp, of fire-resistancerated
construction or contains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or
fire hazard.
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of
the contents, when approved by the code official.
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated
from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having
a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
4. Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoist ways, other than pits where such
sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances.”
To add section 903.3.1.2.2 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.2.2 Attics and attached garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such
buildings two or more stories in height, in accordance with NFPA 13 and/or NFPA 13R requirements,
and attached garages.”
To amend section 903.3.1.3 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and twofamily
dwellings, group R-3; group R-4 condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed
throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law.”
To amend section 903.3.1.4 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be
in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/618
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler
systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic
spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to
allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the
rest of the building; and
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable
referenced NFPA standard; and
3. The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that
insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved
by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.”
To amend section 903.3.5 by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:
“Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply
requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be
designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference section 507.4 for additional design requirements.”
To amend section 903.4 by adding second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
“…..
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.”
To amend section 903.4.2 by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:
“903.4.2 .....
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe
notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable
to the fire department connection.”
To amend section 905.2 to read as follows:
“905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section
And NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a
maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm.”
To adopt section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows:
“905.3.9 Building area exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area
per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) of
travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, class I
automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/618
Exception:
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in
NFPA 14.
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.”
To amend section 905.4 to read as follows:
“905.4 .....
1. In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above
and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between
stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
2…..
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a
building.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit
stairway hose connection by a .....
4…..
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent
slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way a hose connection located to serve the
roof or at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in
accordance with section 1011.12.
6…..
7. When required by this chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all
required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors
thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official.”
To amend section 905.9 by adding second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
“…..
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.”
To amend section 907.1 by adding subsection 907.1.4 to read as follows:
“…..
907.1.4 Design standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be
addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating
devices.”
To amend section 907.2.1 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/618
“907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in
accordance with section 907.5 shall be installed in group A occupancies having an occupant load of
300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.
Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with section 707.3.9 of the
International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying
this section. Portions of group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with
a fire alarm system as required for the group E occupancy.
Exception: .....
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux)
at the walking surface level; and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.”
To amend section 907.2.3; change to read as follows:
“907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing
an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of section 907.5.2.2 and
installed in accordance with section 907.6 shall be installed in group E educational occupancies.
When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be
connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed
in group E day-care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings,
whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant
load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems.
Exceptions:
1……
1.1. Residential in-home day-care with not more than 12 children may use
interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five
children 2-1/2 or less years of age, see section 907.2.6.)
…..”
To amend section 907.2.13; exception 3. change to read as follows:
“907.2.13 .....
Exceptions:
1…..
……
3. Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in group A-5 in accordance with
section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply
to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants and similarly
enclosed areas.”
To amend section 907.4.2 by adding subsection 907.4.2.7 to read as follows:
“907.4.2 .....
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/618
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.”
To amend section 907.6.1 by adding subsection 907.6.1.1 to read as follows:
“907.6.1
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a
failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not
interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall
be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any
addressable devices (class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four
feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors.
The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a signaling line circuit interface device may be wired
class B, provided the distance from the interface device to the initiating device is ten feet or
less.”
To amend section 907.6.3 by deleting all exceptions in its entirety.
To amend section 907.6.6 by adding a sentence at end of paragraph to read as follows:
“…..
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station.”
To amend section 909.22 to read as follows:
“909.22 Stairway or ramp pressurization alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization
alternative is chosen for compliance with building code requirements for a smokeproof enclosure,
interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches Of water (25 Pa)
and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all
interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect
and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with section 909, including the installation of a separate
firefighter's smoke control panel as per section 909.16, and a smoke control permit shall be required
from the fire department as per section 105.7.
909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp
pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved
location at the entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway
or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, mechanical
equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall
be installed in accordance with section 907.3.
909.22.1.1 Ventilation systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be
independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power
wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following:
1. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior
to the building and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to
the smokeproof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers
constructed in accordance with section 707 of the building code or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with section 711 of the building code, or both.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/618
2. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within
the smokeproof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or
through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in
accordance with section 707 of the building code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 of the building code, or both.
3. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within
the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other
mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in
accordance with section 707 of the building code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 of the building code, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable
system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.
3. Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit
protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
909.22.1.2 Standby power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation
systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in
accordance with section 2702 of the building code.
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the
system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is
operating in compliance with these requirements.”
To amend section 910.2 exception 2. and 3. to read as follows:
“910.2 .....
Exception:
1…..
2. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings
equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and
heat removal is prohibited.
3. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings
equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of
50(m*S)1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer
sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.”
To amend section 910.2 by adding subsections 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows:
“910.2 .....
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a group H occupancy as follows:
1. In occupancies classified as group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000
square feet (1394 m2) in single floor area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/618
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only
noncombustible materials.
2. In areas of buildings in group H used for storing class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid
oxidizers, class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, class 3 and 4 unstable
(reactive) materials, or class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard
commodity classification.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only
noncombustible materials.”
To amend section 910.3 by adding subsection 910.3.4 to read as follows:
“910.3 .....
910.3.4 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved
automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to
the provisions of sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3.
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate
automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall
operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius)
greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed.
Exception: Manual only system per 910.2
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by
actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C)
above ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents.”
To amend section 910.4.3.1 to read as follows:
“910.4.3.1 Makeup air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor
level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be manual or automatic. The minimum gross area of
makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of
smoke exhaust.”
To amend section 910.4.4 to read as follows:
“910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the
automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall
also be provided.
Exception: Manual only systems per section 910.2.”
To amend section 912.2 by adding subsection 912.2.3 to read as follows:
“912.2 .....
912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire
department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/618
To amend section 913.2.1 by adding a second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
“913.2.1 .....
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with
an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in
height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this
door, as required by section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an
exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the
building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump
room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key
box as required by section 506.1.”
To adopt section 1006.2.2.6 to read as follows:
“1006.2.2.6 Electrical rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply.
Reference the electrical code as adopted.”
To amend section 1009.1 by adding exception 4 to read as follows:
“1009.1 ....
Exceptions:
4. Buildings regulated under state law and built in accordance with state registered
plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the state, shall be deemed to be in
compliance with the requirements of section 1009.”
To amend section 1010.1.9.4 by amending exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows:
“1010.1.9.4 Bolt locks .....
Exceptions:
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a group B, F,
M or S occupancy......
4. Where a pair of doors serves a group A, B, F, M or S occupancy .....”
To amend section 1020.1 by adding exception 6 to read as follows:
“1020.1 Construction .....
………
6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive
construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic
smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate selfannunciating
alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected
to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided.”
To amend section 1029.1.1.1 by deleting this section in its entirety.
To amend section 1101.1 by adding an exception to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/618
“1101.1 Scope .....
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers
Division of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be incompliance
with the requirements of this chapter.”
To amend section 1203.1 to read as follows:
“1203.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with section
1203.4, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with the International Mechanical Code.
Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is 5 air changes or less per hour when tested with a
blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with section 402.4.1.2 of the
International Energy Conservation Code, the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical
means in accordance with section 403 of the International Mechanical Code.”
To amend table 1505.1 by deleting footnote c and replace footnote b with the following:
“…..
b. Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of U occupancies having not more
than 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area. When exceeding 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area, buildings of
U occupancies may use non-rated non-combustible roof coverings.”
To delete section 1505.7 in its entirety.
To amend section 1510.1 by adding a sentence to read as follows:
“1510.1 General. Materials and methods of applications used for recovering or replacing an existing
roof covering shall comply with the requirements of chapter 15. All individual replacement shingles
or shakes shall be in compliance with the rating required by table 1505.1.
…..”
To amend section 1704.2 to read as follows:
“1704.2 Special inspections and tests. Where application is made to the building official for
construction as specified in section 105, the owner or the owner's authorized agent, or the registered
design professional in responsible charge, other than the contractor, shall employ one or more
approved agencies to provide special inspections and tests during construction on the types of work
listed under section 1705 and identify the approved agencies to the building official. The special
inspector shall not be employed by the contractor. These special inspections and tests are in addition
to the inspections identified by the building official that are identified in section 110.”
To amend section 1704.2.1 to read as follows:
“1704.2.1 Special inspector qualifications. Prior to the start of construction and or upon request; the
approved agencies shall provide written documentation to the registered design professional in
responsible charge and the building official demonstrating the competence and relevant experience or
training of the special inspectors who will perform the special inspections and tests during
construction......”
To amend section 1704.2.4 to read as follows:
“1704.2.4 Report requirement. Approved agencies shall keep records of special inspections and
tests. The approved agency shall submit reports of special inspections and tests to the building official
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/618
upon request, and to the registered design professional in responsible charge. Individual inspection
reports shall indicate that work inspected or tested was or was not completed in conformance to
approved construction documents......”
To amend section 1704.2.5.2 to read as follows:
“1704.2.5.1 Fabricator approval. Special inspections during fabrications required by section 1704
are not required where the work is done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved to
perform such work without special inspection. Approval shall be based upon review of the
fabricator's written procedural and quality control manuals and periodic auditing of fabrication
practices by an approved agency, or a fabricator that is enrolled in a nationally accepted inspections
program. At completion of fabrication, the acceptable or approved fabricator shall submit a certificate
of compliance to the owner or the owner's authorized agent or the registered design professional in
responsible charge, stating that the work was performed in accordance with the approved construction
documents. The certificate of compliance shall also be made available to the building official upon
request.”
To amend section 2901.1 by adding a sentence to read as follows:
“2901.1 Scope...... The provisions of this chapter are meant to work in coordination with the
provisions of chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any conflicts arise between the
two chapters, the building official shall determine which provision applies.”
To amend section 2902.1 by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:
“2902.1 .....
In other than E occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in table 2902.1 may be lowered, if
requested in writing, by the applicant stating reasons for a reduced number and approved by the
building official.”
To amend table 2902.1 by amending footnote f to read as follows:
“2902.1 .....
…..
f. Drinking fountains are not required in M occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less,
B occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking
establishments.”
To amend section 2902.1.3 by adding a new subsections to read as follows:
“2902.1.3 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in
this chapter, all food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section.
2902.1.3.1 Handwashing lavatory. At least one handwashing lavatory shall be provided for
use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing
areas. Additional handwashing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by
employees.
2902.1.3.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service
sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of
mops or similar wet floor cleaning tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid
waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the City of
Lancaster's health department.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/618
To amend section 3002.1 by adding exceptions to read as follows:
“3002.1 Hoistway enclosure protection......
Exceptions:
1. Elevators wholely located within atriums complying with section 404 shall not
require hoistway enclosure protection.
2. Elevators in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, and
complying with sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall not require hoistway
enclosure protection.”
To amend section 3005.4 by deleting section in its entirety and replacing it to read as follows:
“3005.4. Elevator machine rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces shall be
enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with section 707 or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711, or both.
…..”
To adopt section 3005.7 to read as follows:
“3005.7 Fire protection in machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces.
3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted
by section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by section 3005.7.2.1.
[3005.7.2.2]
3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine
rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoistways.
3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler
control valve supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device provided for each floor
that is monitored by the building's fire alarm system.
3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from infiltrating into the
hoistway enclosure from the operation of the automatic sprinkler system outside the elevator
lobby shall be provided.
3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with section 3005.5 shall not
be installed.”
To amend by adding section 3005.8 to read as follows:
“3005.8 Storage. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room, control room,
machinery spaces and or control spaces. Provide approved signage at each entry to the above listed
locations stating: ‘No Storage Allowed.'”
Section 3006.2, Hoistway opening protection required. Revise text as follows:
5. The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) in height.
The height of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor at or above grade to the highest
floors served by the hoistway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/618
To amend section 3109.1 to read as follows:
“3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of sections 3109.2 through
3109.5 and other applicable sections of this code and complying with applicable state laws.”
(Ordinance 2017-04-05 adopted 4/10/17)
Secs. 6.04.053–6.04.100 Reserved
Division 3. Residential Code*
Sec. 6.04.101 Adoption
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary of the city, being marked and
designated as the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, including appendix, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the residential code of the city for regulating and
governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location,
removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said residential code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in section 6.04.102 of this article.
Sec. 6.04.102 Exceptions and amendments
The residential code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the International
Residential Code, 2015 edition, which shall herein after read as follows:
To amend section R102.4 to read as follows:
“R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards
referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference and as further regulated in sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever
amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code
and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA
70 or the electrical code shall mean the electrical code as adopted.”
To delete section R104.10.1 flood hazard areas in its entirety.
To delete section R105.3.1.1 and R106.1.4 in its entirety.
To delete section 110 (R110.1 through R110.5) in its entirety.
To amend section R202 by changing definition of “townhouse” to read as follows”
“TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached
units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard
of public way on at least two sides.”
To amend table R301.2(1); to read as follows (No changes to footnotes):
Ground Snow
Load
Wind Design Seismic Design
Categoryf
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/618
Speedd (mph) Topographic
Effectsk
Special Wind
RegionL
Windborne Debris
Zonem
5 lb/ft
115 (3 secgust)/
76 fastest
mile
No No No A
Subject to Damage From
Weatheringa Frost Line Depthb Termitec
Moderate 6" Very Heavy
Winter Design
Tempe
Ice Barrier Under-
Laymenth
Flood Hazardsg Air Freezing
Indexi
Mean Annual
Tempj
22° F No Local Code 150 64.9° F
Fn1 .....”
To amend section R302.1 by adding new exception #6 to read as follows:
“Exceptions: {previous exceptions unchanged}
6. Open noncombustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within
adopted ordinances.”
To amend section R302.3 by adding new exception #3 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. {existing text unchanged} .....
2. ....
3. Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure
shall be separated as required for townhouses.”
To amend section R302.5.1 to read as follows:
“R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for
sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be
equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb
core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/618
To amend the exception in section R303.3 to read as follows:
“Exception: {existing test unchanged} Exhaust air from the space shall be exhaust out to the
outdoors unless the space contains only a water closet, a lavatory, or water closet and a lavatory may
be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove
odors from the air.”
To delete section R313 automatic fire sprinkler systems in its entirety.
To amend section R315.2.2, alterations, repairs and additions. Amend to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. ....
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of electrical powered .....{remaining text unchanged}”
To delete section R322 flood resistant construction in its entirety.
To amend section R326 swimming pools, spas and hot tubs to read as follows:
“R326.1 General. The design and construction of pools and spas shall comply with the 2015 IRC
Appendix Q. Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs”
To amend section R401.2, by adding a new paragraph following the existing paragraph to read as follows:
“Section R401.2. Requirements. .....
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation,
regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer.”
To amend section 602.6.1 to read as follows:
“R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an
exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate
by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054-inch-thick (1.37 mm)
(16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the
opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148-inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1-1/2 inches
(38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate
material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1. .....
{remainder unchanged}”
To amend figure R602.6.1 by deleting the figure and add the following figure:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/618
To amend section R703.7.4.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to studs as follows:
1. When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in
(737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or
2. When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in
(483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in (254 mm) from the foundation.”
To amend section R902.1 and by adding exception #3 to read as follows:
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in sections
R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed. {remainder unchanged}
“Exceptions:
1. ....
.....
5. Nonclassified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures
used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed (area defined by jurisdiction).”
Chapter 11. [RE] - Energy efficiency is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
“N1101.1 Scope. This chapter regulates the energy efficiency for the design and construction of
buildings regulated by this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/618
N1101.2 Compliance. Compliance shall be demonstrated by meeting the requirements of the
residential provisions of 2015 International Energy Conservation Code.”
To amend section M1305.1.3; change to read as follows:
“M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided...
{bulk of paragraph unchanged}...sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access
opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger
and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated
as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide
one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be
serviced and removed through the required opening.
2. Where the passageway is unobstructed ...... {remaining text unchanged}”
To amend section M1411.3 to read as follows:
“M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed
from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means
of a direct or indirect drain. .....”
To amend section M1411.3.1, items 3 and 4 by adding text to read as follows:
“M1411.3.1 Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. {bulk of paragraph unchanged}
1. ....
.....
2. An auxiliary drain pan....... with item 1 of this section. A water level detection device may
be installed only with prior approval of the building official.
3. A water level detection device ..... overflow rim of such pan. A water level detection
device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official.”
To amend section M1411.3.1.1 by adding text to read as follows:
“M1411.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices. On down-flow units ...... installed in the drain line. A
water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official.”
To amend section M1503.4 makeup air required amend and add exception as follows:
“M1503.4 Makeup air required. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 400
cubic feet per minute (0.19 m3/s) shall be provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to
the difference between the exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet per minute. Such makeup air systems
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/618
shall be equipped with a means of closure and shall be automatically controlled to start and operate
simultaneously with the exhaust system.
Exception: Where all appliances in the house are of sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented,
or electric, the exhaust hood system shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per
minute (0.28 m3/s) without providing makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting
in excess of 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be provided with a makeup air at a rate
approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 600 cubic feet per
minute.”
To amend section M2005.2 to read as follows:
“M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a
storage closet or installed in any attic unless approved by the building official. Water heaters located
in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be
taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when
through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements
of the International Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device.
Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required.”
To delete section G2408.3 (305.5) in its entirety.
To amend section G2415.2.1 (404.2.1) by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with
an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following
wording shall be stamped into the tag:
WARNING
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
Do Not Remove”
To amend section G2415.2.2 (404.2.2) by adding an exception to read as follows:
“Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EDH).”
To amend section G2415.12 (404.12) to read as follows:
“G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a
minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) 18 inches (457 mm) below grade, except as provided for in
section G2415.12.1.”
To amend section G2417.1 (406.1) to read as follows:
“G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be
inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation
practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable
tests prescribed in sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of
this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the building official when the
piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the
inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible
for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/618
To amend section G2417.4 to read as follows:
“G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or
with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss
caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the
pressure tests are made.”
To amend section G2417.4.1 to read as follows:
“G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa
gauge), or at the discretion of the code official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at
least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests
requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three
and one half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed
6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm
gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand,
a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded
piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column
pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi),
the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying
gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall
be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure.
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working
condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing.”
To amend section G2417.4.2 to read as follows:
“G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory
to the building official, but in no case for be not less than 10 fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping,
and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48
kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the building official, but in no
case for less than thirty (30) minutes.”
To amend section G2420.1 (406.1) by adding section G2420.1.4 to read as follows:
“G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel
(CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support,
suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to
prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the
valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the
system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and
installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping.”
To amend section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) by adding text to read as follows:
“G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve ..... in accordance with the
appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914
mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox.”
To amend section G2421.1 (410.1) by adding text and exception to read as follows:
“G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be ..... approved for outdoor
installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as
specified in section M1305.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/618
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of
being serviced and removed through the required attic opening.”
To delete exceptions 1 and 4 from section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3).
To amend section G2445.2 (621.2) by adding exception to read as follows:
“G2445.2 (621.2) Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole
source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit.
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling
units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the
building official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International
Fuel Gas Code section 108.7 of the fuel gas code.”
To amend section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) to read as follows:
“G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to
access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code.”
To amend section P2801.6.1 to read as follows:
“Section P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) in depth
and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water
heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch
(19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in table 605.4.
Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the
administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with
those instructions.”
To amend section P2804.6.1 to read as follows:
“Section P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure
relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall:
1. Not be directly connected to the drainage system.
2. Discharge through an air gap.
3. Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full
size to the air gap.
4. Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device
or equipment.
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping
system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures
installation instructions and installed with those instructions.
5. Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors.
6. ....
.....”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/618
To amend section P2801.7 by adding exception to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. Electric water heater.”
To amend section P2902.5.3 to read as follows:
“P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be
protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker,
a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be
installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the
system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer.”
To amend section P3009.9 to read as follows:
“P3003.9. Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer
that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to
ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3, CSA B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The
joint shall be made while the cement is wet and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent
cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground.
Exception: A primer is not required where both of the following conditions apply:
.....”
To delete section P3111 in its entirety.
To amend section P3112.2 by deleting and replacing to read as follows:
“P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the
floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drainboard
height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately
downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain
through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical
fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest
partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not
less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings
shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4)
inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the
drain-board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a
ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named.
Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return
vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of
the foot vent.”
To add an appendix Q to read as follows:
“Appendix Q. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.
SECTION AQ101 GENERAL
AQ101.1 General. The provisions of this appendix shall control the design and construction of
swimming pools, spas and hot tubs installed in or on the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/618
AQ101.2 Pools in flood hazard areas. Pools that are located in flood hazard areas established by
table R301.2(1), including above-ground pools, on-ground pools and in-ground pools that involve
placement of fill, shall comply with section AQ101.2.1 or AQ101.2.2.
Exception: Pools located in riverine flood hazard areas which are outside of designated
floodways.
AQ101.2.1 Pools located in designated floodways. Where pools are located in designated
floodways, documentation shall be submitted to the building official which demonstrates that the
construction of the pool will not increase the design flood elevation at any point within the
jurisdiction.
AQ101.2.2 Pools located where floodways have not been designated. Where pools are located
where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, the applicant
shall provide a floodway analysis that demonstrates that the proposed pool will not increase the
design flood elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the jurisdiction.
SECTION AQ102 DEFINITIONS
AQ102.1 General. For the purposes of these requirements, the terms used shall be defined as follows
and as set forth in chapter 2.
ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”
BARRIER. A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds the
swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
HOT TUB. See “swimming pool.”
IN-GROUND POOL. See “swimming pool.”
RESIDENTIAL. That which is situated on the premises of a detached one- or two-family dwelling,
or a one-family townhouse not more than three stories in height.
SPA, NONPORTABLE. See “swimming pool.”
SPA, PORTABLE. A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all
controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product.
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains
water more than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground
swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR.A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and
surrounded on all four sides by the walls of the enclosing structure.
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.
SECTION AQ103 SWIMMING POOLS
AQ103.1 In-ground pools. In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with
ANSI/NSPI-5.
AQ103.2 Above-ground and on-ground pools. Above-ground and on-ground pools shall be
designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/618
AQ103.3 Pools in flood hazard areas. In flood hazard areas established by table R301.2(1), pools in
coastal high-hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ASCE 24.
SECTION AQ104 SPAS AND HOT TUBS
AQ104.1 Permanently installed spas and hot tubs. Permanently installed spas and hot tubs shall be
designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-3.
AQ104.2 Portable spas and hot tubs. Portable spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed
in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-6.
SECTION AQ105 BARRIER REQUIREMENTS
AQ105.1 Application. The provisions of this appendix shall control the design of barriers for
residential swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. These design controls are intended to provide
protection against potential drownings and near-drownings by restricting access to swimming pools,
spas and hot tubs.
AQ105.2 Outdoor swimming pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, aboveground
or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with
the following:
1. The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219mm) above grade measured on the
side of the barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance
between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51mm) measured on the side of
the barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is
above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool
structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the
pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the
bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches (102mm).
2. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102mm) sphere.
3. Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not
contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled
masonry joints.
4. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance
between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143mm), the horizontal
members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical
members shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts
within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in
width.
5. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance
between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between
vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts
within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in
width.
6. Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2.25-inch (57 mm) square unless the
fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not
more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/618
7. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum
opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
8. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of section AQ105.2, items 1 through 7,
and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open
outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates
other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release
mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom
of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following:
8.1. The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches
(76 mm) below the top of the gate; and
8.2. The gate and barrier shall have not opening greater than 0.5 inch (13 mm) within
18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.
9. Where a wall of a dwelling serves a part of the barrier one of the following conditions shall
be met:
9.1. The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM
F1346; or
9.2. Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an
alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen, if present, are
opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. The
deactivation switch(es) shall be located at least 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold
of the door; or
9.3. Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices,
which are approved by the governing body, shall be acceptable as long as the degree of
protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by item 9.1 or 9.2 described
above.
10. Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted
on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then:
10.1. The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to
prevent access; or
10.2. The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements
of section AQ105.2, items 1 through 9. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or
removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inchdiameter (102 mm)
sphere.
AQ105.3 Indoor swimming pool. Walls surrounding an indoor swimming pool shall comply with
section AQ105.2, item 9.
AQ105.4 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures,
equipment or similar objects from being used to climb them.
AQ105.5 Barrier exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F
1346, as listed in section AQ107, shall be exempt from the provisions of this appendix.
SECTION AQ106 ENTRAPMENT PROTECTION FOR SWIMMING POOL AND SPA
SUCTION OUTLETS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/618
AQ106.1 General. Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7.
SECTION AQ107 ABBREVIATIONS
AQ107.1 General.
ANSI-American National Standards Institute
11 West 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036
APSP-Association of Pool and Spa Professionals
NSPI-National Spa and Pool Institute
2111 Eisenhower Avenue
Alexandria, VA 22314
ASCE-American Society of Civil Engineers
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
Reston, VA 98411-0700
ASTM-ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428
UL-Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
333 Pfingsten Road
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096
SECTION AQ108 REFERENCED STANDARDS
AQ108.1 General.
ANSI/NSP
ANSI/NSPI-3-99 Standard for permanently installed residential
spas
AQ104.1
ANSI/NSPI-4-99 Standard for above-ground/on-ground residential
swimming pools
AQ103.2
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/618
ANSI/NSPI-5-03 Standard for residential in-ground swimming
pools
AQ103.1
ANSI/NSPI-6-99 Standard for residential portable spas AQ104.2
ASCE
ASCE/SEI-24-05 Flood-resistant design and construction AQ103.3
ASTM
ASTM F 1346-91(2003) Performance specification for safety covers and
labeling requirements for all covers for
swimming pools spas and hot tubs
AQ105.2,
AQ105.5
UL
UL 2017-2000 Standard for general-purpose signaling devices
and systems - with revisions through June 2004
AQ105.2
(Ordinance 2017-04-06 adopted 4/10/17)
Secs. 6.04.103–6.04.150 Reserved
Division 4. Electrical Code*
Sec. 6.04.151 Adoption
There is hereby adopted as the electrical code for the city for the purpose of regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to,
use or maintenance, of electrical conductors, equipment, and raceways; signaling and communications
conductors, equipment, and raceways; and optical fiber cables and raceways, subject to the exceptions and
amendments provided in section 6.04.152, and the same are incorporated by reference herein as if fully copied.
One copy of each such code, together with the exceptions and amendments thereto, shall be kept at all times in
the office of the city secretary. This code shall serve as the electrical provisions of the International Residential
Code, as adopted elsewhere.
Sec. 6.04.152 Exceptions and amendments
The electrical code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the 2017
National Electrical Code, as follows:
The following articles, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2017 National Electrical Code (NEC) are
hereby amended as follows: Standard type is text from the NEC. Bold is text inserted. Lined through
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/618
type is deleted text from NEC.
To amend Article 100 by adding the following to definition:
Engineering Supervision. Supervision by a Qualified State of Texas Licensed Professional
Engineer engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations.
To amend Article 100 by removing the amendment to the following definition:
Intersystem Bonding Termination. A device that provides a means for connecting intersystem
bonding conductors for communication systems and other systems such as metallic gas piping
systems to the grounding electrode system. Bonding conductors for other systems shall not be
larger than 6 AWG.
To amend Article 110.2; to read as follows:
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be
acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of
equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that
laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ.
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is
field modified is subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation
by a NRTL or qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ.
Manufacturer's self-certification of any equipment shall not be used as a basis for approval by the AHJ.
Informational Note No. 1: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3,
Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved,
Identified, Labeled, and Listed.
Informational Note No. 2: Manufacturer's self-certification of equipment may not
necessarily comply with U.S. product safety standards as certified by an NRTL.
Informational Note No. 3: National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 790 and 791
provide an example of an approved method for qualifying a third party inspection agency.
To amend Article 210.52(G)(1) Garages by removing the amendment that deleted the following:
(1) Garages. In each attached garage and in each detached garage with electric power. The
branch circuit supplying this receptacle(s) shall not supply outlets outside of the garage. At least one
receptacle outlet shall be installed for each car space.
To amend Article 230.71(A) by removing the amendment that added the following exception:
Exception: Multi-occupant buildings. Individual service disconnecting means is limited to six for each
occupant. The number of individual disconnects at one location may exceed six.
To amend Article 300.11 by removing the amendment that added the following exception:
Exception: Ceiling grid support wires may be used for structural supports when the associated wiring is
located in that area, not more than two raceways or cables supported per wire, with a maximum nominal
metric designation 16 (trade size 1/2”).
To amend Article 310.15(B)(7) by removing the amendment that changed the following to read as
follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/618
(7) This Article shall not be used in conjunction with 220.82.
To amend Article 500.8(A)(3); to read as follows:
500.8 Equipment.
Articles 500 through 504 require equipment construction and installation that ensure safe
performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more
than ordinary care with regard to installation and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 2: Since there is no consistent relationship between explosion properties
and ignition temperature, the two are independent requirements.
Informational Note No. 3: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Explosion
proof or dust-ignition proof equipment may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than
-25°C (-13°F) unless they are identified for low-temperature service. However, at low ambient
temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified as Class
I, Division 1 at normal ambient temperature.
(A) Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by one of the
following:
(1) Equipment listing or labeling;
(2) Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory or inspection
agency concerned with product evaluation; or,
(3) Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's
self-evaluation or an owner's engineering judgment. an engineering judgment signed and
sealed by a qualified Registered licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas.
Informational Note: Additional documentation for equipment may include certificates
demonstrating compliance with applicable equipment standards, indicating special conditions of
use, and other pertinent information.
To amend Article 505.7(A); to read as follows:
505.7 Special Precaution.
Article 505 requires equipment construction and installation that ensures safe performance
under conditions of proper use and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more
than ordinary care with regard to the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in
hazardous (classified) locations.
Informational Note No. 2: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Electrical
equipment depending on the protection techniques described by 505.8(A) may not be suitable
for use at temperatures lower than -20°C (-4°F) unless they are identified for use at lower
temperatures. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may
not exist in a location classified Class I, Zones 0, 1, or 2 at normal ambient temperature.
(A) Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and
design, selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/618
performed by a qualified persons Registered licensed Professional Engineer in the State of
Texas.
To amend Article 517.30 Essential Electrical Systems for Hospitals by removing the amendment that
created a new (H) and added the following language:
(G) Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the equipment branch of the
essential electrical system shall be coordinated for the period of time that a fault's duration
extends beyond 0.1 second.
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective
devices, where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective
devices exists on the transformer secondary.
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating)
in series.
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not
cover the full range of overcurrent conditions.
(H) Selective Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the life safety, and critical
branches of the essential electrical system shall be selectively coordinated with all supply-side
overcurrent protective devices.
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective
devices, where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices
exists on the transformer secondary.
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in
series.
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not
cover the full range of overcurrent conditions.
To amend Article 600.6(A)(1) At Point of Entry to a Sign; Exception 1; to read as follows:
Exception No.1: A disconnect shall not be required for branch circuits(s) or feeder conductor(s)
passing through the sign where enclosed in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable
identified for the location. The conductor(s) shall not serve the sign body or sign enclosure
where passing through.
To amend Article 600.6(A)(1) At Point of entry to a sign by creating a new exception no. 2 to add the
following language:
Exception No. 2. A disconnect shall not be required at the point of entry to a sign body,
sign enclosure, or pole for branch circuit conductor(s). The conductors shall be enclosed in
a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the location. The
conductor(s) shall be routed to a device box which contains the disconnect. A field-applied
permanent warning label that is visible during servicing shall be applied to the raceway at
or near the point of entry into the sign enclosure or sign body. The warning label shall
comply with 110.21(B) and state the following: “Danger. This raceway contains energized
conductors.” The marking shall include the location of the disconnecting means for the
energized conductor(s). The disconnecting means shall be capable of being locked in the
open position in accordance with 110.25.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/618
To amend Article 600.6(A)(1) at point of entry to a sign; move the original exception 2 to create a
new exception no. 3 and add the following language:
Exception No. 3: A disconnect shall not be required at the point of entry to a sign
enclosure or sign body for branch circuit(s) or feeder conductor(s) that supply an internal
panelboard(s) in a sign enclosure or sign body. The conductors shall be enclosed in a
Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the location. A fieldapplied
permanent warning label that is visible during servicing shall be applied to the
raceway at or near the point of entry into the sign enclosure or sign body. The warning
label shall comply with 110.21(B) and state the following: “Danger. This raceway contains
energized conductors.” The marking shall include the location of the disconnecting means
for the energized conductor(s). The disconnecting means shall be capable of being locked
in the open position in accordance with 110.25.
(2017 Code) Informational Note: The location of the disconnect is intended to allow service or
maintenance personnel complete and local control of the disconnecting means.
To amend Article 680.25(A) by removing the amendment that added the following language and
exception:
680.25 Feeders. These provisions shall apply to any feeder on the supply side of panelboards
supplying branch circuits for pool equipment covered in Part II of this article and on the load
side of the service equipment or the source of a separately derived system.
(A) Wiring Methods.
(1) Feeders. Feeders shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal
conduit. The following wiring methods shall be permitted if not subject to physical
damage:
(1) Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit
(2) Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit
(3) Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit
(4) Electrical metallic tubing where installed on or in a building
(5) Electrical nonmetallic tubing where installed within a building
(6) Type MC Cable where installed within a building and if not subject to
corrosive environment
(7) Nonmetallic-sheathed cable
(8) Type SE cable
Exception: A feeder within a one-family dwelling or two-family dwelling unit between remote
panelboard and service equipment shall be permitted to run in flexible metal conduit or an approved
cable assembly that includes an insulated equipment grounding conductor within its outer sheath. The
equipment grounding conductor shall comply with 250.24(A) (5).
(Ordinance 2017-08-31 adopted 8/14/17)
Secs. 6.04.153–6.04.200 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/618
Division 5. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 6.04.201 Adoption
There is hereby adopted as the plumbing code for the city for the purpose of regulating and governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing system the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition,
including appendix, as published by the International Code Council, subject to the exceptions, amendments and
interpretations described in this article, and the same are incorporated by reference herein as if fully copied. One
copy of each such code, together with the exceptions and amendments thereto, shall be kept at all times in the
office of the city secretary.
Sec. 6.04.202 Exceptions and amendments
The plumbing code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the International
Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, as follows:
To amend table of contents, chapter 7, section 714 to read as follows:
“Section 714 Engineered drainage design…………………………………69”
To amend section 102.8; change to read as follows:
“102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those that are listed in chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been
adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be
considered to reference the amendments. Any reference to NFPA 70 or National Electrical Code
(NEC) shall mean the electrical code as adopted.”
To delete and amend sections 106.6.2 and 106.6.3 to read as follows:
“106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be established by resolution of the
governing body of the jurisdiction.
106.6.3 Fee refunds. Delete this section in its entirety.
To amend section 109 by deleting in its entirety and insert the following:
SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL
“109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code
official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling
ordinance.”
To amend section 305.4.1 to read as follows:
“305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade.”
To amend section 305.7 to read as follows:
“305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed
within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/618
they would be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an
approved manner.”
To amend section 314.2.1 to read as follows:
“314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed
from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. .... {text unchanged} ... Condensate shall
not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance.”
To amend section 409.2 to add to said section:
“409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected
against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with section 608 ......”
To amend section 412.4 to read as follows:
“412.4 Required location for floor drains. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas.
1. In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family
dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains
located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less
than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter.
2. Commercial kitchens. (In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may
accept floor sinks.)
3. Public restrooms.”
To amend section 419.3 to read as follows:
“419.3 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal lip
and 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be
waterproofed with a smooth, readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material.”
To amend section 502.3 to read as follows:
“502.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing a water heater shall be provided ..... side of the water
heater. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm
by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions be not less than 20 inches by 30 inches (508mm by
762mm) where such dimensions are large enough to allow removal of the water heater. A walkway to
an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access
to the attic space, provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. Access panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code
official due to building conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is
capable of being serviced and removed .....”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/618
To amend section 502.6 by adding a new section 502.6 to read as follows:
“502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which
a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it
shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building.
Exception: A max 10-gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed
through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm)
above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder.”
To amend section 504.6 to read as follows:
“504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve,
temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall:
1. Not be directly connected to the drainage system.
2. Discharge through an air gap.
3. Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full
size to the air gap.
4. Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device
or equipment.
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping
system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures
installation instructions and installed with those instructions.
5. Discharge, to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors.
6. Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage.
7. Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants.
8. Not be trapped.
9. Be installed so as to flow by gravity.
10. Terminate not more than 6 inches above and not less than two times the discharge pipe
diameter above the floor or flood level rim of the waste receptor.
11. Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping.
12. Not have valves or tee fittings.
13. Be constructed of those materials listed in section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and
approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1.”
To amend section 504.7.1 to read as follows:
“Section 504.7.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) in depth
and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water
heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch
(19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in table 605.4. Multiple pan
drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/618
authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those
instructions.”
To amend section 604.4 by adding section 604.4.1 to read as follows:
“604.4.1 State maximum flow rate. Where the state mandated maximum flow rate is more
restrictive than those of this section, the state flow rate shall take precedence.”
To delete subsection items #4 and #5 in section 606.1 in its entirety.
To amend section 606.2 to read as follows:
“606.2 Location of shutoff valves. Shutoff valves shall be installed in the following locations:
1. On the fixture supply to each plumbing fixture other than bathtubs and showers in one- and
two-family residential occupancies, and other than in individual sleeping units that are provided
with unit shutoff valves in hotels, motels, boarding houses and similar occupancies.
2. On the water supply pipe to each appliance or mechanical equipment.”
To amend section 608.1 to read as follows:
“608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a
manner so as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into
the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system.
Backflow preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, table 608.1, and as
specifically stated in sections 608.2 through 608.16.10.”
To amend section 608.16.5 to read as follows:
“608.16.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation
systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type
vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A
valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are
introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced
pressure principle backflow preventer.”
To amend section 608.17 to read as follows:
“608.17 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and
constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local
regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8.”
To amend section 610.1 by adding exception to read as follows:
“610.1 General. New or repaired potable water systems shall be purged of deleterious matter and
disinfected prior to utilization. The method to be followed shall be that prescribed by the health
authority or water purveyor having jurisdiction or, in the absence of a prescribed method, the
procedure described in either AWWA C651 or AWWA C652, or as described in this section. This
requirement shall apply to “on-site” or “in-plant” fabrication of a system or to a modular portion of a
system.
1. The pipe system shall be flushed with clean, potable water until dirty water does not
appear at the points of outlet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/618
2. The system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least
50 parts per million (50 mg/L) of chlorine, and the system or part thereof shall be valved off and
allowed to stand for 24 hours; or the system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine
solution containing at least 200 parts per million (200 mg/L) of chlorine and allowed to stand
for 3 hours.
3. Following the required standing time, the system shall be flushed with clean potable water
until the chlorine is purged from the system.
4. The procedure shall be repeated where shown by a bacteriological examination that
contamination remains present in the system.
Exception: With prior approval the code official may wave this requirement when
deemed unnecessary.”
To delete section 703.6 in its entirety.
To amend section 704.5 by adding to read as follows:
“704.5 Single stack fittings. Single stack fittings with internal baffle, PVC schedule 40 or cast iron
single stack shall be designed by a registered engineer and comply to a national recognized standard.”
To amend section 705.11.2 and to delete exceptions to read as follows:
“705.11.2 Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer
that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to
ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3, CSA B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The
joint shall be made while the cement is wet and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent
cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground.”
To amend section 712.5 by adding section 712.5 to read as follows:
“712.5 Dual pump system. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any public use
occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or
ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm
drainage sumps and pumping systems, see section 1113.”
To amend section 714, 714.1 to read as follows:
“SECTION 714
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN
714.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be
designed by registered engineer using approved design methods.”
To amend section 804.2 by adding section to read as follows:
“804.2 Special waste pipe, fittings, and components. Pipes, fittings, and components receiving or
intended to receive the discharge of any fixture into which acid or corrosive chemicals are placed
shall be constructed of CPVC, high silicone iron, PP, PVDF, chemical resistant glass, or glazed
ceramic materials.”
To amend section 903.1 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/618
“903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall terminate at least six (6)
inches (152 mm) above the roof. Where a roof is to be used for assembly or as a promenade,
observation deck, sunbathing deck or similar purposes, open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7
feet (2134 mm) above roof.”
To delete section 917, Single stack vent systems in its entirety.
To delete section 1002.10 in its entirety.
To add a footnote to section 1003 to read as follows:
“{Until the health and water departments of the area can coordinate a uniform grease interceptor
section, each city will have to modify this section individually.}”
To amend section 1101.8 to read as follows:
“1101.8 Cleanouts required. Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed in the storm drainage system
and shall comply with the provisions of this code for sanitary drainage pipe cleanouts.”
To amend section 1106.1 to read as follows:
“1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building
storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches
per hour rainfall rate.”
To amend section 1108.3 to read as follows:
“1108.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in
accordance with section 1106. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from
exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not
have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system
shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system.”
To delete section 1109 in its entirely.
To delete exception #2 in section 1202.1 in its entirely.
(Ordinance 2017-04-08 adopted 4/10/17)
Secs. 6.04.203–6.04.250 Reserved
Division 6. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 6.04.251 Adoption
There is hereby adopted as the mechanical code for the city for the purpose of regulating and governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city the International Mechanical
Code, 2015 edition, subject to the exceptions and amendments provided in section 6.04.252, and the same are
incorporated by reference herein as if fully copied. One copy of each such code, together with the exceptions and
amendments thereto, shall be kept at all times in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 6.04.252 Exceptions and amendments
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/618
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and
amendments which are as follows:
To amend section 102.8 to read as follows:
“102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those
that are listed in chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions
of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and
standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments.
Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the electrical code as
adopted.”
To amend section 306.3 to read as follows:
“306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided.... . side
of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches
(508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the
largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building
official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. Access panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code
official due to building conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is
capable of being serviced and removed....”
To amend section 306.5 to read as follows:
“306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment and
appliances are located on an elevate structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have
to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior means
of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer
than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and
appliance's level service space. Such access shall ..... on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units
vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope)....”
To amend section 306.5.1 to read as follows:
“306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service
are installed on a roof having a slope of 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or
greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at
least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided
from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each
side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform
shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The
guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/618
to prevent the passage of a 21-inch- diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading
requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code.”
To amend section 306 by adding section 306.6 to read as follows:
“306.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water
heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be
made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building.
Exception: A maximum 10-gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being
accessed through a lay-in ceiling and the water heater installed is not more than ten (10) feet
(3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder.”
To amend section 307.2.3 by amending # 2 to read as follows:
“2. A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment.
Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event
of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher
level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard
such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance.”
To amend section 403.2.1 by adding a subsection 5 to read as follows:
“5. Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory or combination
thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed
to remove odors from the air.”
To amend section 501.3; add an exception to read as follows:
“501.3 Exhaust discharge. The air removed by every mechanical exhaust system shall be discharged
outdoors at a point where it will not cause a public nuisance and not less than the distances specified
in section 501.3.1. The air shall be discharged to a location from which it cannot again be readily
drawn in by a ventilating system. Air shall not be exhausted into an attic, crawl space, or be directed
onto walkways.
Exceptions:
1. Whole-house ventilation-type attic fans shall be permitted to discharge into the attic
space of dwelling units having private attics.
2. Commercial cooking recirculating systems.
3. Where installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and where
mechanical or natural ventilation is otherwise provided in accordance with chapter 4,
listed and labeled domestic ductless range hoods shall not be required to discharge to the
outdoors.
4. Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when
infiltration of outside air is present.”
To amend section 607.5.1 to change to read as follows:
“607.5.1 Fire walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with
section 705.11 of the International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed
in accordance with their listing. For hazardous exhaust systems see section 510.1–510.9 IMC.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/618
(Ordinance 2017-04-09 adopted 4/10/17)
Secs. 6.04.253–6.04.300 Reserved
Division 7. Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 6.04.301 Adoption
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, including appendix, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city. Each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the
office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 6.04.302 of this article.
Sec. 6.04.302 Exceptions and amendments
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, adopted in this article shall be subject to the
exceptions and amendments which are as follows:
To amend section 201.3 to read as follows:
“Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Delete reference to ICC Electrical Code and replace
with reference to adopted electrical code.”
To amend section 202 to read as follows:
“Section 202 Definitions, insert definition for junked vehicle to read as follows;
Junk vehicle means a vehicle that is self propelled and is:
(A) wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than 72 hours, if the vehicle is on
public property; or 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
....”
To amend section 107.1 by deleting the entire section and changing to read as follows:
“Section 107.1, Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has
been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be
given in the manner prescribed in section 107.2 and 107.3 herein to the person responsible for the
violation as specified in this code. In the notice herein provided for the city shall have the right to
inform the property owner or agent having charge that if he or she commits another violation of the
same kind or nature any time within one year from original notice, the city may institute the
appropriate proceedings at law or to correct or abate such violation without further notice at the
owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. Exception to this section, weeds in
excess of 48 inches in height that are a danger to the health, life or safety of any person, may be
immediately abated without notice. Notice shall be not later than the tenth day after the city causes
the work to be done under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the manner
required by this section.”
To amend section 111.2 by deleting in its entirety and replacing with a new section, to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/618
“Section 111.2, Board of appeal. Any reason directly affected by a decision of the code official or a
notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the property standards and
appeals board, hereinafter referred to as the “board,” provided that a written application for appeal is
filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this
code are adequately satisfied by other means.
(a) Membership, rules and procedures of the board shall be those as determined by the
governing body and state law unless otherwise so stated herein.
(1) The board shall consist of five (5) members and (1) alternate member who are
qualified by experience, common knowledge, and/or training to pass upon matters of
construction and this code. Members shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed
by the city council for a term of two years. Alternates appointed shall serve a one-year
term. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for unexpired terms. Any member may be
removed from the board by the city council at will.
(2) Postponed hearing. When a quorum of the board is not present to hear an appeal, the
hearing will be postponed. A majority of the members (3) shall constitute a quorum of the
board. The act of a majority of the members which a quorum is in attendance shall
constitute the act of the board unless the act of a greater number is required by law.
(3) Chairman. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairman.
(4) Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that
member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
[(b) Reserved.]
(c) Notice of meeting. The boards shall meet upon notice from the code official within 20
days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. Notice of any meeting shall be
given to the public in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. All
meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(d) Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the
appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be
given an opportunity to be heard.
(e) Board decision. The board shall, only by a concurring vote of a majority of those present
either modify the order of the official by granting an extension of time to make all repairs and
improvements necessary to meet code requirements, enforce the recommendation of the official,
or reverse the decision of the code official.
(1) Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be
furnished to the appellant and to the code official upon request.
(2) Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the board.
(f) Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the
right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application
for review shall be made in the manner and within 30 days following the decision of the board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/618
[(g)] Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger
notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the
board.”
To amend section 302.3 by adding a sentence to read as follows:
“Section 302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. Repairs and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to maintain free from obstructions, trip hazards or dilapidated conditions from the
edge of street or alley pavement.”
To amend section 302.4 and adding a new section 302.4.1 to read as follows:
“Section 302.4 Weeds. Amend the first sentence to read as follows: All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of twelve (12) inches in
height.
Section 302.4.1 Trees, scrubs, vegetation. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property,
occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate city limits to permit bushes, trees, shrubs,
vegetation or plant substances(s) or any part(s) thereof, whether living or not, that has its roots
on said real property, to hang, overhang, grow into or grow over any street, alleyway within the
city, if said growth is overhanging below fourteen (14) feet from a point on a vertical line with
the starting point on a horizontal plane of the street or alleyway and no plant or tree growth be
allowed within twelve (12) inches of the edge of any street or alleyway. Sidewalks shall have a
clearance of eight (8) feet from a point on a vertical line with a starting point at the horizontal
plane of the sidewalk. When such growth exists it shall be deemed a nuisance and a danger to
public safety. It shall be the duty of the person named as owner of the property to abate the
nuisance so that the overhang is not below the set minimum(s) clearances as stated above.”
To amend section 302.8 to read as follows:
“302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations no inoperative, unlicensed, or
unregistered motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle not bearing current inspection shall be parked, kept
or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of disassembly, disrepair, or
in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of the vehicles is prohibited unless conducted
inside an approved paint spray booth and within the zoning district where spray painting of vehicles
is an allowed use.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work,
provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes. Work on vehicles at a residence can only be conducted on those vehicles
legally registered in the resident's name and no others. Any noise that disturbs the adjacent residential
environment would not be allowed to continue.”
To amend section 302.10 to read as follows:
“Section 302.10 Other exterior property conditions. Add the following new section 302.10 to read
as follows; Unless authorized within a zoning district and under conditions thereof, or within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, it shall be unlawful of any person to allow permit, conduct or
maintain objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary conditions, items, situations or events on any portion
of a lot or tract, outside of an enclosed or covered patio or other projecting overhang that includes,
but is not limited to:
1) Furniture, appliance and other items left outside that were or are not intended for outdoor
use that includes broken or damaged lawn furniture, outdoor structure(s), lawn and garden
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/618
accessories and sculpture.
2) Building materials or any item by itself used in construction that is not serving its intended
purpose where there is not an active building permit.
3) Clothing, papers, broken glass, scrap materials, pipe, barrels, piles or stacks of unused
brick or stone, uninstalled fence and or fence materials.
4) Brush, trash, wood piles, fallen trees or large parts of trees such as the trunk or main
branches, dead trees or other dead vegetation.
5) Lawn equipment in whole or in part where such is kept outside and unprotected from the
elements.
6) Unlicensed and or inoperable trailers.
7) Boats not on trailers for longer than 30 days.
8) Any condition, situation, event or action as described herein where items are covered by
tarpaulin(s) or other such cover including the tarpaulin(s) or other such cover.
9) Parts typically associated with trucks, cars, motorcycles, boats, farm equipment,
construction equipment or other vehicle that includes but is not limited to body parts, tires,
wheels, batteries, upholstered items, engines, drive train components, plows, disks, rakes and
other such items.
10) A boat on a trailer, car, truck, trailers or other vehicle with axle(s) not currently licensed
and or registered.
11) Any vehicle elevated up off the ground for a period of more than 72 hours.
12) Cargo containers placed on any residential property and cargo containers placed on any
commercial property without an active building permit is prohibited.
13) Semi-trucks and or trailers or parts thereof on a property or in front of a property used as
or zoned for residential use, located on property used or zoned for nonresidential use, other than
where permitted within the approved zoning district and subject to items and conditions thereof
where such is not conducting business or has not conducted business for more than 24 hours.
14) Commercial vehicles, as that term is used and under conditions and or terms established
under Ordinance 2004-12-43 parked on a property or in front of a property used as or zoned for
residential use or where located anywhere where such vehicle is not conducting work at the
time related to the vehicle other than where permitted within the approved zoning district and
subject to terms and conditions thereof.
15) Construction equipment in whole or in part where the equipment is not being used for its
intended purpose on the property where parked or stored unless otherwise allowed within that
zoning district subject to terms and conditions thereof.
16) Where outdoor storage and or display is allowed, accumulation of trash and or debris and
items or material that is not orderly stacked.
17) Vehicles may only be parked on those approved surfaces as outlined in Ordinance 2009-
06-15 Minimum Parking Standards.
18) Signs of all types not included within the approved Sign Ordinance 2009-08-20.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/618
19) Any vehicular sign used as a source of advertising for a business within city limits not in
compliance with Ordinance 2009-08-20.
20) The placing or accumulation of any material or item in any area of a property that does or
could provide nesting, harborage or feeding for vermin or pest, or that could negatively affect
the environment's ecological system from runoff, areas emitting an odor or odors for longer
than 24 hours that a person of reasonable sensibilities may distinguish from ambient odors,
seepage of fuels, oils, chemical or organic compounds into the soils and similar such events.
21) The accumulation of materials that emit any gases, noxious fumes, or odors to such
extent that the same or any of them shall by reason of such offensive odors become a source of
endangerment to the health, safety and welfare to immediate surrounding property or to persons
living or passing in the vicinity within the city.
22) Other situations as determined by the director of development services or their designee.
23) Any trailer, boat or recreational vehicle left parked on any public street or right-of-way
not connected to a legally registered motor vehicle will be considered in violation.”
To amend section 303.2 to change to read as follows:
“Section 303.2, Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than
24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 72 inches in height
above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Horizontal
members shall not be constructed in such a manner to create a ladder effect. All such door openings
directly into such enclosure shall be equipped with self closing and latching devices designed to keep
and capable of keeping doors securely closed at all times when not actually in use. It shall be
unlawful to maintain a swimming pool, spa or hot tub in the city limits of Lancaster that is not
properly fenced.”
To amend section 304.3 to change to read as follows:
“Section 304.3 Premises identification. Building shall have approved address numbers placed in a
position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property and visible from
the rear alley. (remainder of section remains the same).”
(Ordinance 2017-04-10 adopted 4/10/17)
Secs. 6.04.303–6.04.350 Reserved
Division 8. Existing Building Code
Sec. 6.04.351 Adoption
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary of the city, being marked and
designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, including appendix, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the city. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said existing building code on file in the office of the
city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 6.04.352 of this article.
Sec. 6.04.352 Exceptions and amendments
The existing building code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the
International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/618
To amend section 102.4; change to read as follows:
“102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards
referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference and as further regulated in sections 102.4.1 and 102.4.2.”
To amend section 202 by amending definition of existing building as follows:
“.....
Existing building - A building, structure, or space, with an approved final inspection issued under a
code edition which is at least 2 published code editions preceding the currently adopted building
code; or a change of occupancy.”
To amend section 405.1.2 to read as follows:
“405.1.2 Existing fire escapes. Existing fire escapes shall continue to be accepted as a component in
the means of egress in existing buildings only. Existing fire escapes shall be permitted to be repaired
or replaced.”
To delete section 405.1.3 in its entirety.
To amend section 406.2 to read as follows:
“406.2 Replacement window opening control devices. In group R-2 or R-3 buildings containing
dwelling units, window opening control devices complying with ASTM F 2090 shall be installed
where an existing window is replaced and where all of the following apply to the replacement
window .....
The window opening control device, after operation to release the control device allowing the
window to fully open, shall not reduce the minimum net clear opening area of the window unit to less
than the area required by section 1030.2 of the International Building Code.
.....”
To amend section 406.3 to read as follows:
“406.3 Replacement window emergency escape and rescue openings. Where windows are
required to provide emergency escape and rescue openings in group R-2 and R-3 occupancies,
replacement windows shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 1030.2, 1030.3 and 1030.5
of the International Building Code provided the replacement window meets the following conditions:
.....”
To delete section 408.3 Flood hazard areas in its entirety.
To amend section 409.1 by adding an exception to read as follows:
“.....
Exception: Moved historic buildings need not be brought into compliance with the exception of new
construction features required as the result of such movement, including but not limited to
foundations and/or other structural elements.”
To amend section 410.1 by adding an exception to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/618
“.....
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division
of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be incompliance with the
requirements of this chapter.”
To amend section 410.4.2 by adding number 7 to the list of requirements as follows:
“.....
1. .....
.....
7. At least one accessible family or assisted use toilet room shall be provided in accordance with
chapter 11 of the International Building Code.”
To delete section 601.3 flood hazard areas in its entirety.
To amend section 602.3 by adding code reference to read as follows:
“602.3 Glazing in hazardous locations. Replacement glazing in hazardous locations shall comply
with the safety glazing requirements of the International Building Code, International Energy
Conservation Code, or International Residential Code as applicable.”
To delete section 606.2.4, flood hazard areas in its entirety.
To amend section 607.1 to read as follows:
“607.1 Material. Existing electrical wiring and equipment undergoing repair shall be allowed to be
repaired or replaced with like material, in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 70.”
To delete section 701.3, flood hazard areas in its entirety.
To amend section 702.6 by adding a code reference to read as follows:
“702.6 Materials and methods. All new work shall comply with the materials and methods
requirements in the International Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code,
International Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, and International Plumbing Code, as
applicable, that specify material standards, detail of installation and connection, joints, penetrations,
and continuity of any element, component, or system in the building.”
To amend section 802.1 by adding a code reference to read as follows:
“802.1 General. Alteration of buildings classified as special use and occupancy as described in
chapter 4 of the International Building Code shall comply with the requirements of section 801.1 and
the scoping provisions of chapter 1 where applicable.”
To amend section 803.5.1; exception to read as follows:
“803.5.1 Minimum requirement. Every portion of open-sided walking surfaces, including
mezzanines, equipment platforms, aisles, stairs, ramps and landings that are not provided with
guards, or those in which the existing guards are judged to be in danger of collapsing, shall be
provided with guards.”
To amend section 804.1 by adding sentence to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/618
“.....
For the purpose of fire sprinkler protection and fire alarm requirements included in this section, the
work area shall be extended to include at least the entire tenant space or spaces bounded by walls
capable of resisting the passage of smoke containing the subject work area, and if the work area
includes a corridor, hallway, or other exit access, then such corridor, hallway, or other exit access
shall be protected in its entirety on that particular floor level.”
To amend section 804.2.2, number 2 exception to read as follows:
“.....
Exception: Where the building does not have sufficient municipal water supply for design of a fire
sprinkler system available to the floor without installation of a new fire pump, fire sprinkler
protection shall not be required.”
To amend section 804.2.5 by changing exception to read as follows:
“.....
Exception: Supervision is not required where the fire code does not require such for new
construction.”
To amend section 804.3 to read as follows:
“804.3 Standpipes. Refer to section 1103.6 of the fire code for retroactive standpipe requirements.
{Delete rest of section 804.3.}”
To delete exception 1 under section 805.2.
To delete number 4 under section 805.3.1.1.
To amend section 805.3.1.2 to read as follows:
“805.3.1.2 Fire escapes required. For other than group I-2, where more than one exit is required an
existing fire escape complying with section 805.3.1.2.1 shall be accepted as providing one of the
required means of egress.”
To amend section 805.3.1.2.1 to read as follows:
“805.3.1.2.1 Fire escape access and details - ...
2. Access to a fire escape shall be through a door .....
....
4. In all building of group E occupancy up to and including the 12th grade, building of group
I occupancy, boarding houses, and childcare centers, ladders of any type are prohibited on fire
escapes used as a required means of egress.”
To delete section 805.3.1.2.2 in its entirety.
To delete section 805.3.1.2.3 in its entirety.
To add note to section 805.5.2 Transoms to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/618
“B and E occupancies are not included in the list and consideration should be given to adding them
depending on existing buildings stock.”
To amend section 806.2 by adding an exception to read as follows:
“.....
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division
of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be incompliance with the
requirements of this chapter.”
To amend section 904.1 by adding sentence to read as follows:
“.....
For the purpose of fire sprinkler protection and fire alarm requirements included in this section, the
work area shall be extended to include at least the entire tenant space or spaces bounded by walls
containing the subject work area, and if the work area includes a corridor, hallway, or other exit
access, then such corridor, hallway, or other exit access shall be protected in its entirety on that
particular floor level.”
To amend section 904.1; add sentence to read as follows:
“904.1.1 High-rise buildings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in work areas of
high-rise building.”
Section 1103.5 Flood hazard areas. Delete in its entirety.
Section 1201.4 Flood hazard areas. Delete in its entirety.
Section 1302.7 Flood hazard areas. Delete in its entirety.
To amend section 1401.2 to read as follows:
“1401.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to the date of an approved final inspection issued
under a code edition which is at least two published code editions preceding the currently adopted
building code; or a change of occupancy .....”
To amend section 1401.3.2 to read as follows:
“1401.3.2 Compliance with other codes. Buildings that are evaluated in accordance with this
section shall comply with the International Fire Code.”
To amend chapter 16 - referenced standards to read as follows:
“IECC Edition as adopted by the State of
Texas
International Energy Conservation Code®. 301.2, 702.6, 708.1,
811.1, 908.1”
(Ordinance 2017-04-11 adopted 4/10/17)
Secs. 6.04.353–6.04.400 Reserved
Division 9. Fuel Gas Code*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/618
Sec. 6.04.401 Adoption
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary of the city, being marked and
designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, including appendix, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city, for the purpose of
regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collections of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said fuel gas code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section 6.04.402 of this article.
Sec. 6.04.402 Exceptions and amendments
The fuel gas code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the International
Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, as follows:
To amend section 102.2 by adding an exception to read as follows:
“Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with section 621.2.”
To amend section 102.8 to read as follows:
“102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those that are listed in chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions
of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and
standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments
as well.”
To amend section 306.3 to read as follows:
“306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided...{bulk
of paragraph unchanged}...side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a
minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not
large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a
floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of
the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. Access panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code
official due to building conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is
capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening.
2. Where the passageway is not less than ..... {bulk of section to read the same}.”
To amend section 306.5 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/618
“306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring
access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel
will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or
exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not
extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the
equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall ..... {bulk of section to read the
same}..... on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent
slope). ... {bulk of section to read the same}.”
To amend section 306.5.1 to read as follows:
“306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service
are installed on a roof having a slope of 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or
greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at
least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided
from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each
side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform
shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The
guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as
to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading
requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code.”
To amend section 306 by adding section 306.7 with exception and subsection 306.7.1 to read as follows:
306.7 Water heaters in commercial buildings above ground or floor. When the attic, roof,
mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm)
above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder
fastened to the building.
To amend section 401.5 by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with
an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following
wording shall be stamped into the tag:
“WARNING
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
Do Not Remove””
To amend section 402.3 by adding an exception to read as follows:
“Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EHD).”
To amend section 404.12 to read as follows:
“404.12. Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth
of 18 inches (458 mm) top of pipe below grade.”
To amend section 406.1 to read as follows:
“406.1 General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected
and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/618
comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests
prescribed in sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this
code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the code official when the piping
system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections
and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for
determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests.”
To amend section 406.4 to read as follows:
“406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a
pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused
by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure
tests are made.”
To amend section 406.4.1 to read as follows:
“406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at
the discretion of the code official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6)
inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a
pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one
half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for
tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall
utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, a minimum
of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for
piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa)
(1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall
not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that
exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one
and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure.
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working
condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing.”
To amend by deleting section 406.4.2 and amend to read as follows:
“406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the code
official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying
gas a pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration
shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the code official, but in no case for less than thirty
(30) minutes.”
To amend section 409.1 by adding section 409.1.4 to read as follows:
“409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel
(CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support,
suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to
prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the
valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the
system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and
installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping.”
To amend section 410.1 by adding a second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
“.....
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/618
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in
section 306.
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of
being serviced and removed through the required attic opening.”
To amend section 621.2 by adding an exception as follows:
“621.2 Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of
comfort heating in a dwelling unit.
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in
accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the code official
unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in section 108.7.”
(Ordinance 2017-04-12 adopted 4/10/17)
Secs. 6.04.403–6.04.450 Reserved
Division 10. Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 6.04.451 Adoption
For the purpose of regulating and controlling conditions hazardous to public health, safety and welfare from the
installation of energy efficient mechanical lighting and power systems the International Energy Conservation
Code, 2015 edition, as amended herein, and the same is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully copied,
subject to the exceptions and amendments described in section 6.04.452 of this article. That one copy of each
volume of such code shall be kept at all times in the office of the city secretary, together with the exceptions and
amendments.
Sec. 6.04.452 Exceptions and amendments
The energy conservation code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the
International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, as follows:
To amend section C102/R102 by adding section C102.1.2 and R102.1.2 to read as follows:
“.....
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited
energy efficiency program and determined by the energy systems laboratory to be in compliance with
the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the code official, be
considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star
Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance.
.....
R102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state or local accredited energy
efficiency program and determined by the energy systems laboratory to be in compliance with the
energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the code official, be considered in
compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification
of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path
to compliance each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in
section R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/618
To amend section C202 and R202 by adding the following definition:
“.....
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently
attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the
fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device.
.....”
To amend section R202 by adding the following definition:
“.....
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it
performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible
transmittance (VT).
.....”
To amend table R402.1.2 insulation and fenestration requirements by component by amending the wood frame
wall R-value for climate zone 3 to read as follows:
“13”
To amend table R402.1.4 equivalent U-factors amending the wood frame wall U-factor for climate zone 3 to
read as follows:
“0.082”
To amend section R402.3.2 glazed fenestration SHGC by adding a paragraph and table following the exception
to read as follows:
“Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhand, eave, or permanently attached shading device,
the SHGC required in table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in table R402.3.2
SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections.
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projectionsa
Projection Factor SHGC Multiplier
(all other orientation)
SHGC Multiplier (north
oriented)
0–0.10 1.00 1.00
>0.10–0.20 0.91 0.95
>0.20–0.30 0.82 0.91
>0.30–0.40 0.74 0.87
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/618
>0.40–0.50 0.67 0.84
>0.50–0.60 0.61 0.81
>0.60–0.70 0.56 0.78
>0.70–0.80 0.51 0.76
>0.80–0.90 0.47 0.75
>0.90–1.00 0.44 0.73
a North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north.”
To amend section R402.4.1.2 to read as follows:
“R402.4.1.2 Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air
leakage rate of not exceeding 5 air changes per hour in climate zone .....”
To amend section R402.4.1.2 testing by adding last paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration
testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified
individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any
financial interest in the company that constructs the structure.”
To amend section R403.3.3 by adding a last paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing
leakage testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The
certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any
financial interest in the company that constructs the structure.”
To amend section C402.2.7/R402.2 by adding section C402.2.9 and R402.2.14 to read as follows:
“.....
Section C402.2.7/R402.2.14 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place,
insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber,
gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by
the building official.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/618
To amend section R405.6.2 by adding the following sentence to the end of paragraph:
“.....
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM RateTM,
Energy Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and
having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable
performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official.”
To amend table R406.4 maximum energy rating index to read as follows:
“TABLE R406.41
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 65
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019
TABLE R406.42
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 63
2 This table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022
TABLE R406.43
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 59
3 This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022”
(Ordinance 2017-04-13 adopted 4/10/17)
Secs. 6.04.453–6.04.500 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/618
Division 11. Swimming Pool and Spa Code
Sec. 6.04.501 Adoption
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary of the city, being marked and
designated as the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 edition, including appendix, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the existing building [swimming pool and spa] code
of the city. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said existing building
[swimming pool and spa] code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
section 6.04.502 of this article.
Sec. 6.04.502 Exceptions and amendments
The swimming pool and spa code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 edition, as follows:
To amend section 105.6.4 to read as follows:
“105.6.4 Work without a permit.
105.6.5 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been
commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit
may be issued for such work.
106.6.6 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a
permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such investigation fee
shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the
technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law..”
To amend section 106.7 to read as follows:
“106.7 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required
inspection in violation of section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee schedule.”
To amend section 106.8 to read as follows:
“106.8 Plan review fee. A plan review fee shall be assessed at 65% of the building permit fee. Plan
review fees shall be paid for at time of permit application and construction plans are submitted for
review.”
To amend section 108 to read as follows:
“Section 108. Board of appeals.
(a) Any reason directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under
this code shall have the right to appeal to the property standards and appeals board, hereinafter
referred to as the “board,” provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after
the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are
adequately satisfied by other means.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/618
(b) Membership, rules and procedures of the board shall be those as determined by the governing
body and state law unless otherwise so stated herein.
(1) The board shall consist of five (5) members and (1) alternate member who are qualified
by experience, common knowledge, and/or training to pass upon matters of construction and
this code. Members shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by the city council for a
term of two years. Alternates appointed shall serve a one-year term. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for unexpired terms. Any member may be removed from the board by the city
council at will.
(2) Postponed hearing. When a quorum of the board is not present to hear an appeal, the
hearing will be postponed. A majority of the members (3) shall constitute a quorum of the
board. The act of a majority of the members which a quorum is in attendance shall constitute
the act of the board unless the act of a greater number is required by law.
(3) Chairman. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairman.
(4) Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has
a personal, professional or financial interest.
(c) Notice of meeting. The boards shall meet upon notice from the code official within 20 days of
the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. Notice of any meeting shall be given to the
public in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. All meetings shall be
conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(d) Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the
appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.
(e) Board decision. The board shall, only by a concurring vote of a majority of those present either
modify the order of the official by granting an extension of time to make all repairs and
improvements necessary to meet code requirements, enforce the recommendation of the official, or
reverse the decision of the code official.
(1) Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be
furnished to the appellant and to the code official upon request.
(2) Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the board.
(f) Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to
apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review
shall be made in the manner and within 30 days following the decision of the board.
(g) Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall
stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the board.”
(Ordinance 2017-04-14 adopted 4/10/17)
ARTICLE 6.05 MOVING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES*
Sec. 6.05.001 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/618
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec. 3.215)
Sec. 6.05.002 Permit required; building permit
No building or structure shall be moved over, across or along any street, public way or private place within the
city until the mover of such building or structure has first obtained a moving permit for such move, and if the
structure is to be moved to a place within the city a building permit must be first obtained. (2002 Code, sec.
3.201)
Sec. 6.05.003 Issuance of permit; inspection requirements; fees
(a) Application for permit. Any person desiring to move a building or structure as defined by the Uniform
Building Code, 1997 edition, within or through the city on any public street shall file with the code official a
written application for a moving permit. Such application shall be developed by the code official. This shall not
preclude the movement of HUDCO [HUD-code] or industrial manufactured buildings which have been
approved by the state department of labor and standards.
(b) Review of information and inspection of structure. The application and other information furnished by the
applicant shall be examined and the building or structure sought to be moved shall be permitted and inspected by
the code official.
(c) Issuance of permit; fees. If the application and the building or structure are found to be in conformance
with the requirements of this article and all other laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building inspector
shall issue a permit to the mover upon receipt of such fees as may be provided by the city. Said fees shall include
a base fee as established by the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.202)
Sec. 6.05.004 Bond or insurance
Prior to the issuance of any such permit, however, the mover of any such building or structure shall file with the
city a surety bond or certificate of insurance providing for public liability insurance or bond in the sum of not
less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and a twenty-five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) policy
limit or bond against bodily injury liability for each accident within the corporate limits of the city, and shall
save and keep the city harmless from any and all costs, damages and suits that it may incur and become liable in
consequence of the injury to any person or property in any manner occasioned in or about the moving of
buildings or structures, and to pay for any and all damages to public property that might arise from the use of
any of its streets, alleys, boulevards or other public places in the moving of buildings or structures within the
city. (2002 Code, sec. 3.203)
Sec. 6.05.005 Compliance with codes and ordinances
Any building or structure brought into the city shall comply with all the requirements of the building code,
plumbing code, electrical code, fire code and development code of the city, and it shall be illegal and an offense
to bring into the city any building or structure which does not comply with the requirements of said codes and
ordinances. (2002 Code, sec. 3.204)
Sec. 6.05.006 Building appearance and repairs
In addition to all the requirements of the building code or other ordinances, any building or structure moved any
place within the city shall be repaired so as to bring its general appearance up to city standards, including the
painting of all outside surfaces and providing for adequate window screens and screen doors, and roofing shall
be in good condition. However, the painting requirement herein shall be waived if the building, when located, is
veneered with brick or other building stone or is covered with asbestos or other finished siding and all trim has
been painted. All such repairs shall be completed and any and all other conditions shall be completed within a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/618
period of six (6) months from the date upon which such building or structure is moved into the city. (2002 Code,
sec. 3.205)
Sec. 6.05.007 Traffic safety
The moving of any building or structure shall be made so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic safety.
Lights, flares and flagmen may be required to be provided if the same is necessary in the opinion of the police
department in order to provide traffic safety. (2002 Code, sec. 3.206)
Sec. 6.05.008 Cleanup and grading of lot after removal of building
Whenever a building or structure is removed from any lot within the city, the premises shall be left free from
unsafe and unsanitary or hazardous conditions, including cleaning up of the lot, restoration of the established
grade and the erection of necessary walls and fences. (2002 Code, sec. 3.207)
Sec. 6.05.009 Utility connections required
After any residence or other structure or building has been moved into the city, it shall be illegal and an offense
for any person to occupy the residence or other building until the building has been connected to the sanitary
sewer and water system of the city, or to an approved septic tank in such cases as where sanitary sewer service is
not provided for by the city. It shall be illegal and an offense for any person to occupy any such residence or
other building until the building has been connected to any and all other utilities and they have been installed and
are ready for service. (2002 Code, sec. 3.208)
Sec. 6.05.010 Violations generally
It shall be illegal and an offense for any person to move within or through the city any building, residence or
other building that does not comply with the requirements of this article and/or without first having obtained a
permit as provided for herein. (2002 Code, sec. 3.209)
Sec. 6.05.011 Occupying noncomplying building
It shall be illegal and an offense for any person to occupy a residence or building that has been moved into the
city in violation of any of the requirements and provisions of this article. (2002 Code, sec. 3.210)
Sec. 6.05.012 Allowing noncomplying building to be occupied
It shall be illegal and an offense for the owner of any such building or residence which has been moved into the
city in violation of the provisions of this article to permit the residence or building to be occupied. (2002 Code,
sec. 3.211)
Sec. 6.05.013 Time limit on moving
A building or structure to be moved into or through the city shall not remain on property other than its final
destination for a period greater than two (2) days. (2002 Code, sec. 3.212)
Sec. 6.05.014 Hours of moving; escort
Buildings or structures to be moved within or through the city can be moved only during the hours approved by
the code official and the city police department, and an escort shall be provided. (2002 Code, sec. 3.213)
Sec. 6.05.015 Inspection of route; notification of utility companies
(a) Prior to the issuance of the moving permit, the building inspector shall inspect the proposed route to
determine if problems exist with regard to trees, structures, utility lines, etc. If the proposed route is not feasible,
an alternate route shall be selected and will be subject to inspection by the code official.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/618
(b) Utility companies shall be notified as to size of building, proposed route and time and date of moving so
any special problems with regard to utility lines can be handled.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.214)
ARTICLE 6.06 BUILDING NUMBERING
Sec. 6.06.001 Assignment of numbers
It shall be the responsibility of the city to assign proper numbers for all buildings. A complete record of the
numbering of all buildings shall be kept by the city; such record shall be supplemented and amended from time
to time when necessary. Building numbers shall be public property and subject to change by the city. (2002
Code, sec. 3.701)
Sec. 6.06.002 Placement of numbers required
Owners or occupants of buildings in the city are required to place or have placed thereon the proper street
number as designated by the city, in some conspicuous place so that the same can be plainly seen and read from
the public street, alleyway and/or access on the front and rear of buildings. (2002 Code, sec. 3.702)
Sec. 6.06.003 Numbering within building complexes
A building of multiple structures or occupancies must have an official number assigned to each building and
each unit within the building. The official number assigned to each building must be conspicuously posted and
displayed both at the front and rear of the building, if the building design permits, or so displayed that it is
visible, where possible, from the nearest vehicular access. The official number for each unit within the building
must be conspicuously posted on the unit. (2002 Code, sec. 3.703)
Sec. 6.06.004 Specifications for numbers
The number assigned by the city as required by this article shall be of a durable material, shall be maintained to
be completely visible at all times and shall be of a color contrasting to its background. Numbers shall be a
minimum of four (4) inches in height and visible from the public street, alleyway and/or access. Houses not
visible from the street shall be numbered visibly at the street entrance to the property. Commercial buildings
shall have numbers a minimum of six (6) inches in height. All structures shall have numbers placed at the
property line when the distance from the point of entrance for public access exceeds 75 feet. Depending on
building setbacks, the code official may designate additional locations of numbers or size of numbers. Said
numbers shall not [sic] contrast with their background. (2002 Code, sec. 3.704)
Sec. 6.06.005 Violations
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation to use or occupy a building which does
not have a proper street number posted and displayed as required by this article. (2002 Code, sec. 3.705)
ARTICLE 6.07 FENCES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases and words shall have meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
Code official. The administrative official or the designated representative charged with the responsibility of
enforcement of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/618
Approved. Approved by the code official or the city council.
Corner lot. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not to
exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Fence. Any wall, berm or structure more than two and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height erected or maintained for
the purpose of enclosing, screening, restricting access to or decorating the surrounding lot, parcel, building or
structure, located entirely on private property.
Front yard. An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street and extending from the building or the required
building line across the front of a lot.
Height (of fence). Measured from ground level at the base of the fence to the uppermost part of the fence.
Interior lot. A lot other than a corner lot.
Interior lot line. The side yard lot line that is adjacent to a corner lot or an interior lot's side yard line.
Rear yard. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the principal buildings.
Reverse frontage corner lot. A corner lot where the rear lot line is adjacent to a side lot line of an adjoining lot or
across an alley from such side lot line.
Side yard. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building, extending from the building or the
required building line and the same [side] lot line.
Street. For the purpose of this article, shall refer to public and private streets.
Through lot (double frontage lot). A building lot not a corner lot, where both the front and rear lot lines adjoin
street lines. For the purpose of this section, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
Vision triangle. That imaginary area created by measuring along two (2) intersecting property lines a distance as
indicated below, then drawing a line diagonally. A fence or fences in these vision triangles shall not exceed two
and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height.
(1) Street-street intersections. The vision [triangle] is determined by measuring back from the
intersecting point of the two (2) property lines parallel to the intersecting streets a distance of twentyfive
(25) feet, and drawing an imaginary line across these two (2) points.
(2) Alley intersections. The vision triangle is determined by measuring back from the intersecting
point of the two (2) property lines parallel to the intersecting alley a distance of ten (10) feet, and
drawing an imaginary line across the two (2) points. (See figure 5 at the end of this article.)
Sec. 6.07.002 Encroachment on public property
No fence, guy wires, braces or any post of such fence constructed pursuant to this article shall be constructed
upon or caused to extend or otherwise encroach over public property that the city or the general public has
dominion and control, owns or has a right of access over, under, around or through, except upon utility
easements which are permitted to be fenced.
Sec. 6.07.003 Construction within easements
(a) Permission to build a fence upon a utility easement does not remove the obligation of the owner of said
fence to remove the fence upon demand of the utility company. Removal of any fence and any rebuilding of any
fence shall be the responsibility of the owner of said fence and at the owner's expense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/618
(b) Fences shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with utility lines.
(c) Fences shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with normal drainage.
Sec. 6.07.004 Height limitation in rear and side yards
It shall be unlawful to erect, maintain, suffer or permit a fence at a height exceeding (8) feet in any rear yard or
along any rear yard lot line, or in any side yard or along any side yard line, except by appeal to the zoning board
of adjustment board and by favorable vote from same.
Sec. 6.07.005 Height limitation in front yards
Front yard fences shall be constructed within the required front yard according to the following:
(1) The fence is forty-eight (48) inches or less in height, and the fence is fifty (50) percent visibility
open (no solid fences). (See figure 1 at the end of this article.)
(2) In the case of a corner lot, the fence is forty-eight (48) inches or less in height, and the fence is
fifty (50) percent visibility open (no solid fences). (See figure 2 at the end of this article.)
(3) Metal fabric material (chain-link) fence materials are not allowed within the required front yard
except for the repair or replacement of an existing chain-link fence to its original height.
Sec. 6.07.006 Reverse frontage lots
(a) On all reverse frontage lots located on property zoned for residential use, or used for residential use, it
shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, suffer or permit a fence within the required side yard area that is
adjacent to a front yard area at a distance closer than ten (10) feet of the side property line.
(b) It shall be an affirmation of defense to subsection (a) above that the fence is four (4) feet or less in height
and the fence allows at least fifty (50) percent through vision. (See figure 3 at the end of this article.)
Sec. 6.07.007 Barbed wire or electrically charged fences
(a) Only fences as part of an agricultural or farming or ranching related activities erected, maintained or
permitted shall be electrically charged in any manner or form. The exclusion includes but is not limited to fences
electrically charged by battery or those tied in with the regular electrical outlet.
(b) No fence erected, maintained or permitted shall be made with barbed wire unless as part of an agricultural
or farming or ranching related activities.
(c) No fence erected, maintained or permitted shall be made with concertina wire, razor wire or anything
capable of causing significant harm to the general public.
(d) Any barbed wire portion of a fence for a commercial application must be on that portion of the fence over
six (6) feet in height. The barbed arms shall not extend over public rights-of-way or easements or over private
property of another person. When adjoining property is zoned or used for residential purposes or public rightsof-
way, barbed arms shall extend inward. (See figure 4 at the end of this article.)
(Ordinance 2011-03-06 adopted 3/14/11)
Sec. 6.07.008 Fence construction, materials, and setback
(a) All fences, unless prohibited elsewhere in this article, shall be constructed or maintained with wood, brick,
stone, concrete, vinyl, ornamental iron or other materials as approved by the city manager or his/her designee.
Fence posts shall be constructed or made of metal, brick, stone, concrete, fiberglass or other material as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/618
approved by the city manager or his/her designee. All fence posts must be placed at a depth of at least twentyfour
(24) inches into the ground filled and anchored with concrete footers or encasement.
(b) The city council is hereby designated the appeal body to hear any appeals to decisions rendered from the
strict application of this section. Any material proposed not outlined in the above subsection is considered
prohibited for use as a fence construction material.
(c) Except as otherwise set forth in subsection (d), fencing in commercial and industrial districts behind the
front building line shall be constructed of the primary masonry materials of the building, wrought iron, living
plant material or other material as approved by the city manager or his/her designee except that R-panel as
fencing material shall be allowed by right in all industrial zoning districts, areas intended to transition to
industrial zoning districts and/or encapsulated within designated areas.
(d) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, R-panels as fencing material are prohibited in industrial
areas that are adjacent to, in close proximity, facing and/or adjoining residential neighborhoods, residential or
mixed use properties and areas that are along major arterials.
(e) All fences shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the front of a structure. In the, event that
district-specific fence regulations duly adopted by the city council conflict with this subsection (e), those districtspecific
regulations will control.
(Ordinance 2018-11-44 adopted 11/12/18)
Sec. 6.07.009 Gates
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or maintain any fence without providing a gate or other
means of entrance and exit into and out of the area which the fence encloses, and it shall further be unlawful for
any person to erect, construct or maintain any fence along or near a rear property line which adjoins an alley or
easement without providing a reasonable means of access to such alley or easement. Gates must swing inward
toward private property and are not allowed to swing outward across property lines into public rights-of-way.
Sec. 6.07.010 Inspection
Upon completion of the installation of a fence, the building inspection department shall be called upon for
inspection. An acceptance tag will then be issued or a rejection tag indicating the defects in the same not in
compliance with approved plans or city ordinances.
Sec. 6.07.011 Maintenance
All fences shall be maintained by the owners of the property so as to comply with the requirements of this article
and shall also be maintained in good condition; such condition shall not deviate from the maintenance standards
as follows:
(1) The fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than twenty (20) degrees.
(2) Any and all broken, damaged, removed or missing parts of said fence shall be replaced within
ten (10) days of receiving notification by regular mail, or notice delivered in person by the code
official or his authorized representative. The code official may, upon written notice from the owner
that unusual circumstances prevent the timely repair of a fence, extend the replacement time as
necessary. Replacement materials to be the same material, size, shape and quality of the original
fence to which the repair is being made except when a post is damaged, removed or missing.
Replacement materials of fence posts shall conform to the standards established by section 6.07.008
above. Such post shall be replaced with metal or steel (095 or schedule 40) or other material
approved by the code official. Except in cases where a fence or fences are ordered to be constructed
on property as a result of a specific order of the city council or through operation of the development
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/618
code of the city, the above requirements shall not be construed so as to not allow a fence or fences to
be removed.
Secs. 6.07.012–6.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 6.07.041 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or have erected or to make substantial repairs,
suffer or permit a fence or any part of a fence of permanent construction without first obtaining a fence permit
from the office of the code official.
Sec. 6.07.042 Application
Any person making application for a fence permit shall sign an application which shall contain the following
information:
(1) Applicant's name and address, and if the applicant represents a corporation, the name and
address of the registered agent of the corporation, and if the applicant represents an association, the
name and address of the higher manager or agent of the association.
(2) Name of the owner of the property.
(3) Address where the fence is proposed to be erected.
(4) Type of fence construction and buildings to be utilized.
(5) Height of fence.
(6) Site plan showing proposed location of the fence and listing relevant dimensions between the
fence and other structures on the lot and the location of property lines, easements and public rightsof-
way.
Sec. 6.07.043 Fee
Upon approval of the application and at the time of issuance of the permit, the applicant shall pay a fee as set
forth in the master fee schedule. Any fence constructed without first being issued the required building permit,
the permit fee may be doubled.
Sec. 6.07.044 Right of appeal; variances
(a) Upon denial of a fence permit application by the code official, an applicant may appeal in writing to the
zoning board of adjustment for consideration of variances. Whenever the applicant can show that a strict
application of the terms of this article will impose upon him unusual or practical difficulties, the zoning board of
adjustment may consider such variances when the board is satisfied that granting of such variation will not
merely serve as a convenience but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty to warrant
a variance and, at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly protected.
(b) Areas that warrant a hearing before the zoning board of adjustment would be fence materials, fence
setbacks and overall height of the fence. These are the only areas that may be considered for considering a
variance by the zoning board of adjustment.
Sec. 6.07.045 Appeal procedure
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/618
(a) After denial of a fence permit, the applicant may file an application for appeal for a variance hearing with
the planning department to be considered or scheduled for a hearing before the zoning board of adjustment.
(b) An appeal fee as provided for in the master fee schedule shall accompany such application.
(c) Site plan drawings and elevations of the proposed fence shall accompany the application.
(d) The zoning board of adjustment shall hear the appeal from the applicant and render a decision.
Figure 1. Interior Lot Figure
Figure 2. Corner Lot
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/618
Figure 3. Reverse Frontage Lot
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/618
Figure 4. Barb-type Wire Fences
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/618
Figure 5. Vision Triangle/Garbage Receptacle Detail
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/618
(Ordinance 2011-03-06, adopted 3/14/11)
ARTICLE 6.08 CARGO CONTAINERS
Sec. 6.08.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings subscribed in interpreting the provisions of
this article:
Active building permit. An unexpired and unrevoked building permit for which the building official has not
performed a final inspection.
Applicant. An owner, occupant, authorized agent, or contractor or person with control of a property or lot.
Cargo container. A standardized, reusable vessel constructed from metal, steel, fiberglass or a combination
thereof with a maximum length of fifty-three feet (53') in length, eight feet (8') in width, and nine feet six inches
(9'6") in height that is used for storage of goods or commodities, that is designed to be in contact with the ground
or paved surface and not capable of having wheels installed to act as a trailer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/618
Sec. 6.08.002 Permit required; allowable usage
(a) Permit required. No person shall store, maintain or otherwise keep a cargo container on any lot or property
without first having obtained a permit issued by the city manager or his designee.
(b) Temporary construction storage use. A person may store, maintain, or otherwise keep a maximum of two
(2) cargo containers on a lot or property within any nonresidential zoning district during the period of an active
building permit for construction, provided that the building official determines that the construction project
warrants the use of a cargo container to facilitate the construction, taking into consideration the size of the
structure, complexity of the project, and storage options for materials. The cargo container must be placed on an
approved surface, and the building official must approve its location on the construction site. In the event that a
building permit is expired, revoked, or finalized, any cargo container used on the lot or property must be
removed within ten (10) calendar days from the expiration, revocation, or finalization of the building permit.
(c) Removal. No person shall store, maintain or otherwise keep a cargo container on any lot or property after
the expiration of ten (10) calendar days of any valid cargo container permit issued under this article.
Sec. 6.08.003 Issuance of permit
(a) No person shall store, maintain, or otherwise keep a cargo container as provided in section 6.08.002(b)
without obtaining the required permit, which shall be issued by the city manager or designee after the applicant
complies with the following requirements:
(1) The applicant must submit a written permit application identifying the intended temporary use
for the cargo container, and provide a scaled site or location plan showing the size and location of any
proposed cargo container(s) on the lot or property, and the location of all existing buildings and
parking spaces.
(2) The applicant shall pay the required permit fee for each cargo container as provided in this
article.
(b) No person shall be issued a permit for the maintenance of a cargo container unless a current, active
building permit has been issued for the lot or property where the cargo container shall be located, and the
applicant clearly demonstrates the need for such container under the building permit issued for the lot or
property. The applicant may provide a written statement identifying the reasons the cargo container(s) are needed
during construction or remodeling activities for which a building permit has been issued.
(c) The permit for a cargo container shall contain such reasonable conditions which shall minimize the visual
clutter and use of adjacent property.
Sec. 6.08.004 Standards; placement and location; removal by city
(a) The following development standards shall apply to all cargo containers:
(1) The cargo container(s) shall be constructed of steel or aluminum with a minimum 14-gauge
thickness, except for a wood floor within the metal shell. Structural plans and calculations are not
required.
(2) The cargo container(s) shall not exceed fifty-three feet (53') in length, eight feet (8') in width,
and nine feet six inches (9'6") in height.
(3) The cargo container(s) shall not have any factory-built or field-applied electrical, plumbing,
heating, or air conditioning systems. Further, the cargo container(s) shall not be connected to a power
system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/618
(4) No fixtures, mechanicals, or equipment of any kind may be affixed to the cargo container, with
the exception of a locking device.
(5) The cargo container(s) shall be installed and maintained in a level and plumb condition with a
maximum differential settlement to grade of two inches (2").
(b) The following standards shall apply to the placement and location of all cargo containers:
(1) The cargo container(s) may not occupy any required off-street parking spaces or
loading/unloading areas or fire lanes in any district.
(2) The cargo container(s) shall not block, obstruct, or reduce in any manner any required exits,
windows, vent shafts, parking spaces, and/or access driveways.
(3) The cargo container(s) shall conform to the setback and building line requirements of the
zoning district where it will be placed. No cargo container shall be permitted in a location which is
nearer to the public street than the main building, except for projects with an active building permit as
defined in section 6.08.002(b).
(4) The cargo container(s) shall not be stacked on top of each other or on any other structure.
(5) The cargo container(s) may not be placed closer than 1,000 feet to any existing inventoried
wetland or identified floodplain/floodway.
(c) The following standards apply to use of all cargo containers:
(1) The cargo container(s) shall not be used for human habitation or commercial purposes.
(2) The cargo container(s) shall not be used to store hazardous materials.
(3) Refuse and debris shall not be stored in, against, on, or under the cargo container(s).
(d) A person may only place a cargo container on a property or lot that has an active building permit issued by
the city, and on which construction has commenced.
(e) The cargo container(s) shall be secured, structurally sound, stable, and in good repair. Any cargo container
that becomes unsecured, unsound, unstable or otherwise dangerous shall be immediately repaired or removed
from the property. The building official shall provide the permit holder for the cargo container(s) [notice] of any
condition in violation of this section. After notice to the permit holder, any cargo container stored or kept in such
a manner deemed a dangerous condition and a public nuisance as determined by the building official may be
immediately removed by the city.
(f) Any cargo container in violation of this article shall be removed by the city, and any cost or expense
associated with the removal shall be the responsibility of the property owner where the cargo container is
located. All associated costs, including but not limited to legal fees and court costs, shall constitute a debt due
and owed to the city, and shall be recordable as a lien upon the land of the cargo container storage facility and/or
property owner.
Sec. 6.08.005 Revocation of permit; appeals
(a) Any permit issued under this article may be revoked upon ten (10) days' written notice to the owner,
occupant or person in control of the property if such person is storing, maintaining or otherwise keeping a cargo
container in violation of this article or a permit herein issued.
(b) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager or designee to revoke a permit may appeal to the
property standards and appeals board, whose decision shall be final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/618
(Ordinance 2010-06-10 adopted 6/28/10)
ARTICLE 6.09 MULTIFAMILY RENTAL PROPERTY REGULATIONS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.09.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Actor. A person identified within this article, whether a natural person, firm, corporation or business entity, that
is obligated to perform a duty established under this article.
Apartment building. Any structure containing four (4) or more dwelling units.
Bathroom. An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers or both, and which may also include
toilets, lavatories or fixtures serving similar purposes.
Dwelling unit. A structure or that part of a structure which is used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one
(1) or by two (2) or more persons, maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others.
Floor space. The total area of all habitable space.
Habitable space. The space occupied by one or more persons while living, sleeping, eating, and cooking,
excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, closets, storage spaces,
foyers, hallways, utility rooms, mechanical rooms and basements and/or recreational rooms.
Kitchen. A space sixty (60) square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum width of five (5) feet, used for
cooking or preparing food.
Kitchenette. A space less than sixty (60) square feet in floor area used for preparation of food.
Landlord. The owner, property manager and/or resident manager or resident manager of an apartment building
or any other person held out by any owner or property manager as the appropriate person who is in control or
management of the property, who leases or causes to be leased a dwelling unit, or the person a tenant contacts
concerning the rental agreement or apartment building.
Lender. Any person who holds a mortgage, deed of trust or any other security interest in the premises.
Owner. A person claiming or in whom is vested the ownership, dominion or title of real property, including but
not limited to:
(1) Holder of simple title;
(2) Holder of life estate;
(3) Holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more;
(4) The buyer in a contract for deed;
(5) A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trust in control of real property but not including the holder
of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five (5) years.
Person. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, two (2) or
more persons having a joint common interest, or any other legal or commercial entity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/618
Plumbing fixtures. Includes gas pipes, water pipes, toilets, lavatories, sinks, laundry tubs, dishwashers, garbage
disposal units, clothes washing machines, catchbasins, wash basins, bathtubs, shower baths, sewer pipes, sewage
systems, septic tanks, drains, vents, traps, and other fuel burning [sic] or connections to pipes.
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structure thereon, and furthermore including a dwelling
unit, appurtenances thereto, grounds and facilities held out for the use of tenants generally and any other area or
facility whose use is promised to the tenant.
Property manager. A person who for compensation has managing control of real property for the owner.
Structure. That which is built or corporation, business trust, estate trust, partnership or association, two or more
persons having a joint interest, or any other legal or commercial entity [sic].
Tenant. Any person who occupies a dwelling unit in an apartment building for living or dwelling purposes with
the landlord's consent.
Sec. 6.09.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished by a fine in accordance
with section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense. Every day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
Sec. 6.09.003 Powers and duties of building official
(a) The building official is hereby designated as the administrator of this article.
(b) In addition to the powers and duties otherwise prescribed for the building official or his designated
representative as administrator of this article, he is required to:
(1) Administer and enforce all provisions of this article.
(2) Keep records of all licenses issued.
(3) Adopt rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, with respect to
the form and content of applications for licenses, the investigation of applicants, and other matters
incidental or appropriate to his powers and duties as may be necessary for the proper administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(4) Conduct, on his/her initiative, periodic inspections of apartment buildings throughout the city,
concerning their compliance with this article.
Sec. 6.09.004 Minimum standards; responsibilities of landlord
(a) Property standards. A landlord shall:
(1) Eliminate a hole, excavation, sharp protrusion, and other objects or conditions that exist on the
premises and are reasonably capable of causing injury to a person.
(2) Securely cover or close a well, cesspool or cistern.
(3) Provide an adequate number of solid waste receptacles or containers on the premises.
(4) Provide adequate drainage to prevent standing water and flooding on the land.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/618
(5) Remove dead trees, tree limbs, shrubs and landscaping that are reasonably capable of causing
injury to a person.
(6) Keep the doors and windows of a vacant dwelling unit or vacant portion of an apartment
building securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry.
(7) Keep all areas of the building, grounds, facilities and appurtenances in a clean and sanitary
manner.
(8) A landlord, manager, or owner shall address a resident's complaints within the prescribed time
listed in section 6.09.006(c) of this article.
(b) Structural standards. A landlord shall, in compliance with the appropriate codes of the city:
(1) Protect the exterior surfaces of a structure which are subject to decay, by application of paint or
other coating.
(2) Provide and maintain railings for stairs, steps, balconies, porches, and elsewhere as specified in
compliance with the established codes in the city Code of Ordinances.
(3) Repair holes, cracks, and defects reasonably capable of causing injury to a person in stairs,
porches, steps and balconies.
(4) Maintain a dwelling unit or apartment building in a weathertight and watertight condition.
(5) Maintain floors, walls, ceilings, and supporting structural members in a sound condition,
capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
(6) Repair or replace chimney flue vent attachments that do not function properly.
(7) Repair holes, cracks, breaks and loose surface materials that are health or safety hazards in or
on floors, walls or ceilings.
(c) Utility standards. A landlord shall, in compliance with the appropriate codes of the city:
(1) Provide and maintain in working order connections to discharge sewage from a structure or
deposit into a public sewer system.
(2) Provide and maintain in working order a toilet connected to a water source and to a public
sewer in each dwelling unit.
(3) Provide and maintain in working order connections and pipes to supply potable water at
adequate pressure to a dwelling unit.
(4) Provide and maintain a device to supply hot water of a consistent minimum temperature of one
hundred and twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit within each dwelling unit.
(5) Provide, connect and maintain in working order a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower and lavatory
to a cold and hot water source in a dwelling unit.
(6) Connect plumbing fixture and heating equipment that the owner supplies in accordance with
the plumbing and mechanical codes of the city.
(7) Provide heating equipment capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of sixty-eight
(68) degrees Fahrenheit in each room of the dwelling unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/618
(8) Provide and maintain air conditioning equipment capable of maintaining an inside temperature
of seventy-eight (78) degrees Fahrenheit with an outside temperature of ninety-eight degrees
Fahrenheit.
(9) Provide and maintain supply lines for electrical service to each dwelling unit.
(10) Connect each heating device that burns solid fuel to a chimney or flue.
(11) Provide and maintain electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to safely carry a load imposed by
normal use of appliances and fixtures.
(12) Maintain all electrical, plumbing, heating and other facilities supplied by the owner in good
working order at all times.
(13) Pay all utility bills on time to prevent any cut-off of utilities by the utility companies.
(d) Health standards. A landlord shall.
(1) Eliminate rodents and vermin in or on the land;
(2) Maintain the interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure free from rubbish and
garbage;
(3) Keep the interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of any structure free from insects,
rodents and vermin; and
(4) Provide and maintain appropriate receptacles and conveniences for the removal of ashes,
rubbish, garbage and any other waste material and arrange for frequent removal of such waste
materials.
(e) Exemption for new construction. A violation of this article under subsection (a) of this section shall not
apply when the premises concerned are the site of new construction and reasonable and continuous progress is
being made to complete the construction.
Sec. 6.09.005 Responsibilities of tenant
A tenant shall:
(1) Maintain the interior of a dwelling unit occupied by the tenant free from rubbish and garbage.
(2) Remove an animal or animals from a dwelling unit if the presence of the animal or animals is a
health hazard to a tenant.
(3) Connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the tenant supplies in accordance with
the plumbing code and the mechanical code.
(4) Place all ashes, rubbish, garbage and any other waste material in the appropriate receptacles
provided for same by the landlord.
(5) Not alter a structure or its facilities so as to create nonconformity with section 6.09.004.
(6) Use in a reasonable manner all electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and other facilities and appliances, including elevators, in the premises.
(7) Not deliberately or intentionally destroy, deface, damage, impair or remove any part of the
premises or unknowingly [sic] permit any person to do so.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/618
(8) Conduct himself or herself, and require other persons on the premises with his consent to
conduct themselves, in a manner that will not disturb his neighbors' peaceful enjoyment of the
premises. For purposes of this section such unallowed conduct includes, but is not limited to, any
loud playing of music, televisions, radios, instruments or any other mechanical device.
(9) When vacating the apartment, remove all trash and debris or risk loss of a portion of the
security deposit.
Sec. 6.09.006 Repair duties
(a) The landlord has the duty to furnish and maintain premises in accordance with the standards enumerated in
section 6.09.004. In addition, the landlord shall at all times during the occupancy of a tenant make all repairs
necessary to keep and maintain the premises in accordance with the standards provided for in section 6.09.004.
(b) The landlord shall provide to all tenants an emergency phone number which is answered at all times during
night or day.
(c) Upon notice by the tenant in writing of any defective condition in the premises or dwelling unit in
noncompliance with the standards stated in section 6.09.004, the landlord shall repair such condition within a
reasonable period of time. If the landlord fails to complete such repairs within seven (7) days, the tenant may file
a complaint in writing to the building official for enforcement based upon the nature of the repair and the
difficulty involved, and [the building official] shall issue a citation to the property owner only if the violation is
not corrected within such reasonable time.
(d) In emergency situations, the tenant shall notify the landlord immediately by way of the emergency
telephone number. For purposes of this section, “emergency situations” are defined as a stopped-up commode,
overflowing bathtub or sink, broken pipes, leaking roof, emergency electrical malfunction or other situations
having immediate adverse effects on the health or safety of the tenant or his/her property. Upon notification, the
landlord shall respond immediately and furnish assistance to the tenant within one (1) hour from such
notification, where possible.
Sec. 6.09.007 Notice requirements
(a) A person “notifies” or “gives a notice or notification” to another person by taking steps reasonably
calculated to inform the other in ordinary course, whether or not the other actually comes to know it. A person
receives a notice or notification when:
(1) It comes to his attention; or
(2) In the case of the landlord, it is delivered at the place of business of the landlord through which
the rental agreement was made or at any place held out by him as the place for receipt of the
communication, or, in the case of the tenant, it is delivered in hand to the tenant or mailed by
registered or certified mail to him at the place held out by him as the place for receipt of the
communication, or in the absence of such designation to his last known place of residence.
(b) A tenant may not file a complaint with the building official under the terms of this article until seven (7)
days have elapsed following written notice to the landlord/manager. A copy of the written notice must
accompany the tenant complaint.
Sec. 6.09.008 Defenses
Notwithstanding all other sections of this article, it will be an affirmative defense to a complaint if the defendant
landlord or tenant is able to establish that:
(1) The noncomplying condition described in the complaint was required [repaired] within the
prescribed time limits set forth in section 6.09.006.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/618
(2) The noncomplying condition was repaired within the time limits established by the building
official, or that the period for repair was reasonable due to circumstances beyond the control of the
landlord.
(3) The required notice in section 6.09.007 was not provided.
(4) The noncomplying condition was caused by the deliberate or intentional conduct of the
complaining party.
(5) The noncomplying condition could have been corrected but for the tenant's refusal to permit
access to his apartment.
Sec. 6.09.009 Information to be provided to tenants; notice of entry
(a) A landlord shall disclose to the tenant, by properly posting in the office, the name and address of:
(1) Each property manager and resident manager.
(2) The management company responsible for the operation of the company.
(b) A landlord shall leave notice of entry whenever it is necessary to enter an apartment without the specific
permission of the tenant. Such notice shall include the date, time, and purpose of the person who has entered the
apartment.
(c) A landlord shall distribute to all tenants a copy of this article, describing the rights and responsibilities of
the tenants, and shall keep a log book with the name, date and signature of the person receiving the same, for a
period of one (1) year, for official use by the city.
Sec. 6.09.010 Retaliatory eviction
(a) In addition to the remedies provided by state law, a landlord shall not retaliate against a tenant by
increasing rent or cutting off utilities, or evict the tenant from the premises, because:
(1) The tenant has made a complaint to the building official about conditions in the apartment or
dwelling unit which might not be in compliance with the building, health, housing or fire codes, as
required by this article and the code, and which condition materially affects the health and safety of
the tenant, and the condition was not caused by the tenant.
(2) The tenant makes a general complaint to the landlord or city about violation of his rights under
this article.
(3) The tenant files a complaint against landlord under this article.
(b) In addition to the remedies provided by state law, even if the tenant claims “retaliation,” the landlord may
still evict him or her when:
(1) The rent is overdue.
(2) There are code violations caused by the tenant or his or her visitor.
(3) The tenant is damaging property, disturbed the peace, or is using the apartment for illegal
purposes.
Secs. 6.09.011–6.09.040 Reserved
Division 2. Apartment License
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/618
Sec. 6.09.041 Required; trade name registration
(a) No person shall maintain, conduct, operate or rent a dwelling unit in an apartment complex for
compensation within the city, or act as agent for another who is renting dwelling units in an apartment complex,
without first obtaining an apartment license from the building official. Should a person own or maintain an
apartment complex at more than one (1) location, a duplicate license is required for each additional location. The
license issued to an owner authorizes such owner and its bona fide agents or employees to rent dwelling units to
tenants.
(b) An owner shall register with the building official the trade name of his owner of his apartment complex,
and shall not use or permit to be used more than one (1) trade name at a single location.
Sec. 6.09.042 Application; expiration; notice of change in resident manager
(a) An applicant for a license shall file with the building official a written application upon a form provided
for that purpose, which shall be signed by the owner and his property manager. Should an applicant own an
apartment complex at more than one (1) location, a separate application must be filed for each location. The
following information shall be required in the application: name, primary address, telephone number of the
owner, property manager, resident manager and lender and the street address of the apartment building, and, if
incorporated, the name of the registered agent on file with the secretary of state.
(b) The apartment complex license expires on December thirty-first (31st) of each year.
(c) The building official may, at any time, require additional information of the owner or property manager, to
clarify items on the application.
(d) When the resident manager of an apartment complex is changed, notice of such change, together with the
name, address and telephone number of the new agent, shall be provided to the building official within ten (10)
days.
Sec. 6.09.043 Fee
All fees for any permit under this article shall be established by resolution of the city council.
Sec. 6.09.044 Display; replacement license; transfer; changes in information
(a) Each license issued pursuant to this article, together with a copy of this article, must be posted, displayed
and kept in a conspicuous place in the apartment complex in which the tenant has access.
(b) A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed or mutilated, upon application on the form
provided by the building official. A replacement license shall have the word “replacement” stamped across its
face and shall bear the same number as the one it replaces.
(c) An apartment complex license is not assignable or transferable.
(d) An owner or property manager shall notify the building official within ten (10) days of a change or partial
change in ownership, lender or management of the apartment complex, or a change of address or trade name.
(Ordinance 2008-10-43 adopted 10/27/08)
ARTICLE 6.10 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION*
Sec. 6.10.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/618
definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the current edition of the
Manual of Cross-Connection Control, published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research, University of Southern California.
Air gap. A physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or
appurtenance and an open or non-pressure-receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An “approved air
gap separation” shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow
rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device, in no case less than 1 inch.
Approved backflow prevention assembly or backflow assembly or assembly. An assembly to counteract
backpressure or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by
USC Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.
Auxiliary supply. Any water source or system other than the public water system that may be available in the
building or on the property.
Backflow. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases
or substances into the water system of the city's water.
Backpressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply
pressure at the point of consideration which would cause or tend to cause a reversal of the normal direction of
flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source.
Backsiphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.
Boresight or boresight to daylight. Providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in
vaults through the use of an unobstructed drain pipe.
City manager. The city's appointed manager or his designee.
Contamination. The entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be
deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
Cross-connection. Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected directly or indirectly
(actual or potential) with any other nonpotable water system, used water system or auxiliary water supply, sewer,
drain, conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp cooler, air conditioner unit, fire
protection system or any other assembly which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other
liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water
system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover
assemblies or other temporary or permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow may
occur are considered to be cross-connections.
Cross-connection control inspector. A person that is a certified inspector recognized by the city.
Customer service inspector or CSI. An individual who has fulfilled the requirements set out in TCEQ rules and
regulations for public water systems.
Degree of hazard. The low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential crossconnections.
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check. An assembly
which consists of two independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly
comes complete with a shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for
tightness.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/618
Health hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable
water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health.
High hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a
substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply.
Low hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a
substance that may be objectionable, but not hazardous to one's health, to backflow into the potable water
supply.
Mobile unit. Any vehicle, tank or trailer which uses water from the city's public water supply and which may
have the potential to introduce contaminants or pollutants into a potable water system. They include but are not
limited to carpet cleaning vehicles, water hauling vehicles, landscape/lawn care vehicles, pest-control vehicles
and portable power washers.
Nonresidential use. Shall include all uses not specifically included in “residential uses” defined in this section.
Plumbing code. The current adopted plumbing code and amendments as currently adopted by the city council.
Plumbing hazard. An internal or plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that may
be either a pollutional or a contamination-type hazard.
Plumbing inspector. A person that is a licensed plumbing inspector recognized by the city.
Point-of-use isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at
which the actual or potential cross-connection exists.
Pollutional hazard. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of
the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as
defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded
under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to
the system or its appurtenances.
Potable water supply. Any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.
Premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures and
structures located on it.
Premises isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water
system and the water user.
Pressure vacuum breaker assembly or PBVA or PVB. An assembly consisting of a spring-loaded check valve
loaded to the closed position and an independently operating air inlet valve loaded to the open position, and
installed as a unit with and between two shut-off valves and with suitable connections for testing.
Public water system or system. Any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public
domestic use. The system must meet all the health requirements set forth by the TCEQ. The system will include
all services, reservoirs, facilities and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing or
conveying water for public consumption.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RP
assembly or RP. Any assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a
hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks
and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/618
Residential use. Shall include single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex housing and apartments where the
individual units are each on a separate meter, or in cases where two or more units are served by one meter.
Service connection. The point of delivery at which the public water system connects to the private supply line or
lateral.
System hazard. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or
consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
TCEQ. The state commission on environmental quality.
Tester. A person that has met all TCEQ requirements to be a certified backflow prevention assembly technician.
(1) A “general tester” is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies, except firelines.
(2) A “fireline tester” is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on firelines only. The
state fire marshal's office requires that a person performing maintenance on firelines must be
employed by an approved fireline contractor.
Thermal expansion. The increase in pressure caused by the heating or rise in the temperature of water. When a
system becomes closed due to the installation of a backflow assembly, this problem can be acute.
Used water. Water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the
service connection.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1601)
Sec. 6.10.002 Purpose
Pursuant to title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 290.44 and section 290.46, it is the responsibility of the
city to protect its drinking water supply by instituting and enforcing a cross-connection program. The purpose of
this article, therefore, is to comply with the above-cited regulatory requirements and to protect the water supply
of the city from contamination or pollution due to any cross-connections. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1602)
Sec. 6.10.003 Backflow prevention assembly requirements
A certified cross-connection inspector employed by or under contract with the city shall determine the type and
location of backflow assembly to be installed at any premises in the city's water service area. The assembly shall
be required in each of the following circumstances, but the inspector is in no way limited to the following
circumstances:
(1) When the nature and extent of any activity at the premises, or the materials used in connection
with any activity at the premises or materials stored at the premises, could contaminate or pollute the
potable water supply.
(2) When the premises have one or more cross-connections as that term is defined in section
6.10.001 and section 6.10.005.
(3) When internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable.
(4) When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether
cross-connections exist.
(5) When the premises have a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/618
(6) When entry to the premises is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be
made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross-connections do not exist.
(7) When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result.
(8) When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by an inspector to
be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations.
(9) When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the city
manager or his designee.
(10) All new commercial and industrial construction will be required to install a backflow
assembly at the meter. This assembly will be a minimum of a double check or commensurate with the
degree of hazard as determined by the city's designated cross-connection inspector.
(11) An approved backflow assembly will be required to be installed at the service connection of
new residential services if it has been determined by a cross-connection inspector that an actual or
potential cross-connection exists. This assembly will be commensurate with the degree of actual or
potential hazard.
(12) When a building is constructed on commercial premises and the end use of such building is
not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the
most hazardous use of the building.
(13) Any used water return system that has received approval from the city manager or his
designee.
(14) If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this article, the
installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection.
(15) If a cross-connection inspector or the city's designated inspector determines that additions or
rearrangements have been made to the plumbing system without the proper permits as required by the
city's current plumbing code, premises isolation shall be required.
(16) All multi-story buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank.
(17) Retrofitting shall be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the city
manager or his designee deems retrofitting necessary.
(18) An approved double detector check valve assembly shall be the minimum protection on all
new fire sprinkler systems. An RP assembly shall be installed if any solution other than potable water
can be introduced into the sprinkler system. Retrofitting shall be required on all high hazard systems
where improper maintenance has occurred, and wherever an inspector deems necessary.
(19) All lawn irrigation systems, commercial and industrial, will have a minimum of a double
check assembly. An RP assembly will be required if any solution or any other source of supply is
used or if it is deemed necessary by an inspector.
(20) All auxiliary water supplies.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1603)
Sec. 6.10.004 Mobile units
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/618
(a) A person who owns or operates any vehicle that uses water from the city's public water system shall obtain
a use permit from the city manager or his designee before accessing the public water system. The city manager
or his designee will require a fixed air gap or a backflow assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard
mounted either on the vehicle or piping.
(b) The failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to comply with this article shall be grounds for the city
to revoke any permit or license required under the city code to operate the vehicle or the business for which such
vehicle is used.
(c) The city manager or his designee may deny a permit to any person who is not in compliance with this
article or who has a history of violating the requirements of this section.
(d) All assemblies used to protect the water supply when using a mobile unit must abide by the maintenance
and testing sections of this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1604)
Sec. 6.10.005 Multiple service connections
Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply shall have a backflow assembly at
each service connection to that premises. Each assembly shall be commensurate with the degree of the highest
potential hazard on that premises. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1605)
Sec. 6.10.006 Compliance with plumbing code
As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain and operate their piping and plumbing systems
in accordance with the plumbing code. If there is a conflict between this article and the plumbing code, the more
restrictive provision shall apply. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1606)
Sec. 6.10.007 Thermal expansion
It is the responsibility of the property owner to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion if a closed system
has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1607)
Sec. 6.10.008 Pressure loss
Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the
city. The city may give reasonable assistance to a property owner regarding information on adequate sizing of
assemblies and proper plumbing practices to provide for required pressure and flows. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1608)
Sec. 6.10.009 Residential service connections
Any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross-connection shall be
equipped with an approved backflow prevention assembly installed in accordance with this article. (2002 Code,
sec. 3.1609)
Sec. 6.10.010 Customer service inspections
(a) Pursuant to TCEQ water system regulations, a customer service inspection for cross-connection control
shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following
circumstances:
(1) Water service to a newly constructed facility or previously existing premises.
(2) After any material improvement to building(s) or premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/618
(3) Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises served by the public
water system of the city.
(b) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility(s) until after the customer
service inspection is completed.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1610)
Sec. 6.10.011 Certification of cross-connection inspectors
Inspectors performing cross-connection control duties within the city must be approved by the city manager or
his designee and shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Be employed by or under contract with the city;
(2) Attend a cross-connection control inspector certification training course approved by the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1611)
Sec. 6.10.012 Certification and registration of backflow prevention assembly testers
(a) Required. All backflow assembly testers operating within the city shall be certified in accordance with all
applicable regulations of the TCEQ. No person shall operate as a backflow prevention assembly tester within the
city without first being registered with the city.
(b) Evidence of insurance, bond and license. At the time of registration or renewal or upon the city manager's
or his designee's request, each person certified as a backflow prevention assembly tester shall furnish evidence to
show that he/she is insured and bonded to perform services on private property and has current all required
licenses.
(c) Qualifications. Persons certified as backflow prevention assembly testers shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Hold a TCEQ-approved certification;
(2) Receive confined-space entry training certification; and
(3) Proof of general commercial liability insurance and automobile insurance required.
(d) Fees. An annual registration fee as established by the city council shall be paid by each contractor or
business for the first certified tester/employee prior to any work commencing with the city. Each additional
employee (who is a certified tester) working for a contractor that is registered in the city shall pay an additional
registration fee as established by the city council, per tester. Each individual tester not under a business or
contractor shall pay an annual registration fee as established by the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1612)
Sec. 6.10.013 Certified backflow prevention assembly tester responsibilities
(a) No certified backflow assembly tester shall operate within the city without first registering with the city
manager or his designee.
(b) A registration shall remain in effect, provided:
(1) The tester maintains eligibility for registration and certification as that is defined in this article;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/618
(2) The tester tests a minimum of 15 assemblies a year in the state;
(3) The tester attends and successfully completes a recertification training course every three years;
and
(4) Registration is not revoked by the city manager or his designee.
(c) Upon recertifying, a tester shall renew his/her registration with the city manager or his designee. If a
certification remains expired for a period of one year, the tester shall reestablish registration eligibility.
(d) Each applicant for registration shall:
(1) Provide proof of current certification which was issued within 60 days of the date of
registration or provide current test reports with proof of testing in the state within 60 days prior to
registration.
(2) Provide evidence to the city manager or his designee to establish that the applicant has
available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test backflow prevention assemblies.
(3) Provide evidence to the city manager or his designee that the applicant has successfully
completed “permit confined-space entry training” as specified by the federal Occupational Safety and
Health Administration's 29 CFR 1910.146.
(e) A registered backflow prevention assembly tester shall:
(1) Annually have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated according to TCEQ
regulations and submit a copy of the test results at the time of registration or renewal.
(2) Perform competent and accurate certifications of each backflow prevention assembly tested and
shall submit complete reports thereof to the city manager or his designee.
(3) List registered serial numbers of test gauges on tests and maintenance reports prior to
submitting them to the city manager or his designee.
(4) Not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly.
(5) All testers shall provide the city with 24 hours' notice prior to any testing within the district.
(6) A copy of test results shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of testing.
(7) Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of
the premises within 30 days.
(8) Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three years.
(f) After notice and hearing, the city manager or his designee may revoke a registration if the city manager or
his designee determines that the tester:
(1) Has made false, incomplete or inaccurate assembly testing reports;
(2) Has used inaccurate gauges;
(3) Has used improper testing procedures;
(4) Has expired insurance;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/618
(5) Is not in compliance with safety regulations;
(6) Has failed to submit the required information on his/her test kits or failed to calibrate gauges
annually as required by subsection (e) above; or
(7) Has violated any other provision of this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1613)
Sec. 6.10.014 Responsibility for cost of compliance
The cost of complying with these regulations shall be the responsibility of the property owners and their lessees.
These costs include but are not limited to purchasing, installation, testing and repair of the assembly. These costs
shall include point-of-use and premises isolation assemblies. Any cost incurred by the city to enforce this article
is the responsibility of the property owners and lessees. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1614)
Sec. 6.10.015 Testing of assemblies
(a) All commercial backflow prevention assemblies shall be caused to be inspected and the test report must be
filed with the city in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Immediately after installation;
(2) Whenever the assembly is moved;
(3) A minimum of once a year;
(4) Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to reoccupancy;
(5) Immediately after repair.
(b) All residential backflow prevention assemblies shall be caused to be inspected and the test report must be
filed with the city in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Immediately after installation;
(2) Whenever the assembly is moved;
(3) Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to reoccupancy;
(4) Immediately after repairs.
(Ordinance 2009-01-03, secs. (a)–(b), adopted 1/12/09)
(c) Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the city manager or his designee deems
necessary.
(d) All assembly testing shall be performed by a certified and registered backflow prevention assembly tester
in accordance with TCEQ approved test procedures.
(e) It is the responsibility of the property owner to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this article.
(f) The city shall not be liable for damage to an assembly that occurs during testing.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1615)
Sec. 6.10.016 Maintenance of assemblies
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/618
(a) A person who owns, operates or manages premises in which required backflow prevention assemblies are
installed shall maintain such assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. All
maintenance and repair of assemblies shall be done in accordance with all applicable regulations of the TCEQ
and this article.
(b) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in a manner that allows them to be tested by a method
that has been approved by the TCEQ.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1616)
Sec. 6.10.017 General standards for installation of assemblies
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements to ensure their
proper operation and accessibility:
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with all plumbing codes
recognized by the city and this article. The assembly installer shall obtain the required plumbing
permits prior to installation and shall have the assembly inspected by a certified cross-connection
inspector and as required by the plumbing code.
(2) No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in
water or installed in a location subject to flooding. If a double check valve assembly is installed in a
vault, brass plugs shall be maintained in the test ports at all times and adequate drainage shall be
provided.
(3) Assemblies shall be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, before any branch in
the line and on private property located just inside the boundary of the city's right-of-way. An
inspector may specify other areas for installation of the assembly.
(4) The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(5) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the city.
(6) All vertical installations shall be approved in writing by the city manager or his designee prior
to installation.
(7) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance and testing.
(8) If the city manager or his designee grants written permission to install the backflow assembly
inside of a building, the assembly shall be readily accessible between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
(9) If an assembly is installed pursuant to section 6.10.024 and is 4 inches or larger and is installed
5 feet or higher above the floor, it shall be equipped with a rigidly and permanently installed
scaffolding acceptable to the city manager or his designee. This installation shall also meet all
applicable requirements set out by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the
state occupational safety and health laws.
(10) The property owner shall register all backflow assemblies with the city manager or his
designee. Registration shall consist of date of installation, manufacturer, model, serial number of the
backflow prevention assembly and initial test report.
(11) Assemblies installed more than 5 feet above floor level shall have a suitable platform for use
by testing or maintenance personnel.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/618
(12) Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be
required ahead of the assembly.
(13) The property owner assumes all responsibility for leaks and damage. The owner shall also see
that any vault is kept reasonably free of silt and debris.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1617)
Sec. 6.10.018 Reduced pressure principle assemblies (RP)
(a) RPs shall be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to the public health
if introduced into the potable water system. An RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical.
An RP is effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure.
(b) RPs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served.
(c) Premises where non-interruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two assemblies of the
same type installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the
minimum water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
(d) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be
installed.
(e) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and shall be located in an area where
water damage to buildings or furnishings will not occur from relief valve discharge. An approved air gap funnel
assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly; this assembly will not control flow in
a continuous relief situation. Drain lines will need to accommodate fill [full] relief valve discharge flow [and
this] should be considered.
(f) Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established
below. Daylight drain ports shall be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly.
(g) All assemblies larger than 2 inches shall have a minimum of 12 inches on the back side, and 24 inches on
the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least 12 inches plus nominal size of assembly above
the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of 6 feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top.
A minimum access opening of 24 inches square is required on all vault lids. All assemblies 2 inches and smaller
shall have at least a 6-inch clearance on all sides.
(h) All RP assemblies shall be tested in accordance with this article.
(i) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations shall be
prohibited without prior written approval of the code official.
(j) RP assemblies may be installed in a vault only if the relief valve discharge can be drained to daylight
through a boresight type drain. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the
assembly and shall be screened on both ends.
(k) An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. This air gap shall be at
least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically above the top rim of the drain
and in no case less than 1 inch.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1618)
Sec. 6.10.019 Double check valve assemblies (DC)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/618
(a) Double check valve assemblies may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be
objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
(b) DCs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served.
(c) Premises where non-interruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two assemblies of the
same type installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the
minimum water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
(d) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be
installed.
(e) The assembly shall be readily accessible, with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs may be
installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained,
constructed of suitable materials and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below.
(f) Assemblies 2 inches and smaller shall have at least a 3-inch clearance below and on both sides of the
assembly, and, if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than 24 inches below grade. All
assemblies larger than 2 inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches on the back side, 24 inches on the
test cock side and 12 inches below the assembly. Headroom of 6 feet is required in vaults without a fully
removable top. A minimum access opening of 24 inches square is required on all vault lids.
(g) Vertical installations are allowed on sizes up to and including four (4) inches that meet the following
requirements:
(1) Internally spring-loaded check valves;
(2) Flow is upward through the assembly;
(3) Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical position; and
(4) Approved by the code official.
(h) All DCs shall be tested in accordance with this article.
(i) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. No deviations shall be
permitted without prior written approval of the code official.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1619)
Sec. 6.10.020 Double detector check valve assemblies (DDC)
Double detector check valve assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve
assembly and detector metering. DDCs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double
check valve assemblies (DCs). (2002 Code, sec. 3.1620)
Sec. 6.10.021 Pressure vacuum breaker assemblies (PVB)
(a) PVBs may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be
objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against
backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure.
(b) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above the highest use outlet or overflow level
downstream from the assembly.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/618
(c) PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water
discharge.
(d) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of 12
inches all around the assembly.
(e) PVBs shall be located between 12 inches and 60 inches above ground level.
(f) A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly.
(g) All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article.
(h) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. No deviations shall be
permitted without prior written approval from the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1621)
Sec. 6.10.022 Atmospheric vacuum breakers (AVB)
(a) AVBs provide minimal protection and are approved for very low hazard applications only. AVBs protect
against backsiphonage only and are prohibited where there is potential for backpressure.
(b) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of 6 inches above the highest use outlet or overflow level
downstream from the assembly.
(c) Shut-off valves downstream from the assembly are prohibited.
(d) AVBs shall be allowed only for those applications where there is less than 12 hours per day continuous
use.
(e) AVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage may occur from water
discharge.
(f) AVBs shall be allowed for point-of-use protection only in accordance with the plumbing code. AVBs in
some installations may not be recognized as adequate protection by the city manager or his designee, so
additional protection will required.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1622)
Sec. 6.10.023 Air gap separation
(a) Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and may be utilized at premises
where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
(b) An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above
the top rim of the receiving vessel, in no case less than 1 inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be
attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45-degree angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of
the angle. Hoses shall not be allowed.
(c) Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable
times.
(d) Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the spout
opening for a single, or a distance greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/618
(e) In cases where there are three or more side walls, ribs or similar obstructions extending from the water
surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening other than as specified in subsection (d) above, the
air gap shall be measured from the top of the wall.
(f) The effective opening shall be the minimum cross-sectional area at the seat of the control valve or the
supply pipe or tubing which feeds the assembly or outlet. If two or more lines supply one outlet, the effective
opening shall be the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the individual supply lines or the area of the single
outlet, whichever is smaller.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1623)
Sec. 6.10.024 Additional specifications for installation of assemblies
All assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the city's standards and specifications (copies available from
the city). (2002 Code, sec. 3.1624)
Sec. 6.10.025 Responsibilities of owners and lessees
It is the responsibility of all property owners and lessees to abide by the conditions of this article. The owner of
leased or rented premises is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow assemblies on the
premises. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1625)
Sec. 6.10.026 Access to premises
(a) Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall, during the hours of 8:00 a.m.
through 5:00 p.m., permit the city manager or his designee, or their designee, to enter their premises and
buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used to determine
compliance with this article.
(b) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected shall be
promptly removed by the water user at the written or verbal request of the city manager or his designee and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1626)
Sec. 6.10.027 Right-of-way encroachment
(a) No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way
except as provided by this section.
(b) A backflow prevention assembly required by this article may be installed upon or within any city right-ofway
only if the owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and
installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities. The city retains the right to approve the
location, height, depth, enclosure and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation.
(c) Any assembly or portion of an assembly which extends above ground shall be located no closer than 18
inches to the face of the curb.
(d) A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's sole expense, relocate a backflow
prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street
or utility construction or repairs or for purposes of public safety.
(e) All city codes relevant to easement issues will be recognized by this article.
(f) The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/618
(g) All permits and inspections required by the city to perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1627)
Sec. 6.10.028 Permits
All city and local permits and plumbing code permits which are required by the city must be met and maintained
to meet the requirements of this article. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1628)
Sec. 6.10.029 Enforcement; violations; penalty
(a) The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article by any one
or more of the enforcement mechanisms set forth in this article.
(b) The inspectors, agents or representatives of the city charged with enforcement of this article shall be
deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public and neither the city, the
city manager or his designee, nor the individual inspector, agent or representative of the city engaged in
inspection or endorsement [enforcement] activities under this article when acting in good faith and without
malice shall ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been
caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function.
(c) Failure on the part of any customer to discontinue the use of all cross-connections and to physically
separate cross-connections is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to the
premises.
(d) Failure on the part of any customer (property owner or lessee) to bring his property into compliance with
this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense. Each day that such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such.
(e) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article
or any order issued under it, or who has falsified, tampered with or knowingly rendered inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this article, shall upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed the maximum allowable by law.
(f) A person is criminally responsible for a violation of the article if the person:
(1) Commits or assists in the commission of a violation; or
(2) Is a property owner, tenant, lessee, permittee or other person in control of the premises
determined to be the source of a violation.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1629)
Sec. 6.10.030 Emergency suspension of utility service
(a) The city manager or his designee may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any premises when
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened backflow which:
(1) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or
welfare of persons; or
(2) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the city's public water supply.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/618
(b) As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the city manager or his designee shall notify the
owner or person in charge of the premises of the suspension in person or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and shall order such person to correct the cross-connection which allowed the backflow to occur.
When time permits, the city manager or his designee should also notify the owner or person in charge prior to
suspending water service.
(c) If the person fails to comply with an order issued [under] subsection (b), the city manager or his designee
may take such steps as the city manager or his designee deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
public water supply or to minimize danger to persons.
(d) The city manager or his designee shall not reinstate suspended service until:
(1) The person presents proof satisfactory to the city manager or his designee that the backflow has
been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected;
(2) The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in responding to the backflow or
threatened backflow; and
(3) The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service.
(e) A person whose service has been suspended may appeal such enforcement action to the city manager or his
designee in writing within ten days of notice of the suspension in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to premises suspended pursuant to this
section without the prior approval of the city manager or his designee.
(g) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise
of this remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1630)
Sec. 6.10.031 Non-emergency termination of water supply
(a) The city manager or his designee may terminate the city-provided water supply of any water user who
violates the following conditions:
(1) Refusing the city manager or his designee reasonable access to the water user's premises for the
purpose of inspection;
(2) Hindering or denying the city manager or his designee access to backflow prevention
assemblies;
(3) Failing to install a reduced pressure principle assembly as required;
(4) Failing to install and maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article;
or
(5) Failing to install, maintain and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with
the plumbing code.
(b) The city manager or his designee will notify a water user of the proposed termination of his water supply.
The water user may petition the city manager or his designee for a reconsideration and hearing within ten (10)
days of service termination.
(c) Exercise of this enforcement option by the city manager or his designee shall not be a bar to, nor a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the water user.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/618
(d) The city manager or his designee shall not reinstate suspended services until:
(1) The person presents proof satisfactory to the city manager or his designee that the backflow has
been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and
(2) The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1631)
Sec. 6.10.032 Remedies nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under
state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all or any combination of these actions
against a violator. The city may take more than one (1) enforcement action against any violator. These actions
may be taken concurrently. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1632)
ARTICLE 6.11 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS*
Sec. 6.11.001 Definitions
The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
Air gap. A complete physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply
pipeline and an open or non-pressure-receiving vessel.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The
flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the
air inlet valve falls and forms a check against backsiphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port
allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker backsiphonage
prevention assembly.
Backflow prevention. The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or backsiphonage, of nonpotable water from an
irrigation system into the potable water source.
Backflow prevention assembly. Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of
assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition.
Completion of irrigation system installation. When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all
minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly.
Consulting. The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation
systems.
Cross-connection. An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that
may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the
treatment process.
Design. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be
limited to, elements such as collecting site-specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant
watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics
calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of
the various components will result in an irrigation plan.
Design pressure. The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is
calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/618
accumulated from an emission device to the water source.
Double check valve. An assembly that is composed of two independently acting approved check valves,
including tightly closed resilient seated shut-off valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with
properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly.
Emission device. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water.
Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler
heads, and drip irrigation emitters.
Employed. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design,
installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person
is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service,
section 3212(d), based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in
performing employment-related tasks.
Head-to-head spacing. The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the
head.
Health hazard. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any
substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a
high probability of causing such effects.
Hydraulics. The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure
losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system.
Inspector. A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation
inspector who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water
district as an employee or as a contractor.
Installer. A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply
system or any water supply, who is licensed according to title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30
(relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation inspector. A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a
municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under title 30,
Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation plan. A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information and the scope
of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system.
Irrigation services. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting,
providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply.
Irrigation system. An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution
and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or
control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by
Texas Agricultural Code, section 251.002.
Irrigation technician. A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter,
repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a
private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed
under title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation zone. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material
type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/618
slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination), or for hydrological control.
Irrigator. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services
or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or
public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under title 30,
Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30.
Irrigator-in-charge. The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner,
including but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators
or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape
irrigation system.
Landscape irrigation. The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy
growth of plant material or turf.
License. An occupational license that is issued by the state commission on environmental quality under title 30,
Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30, as amended, to a person or individual, that authorizes the person or
individual to engage in an activity that is covered by said title.
Mainline. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone
valves.
Maintenance checklist. A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative
that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not
limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or
moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the
irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation
measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or
monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum
water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system
is installed.
Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the
irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes,
but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing
a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere.
Master valve. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of
water to the irrigation system mainline.
Matched precipitation rate. The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at
the same rate.
New installation. An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist.
Pass-through contract. A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt
business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system.
Potable water. Water that is suitable for human consumption.
Pressure vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and
an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known
as a pressure vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly.
Reclaimed water. Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial
use, such as landscape irrigation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/618
Records of landscape irrigation activities. The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies
of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a
landscape irrigation system.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. An assembly containing two independently acting
approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential
relief valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve.
Static water pressure. The pressure of water when it is not moving.
Supervision. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her
professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also, a
licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or, beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation
technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service
an irrigation system.
Water conservation. The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that
prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that
is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion.
Zone flow. A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone
valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has
stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure.
Zone valve. An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system.
Sec. 6.11.002 Enforcement; penalty
(a) The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article as may be required by
governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fails to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for civil relief as well as prosecution
for criminal violations. Any violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum in accordance
with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day that a provision of this article is violated shall constitute a separate
offense. An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in accordance with section
1.01.009 of this code for each offense.
(c) Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the
provisions of this article and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this article or to require specific
conduct that is necessary for compliance with this article; and
(2) Other available relief.
Sec. 6.11.003 Installer's license required; exemptions
(a) Any person who constructs or connects a residential or commercial irrigation system to the water supply
within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, commonly referred to as the ETJ, must hold a valid
license, as defined by title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30, and required by chapter 1903 of the Texas
Occupations Code, or as defined by chapter 365, title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code and required by
chapter 1301 of the Texas Occupations Code.
(b) A property owner is not required to be licensed, in accordance with Texas Occupations Code, title 12,
section 1903.002(c)(1), if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on premises owned or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/618
occupied by the person as such person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must
meet the standards contained in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 344, regarding spacing, water
pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology,
backflow prevention and isolation valves.
Sec. 6.11.004 Permit required; exemptions
(a) No person shall install an irrigation system on property within the city without first obtaining a permit
from the city. Prior to the issuance of such permit, a person must submit a plan in compliance with the
requirements of this article. Permits must be obtained prior to conducting the required work.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
(1) An irrigation system that is that an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by section
366.002, Health and Safety Code;
(2) An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by section 251.002,
Agriculture Code; or
(3) An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic
use.
Sec. 6.11.005 Backflow prevention methods and devices
(a) Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected to a backflow
prevention system/device approved by the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ). The backflow
prevention device must comply with the International Plumbing Code and/or the Uniform Plumbing Code and
must be certified by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE); or the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California; or the International Code
Council - Evaluation Service (ICC-ES); or the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials -
Research and Testing (IAPMO R&T); or any other certifying agency that has equivalent capabilities for both the
laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be
installed in accordance with the laboratory approval standards or, if the approval does not include specific
installation information, the manufacturer's current published recommendations.
(b) If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one of the following methods must be used to prevent
backflow:
(1) An air gap may be used if:
(A) There is an unobstructed physical separation; and
(B) The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the
fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one inch or twice the diameter of
the water supply outlet, whichever is greater.
(2) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if:
(A) The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that will
ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and
(B) Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief
valve.
(3) Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/618
(A) No backpressure condition will occur; and
(B) The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and the
highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from
the top of the sprinkler.
(4) Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if:
(A) No backpressure will be present;
(B) There are no shut-off valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker;
(C) The device is installed at a minimum of six inches above any downstream piping and the
highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from
the top of the sprinkler;
(D) There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker
for more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period; and
(E) A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each
irrigation control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve controls.
(c) Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon
installation and annually thereafter.
(d) If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies
may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation and test cocks are used for testing only.
(e) If a double check valve is installed below ground:
(1) Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested;
(2) Test cock plugs must be threaded, watertight, and made of nonferrous material;
(3) A Y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve;
(4) There must be a clearance between the bottom of the double check valve the 1 [sic] to allow
space for testing and repair (gravel is required below the double check valve); and
(5) There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double check
valve.
(f) If an existing irrigation system without a backflow prevention assembly requires major maintenance,
alteration, repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved,
properly installed backflow prevention method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is
performed.
(g) If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure
vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the
system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly.
(h) The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed backflow prevention
assembly tester prior to being placed in service and the test results provided to the local water purveyor and the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the backflow
prevention device.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/618
Sec. 6.11.006 Specific conditions and cross-connection control
(a) Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation
system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap.
(b) Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water
supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap.
(c) Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system
connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device.
(d) If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as
defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 285, then:
(1) All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage
facilities system as required for a private water line in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section
285.91(10), as amended;
(2) Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable
water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 344.50, as amended;
and
(3) Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the onsite
sewage facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow
complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would
prevent the on-site sewage facilities system from operating effectively.
Sec. 6.11.007 Water conservation
All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a
manner that will promote water conservation as defined in this article.
Sec. 6.11.008 Irrigation plan
(a) An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A
paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the
irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner
after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the
original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not:
(1) Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system;
(2) Violate any requirements of this article; and
(3) Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan.
(b) The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide
complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan.
(c) All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the
following information:
(1) The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/618
(2) All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered;
(3) A north arrow;
(4) A legend;
(5) The zone flow measurement for each zone;
(6) Location and type of each:
(A) Controller; and
(B) Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze);
(7) Location, type, and size of each:
(A) Water source, such as but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection;
(B) Backflow prevention device;
(C) Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads,
quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays;
(D) Valve, including but not limited to zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves;
(E) Pressure regulation component; and
(F) Main line and lateral piping;
(8) The scale used; and
(9) The design pressure.
Sec. 6.11.009 Design and installation requirements
(a) Performance limitations. No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component,
including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the
component.
(b) Spacing.
(1) The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published
radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the
manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure.
(2) New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices in landscapes that
are less than 48 inches not including the impervious surfaces in either length or width and which
contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-up
sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct
flow away from any adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a
hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or
stones set with mortar.
(3) Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in
cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement if the
runoff drains into a landscaped area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/618
(c) Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum
sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods
to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure
regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads.
(d) Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe
will not exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
(e) Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate
factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements.
(f) Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that
zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate.
(g) Spraying over impervious material. Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of
concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited
to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc.
(h) Master valve. A master valve shall be installed on the discharge side and inlet of the backflow prevention
device on all new installations.
(i) PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be
primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code
(section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (section 605).
(j) Rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems
must include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system
during periods of moisture or rainfall. Rain or moisture shut-off technology must be installed according to the
manufacturer's published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require
replacement of an existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt
operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall.
(k) Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's
published specifications for depth coverage of piping.
(1) If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping
must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select backfill between the top
of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet
this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six
inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the
irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address
any safety issues.
(2) If a utility, man-made structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle which makes the sixinch
depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of
two inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil.
(3) All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and
compacted to the original grade.
(l) Electrical wiring.
(1) Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical
component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters' Laboratories as acceptable for
burial underground.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/618
(2) Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized
according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
(3) Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by
the wire splice manufacturer.
(4) Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical
component of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six inches of select backfill.
(m) Other uses of water; connection of hose bib. Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is
deemed to be nonpotable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming
pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet
that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing
supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler
installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled
“nonpotable, not safe for drinking.” An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting
a hose bib to an irrigation system.
(n) Supervision of installation. Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation
technician shall be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator
is not on-site, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on-site to
supervise the installation of the irrigation system.
(o) Freeze sensor. All irrigation systems must have installed a freeze sensor within the system. The installation
of this device will help save water during changing climates.
Sec. 6.11.010 Duties of installer upon completion of installation
Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the
on-site installation shall be required to complete four items:
(1) A final inspection with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the
operation of the system;
(2) The maintenance checklist, on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the
signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the
checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the
maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation
system's owner's or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's
representative will be given the original maintenance checklist, and a duplicate copy of the
maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist
shall include but are not limited to:
(A) The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic;
(B) A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real
time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data,
monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors;
(C) A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components, that
require maintenance, and the recommended frequency for the service; and
(D) The statement, “This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all
applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/618
and determined that it has been installed according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly
adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time.”
(3) A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, and
telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller
installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be
affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be
printed with waterproof ink and include: [no text following this subsection]
(4) The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative.
Sec. 6.11.011 Maintenance, alteration, repair or servicing
(a) The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance,
alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is
not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation
service on the same irrigation system.
(b) All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system
must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill.
(c) Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance,
alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (section 316)
or the International Plumbing Code (section 605).
(d) When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the
water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed if an isolation valve is not
present.
Sec. 6.11.012 Advertisements by irrigators; display of license number and other information
(a) All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service
must display the irrigator's license number in the form of “LI #####” in a contrasting color of block letters at
least two inches high, on both sides of the vehicle.
(b) All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license
number in the form of “LI #####”. Any form of advertisement, including business cards and estimates, which
displays an entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the
licensed irrigator and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must
display the irrigator's license number.
(c) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a
legible sign and displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure
where irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation records are kept.
Sec. 6.11.013 Contracts for installation
(a) All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify
the irrigator's name, license number, business address, and current business telephone numbers, the date that
each party signed the agreement, and the total agreed price, and must contain the statement, “Irrigation in Texas
is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin,
Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.” All contracts must include the irrigator's seal,
signature, and date.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/618
(b) All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation
system(s) must include the irrigator's name, license number, business address, and current business telephone
number(s), and the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ) (MC-178), P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is:
www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, section 344.30 (relating to license required) shall hold an irrigator license issued under title
30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations) unless the
contract is a pass-through contract as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 344.1(36) (relating
to definitions). If a pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion of the contract
can only be performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass-through contract,
the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or through contract [sic], the
irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a copy of
the warranty and all other documents required under this article. A pass-through contract must identify by name
and license number the irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the
irrigator for irrigation system warranty work.
(d) The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid.
Sec. 6.11.014 Duties of city irrigation inspectors
A licensed irrigation inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article and shall be responsible for:
(1) Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the
irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed;
(2) Inspecting the irrigation system;
(3) Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this article;
(4) Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed and tested, and test
results provided to the city;
(5) Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration,
repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services;
(6) Maintaining records according to this article; and
(7) Issuing the appropriate notice of violation, stop work orders or citations.
Sec. 6.11.015 Fees
Fees for compliance with the provisions of this article shall be established by resolution of the city council.
(Ordinance 2008-12-49 adopted 12/8/08)
ARTICLE 6.12 SINGLE-FAMILY, DUPLEX AND SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY
REGULATIONS
Sec. 6.12.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/618
Bedroom. A room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes and not as a kitchen, bathroom, living room,
closet, hallway, utility space, entryway, garage, patio, or breezeway.
Building. Any structure having a roof that is built, maintained, or intended for use for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, or property of any kind.
Building line. Any line parallel or approximately parallel to a lot line and beyond which no buildings may be
erected.
Building official. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of
this article.
Certificate of occupancy. An official certificate issued by the city through the chief building official which
indicates conformance for legal use of the premises for which it is used.
Duplex. One dwelling divided into two units on one property.
Dwelling. Any building providing complete independent living facilities for one family to include permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, and cooking.
Family. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit in which not more than two
individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption. Foster children shall be considered as a related
member of the family.
Landlord. Any owner, resident, or nonresident, who leases, barters, or rents his single family residence to another.
Nonresident owner. Any person who does not live, stay, or dwell in a single-family home in which he/she owns.
Occupancy. The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants.
Owner. A person claiming, or who is vested in the ownership, dominion or title of real property.
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structure thereon and furthermore including a dwelling unit,
appurtenances thereto, grounds and facilities held out for the use of tenants generally and any other area or
facility whose use is promised to the tenant.
Short-term rental. Short-term rental (STR) is defined as the rental of any residence or residential structure, or a
portion of a residence or residential structure for a period of less than thirty (30) days. The term does not include:
(1) a bed and breakfast; or (2) a hotel or residence/hotel.
Single-family residence. A detached building containing not more than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by
open space on that lot.
Tenant. Any person who occupies a dwelling unit for dwelling purposes with the landlords consent.
Sec. 6.12.002 Purpose
The city recognizes a need for an organized inspection program of residential rental properties within the city to
meet city and state life safety, health, fire, and development codes and to provide a more efficient system for
compelling both absentee and local landlords to correct violations and to maintain, in proper condition. The city
recognizes that the most efficient system to provide registrations and rental inspections is the creation of a
program requiring registration and issuance of a certificate of occupancy for all single-family, duplex and shortterm
rental properties within the city so that rental properties can be identified and orderly inspections can be
made.
Sec. 6.12.003 Building official; power and duties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/618
(a) The building official is hereby designated as the administrator of this article.
(b) In addition to the powers and duties otherwise prescribed for the building official or his designated
representative, as administrator of this article, he is required to:
(1) Administer and enforce all provisions of this article. Keep records of all licenses issued.
(2) Adopt rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, with respect to
the form and content of application for registration, the investigation of applicants, and other matters
incidental or appropriate to his powers and duties as may be necessary for the proper administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(3) Conduct on his/her initiative, periodic inspections of residential rental properties throughout the
city, concerning their compliance with this article.
Sec. 6.12.004 Registration requirements
No person shall hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied or rent or let to any another person for any occupancy
any residential rental property, including but not limited to a short-term rental property within the city for which
an annual registration has not been completed and filed with the division of building inspections.
Sec. 6.12.005 Change in tenancy
When a rental residence is vacated by the tenant, the owner must apply for and receive a certificate of occupancy
from the building official prior to the property being occupied by a new tenant. The building official or his
designated representative will inspect the property and premises for compliance with this code, the International
Property Maintenance Code, International Building Codes and other applicable ordinances of the city. If
deficiencies are found the building official may prohibit occupancy of the residence and premises until such time
as the owner takes action needed to bring the residence and premises into compliance. The inspection required
by this section shall apply to all dwelling units and premises prior to its original occupancy as a rental property.
Sec. 6.12.006 Tenant record list
Short-term rental property owners are required to keep a complete record of each and every tenant and occupant
of each of their short-term rental properties located within the city limits. Such records shall be maintained for a
period of no less than eighteen (18) months from the date of rental or occupancy and shall be made available to
the city immediately upon request.
Sec. 6.12.007 Inspection required
(a) All single-family and duplex rental properties that rent to permanent residents shall be inspected upon any
change of tenancy according to the rental property checklist.
(b) All short-term rental properties shall be inspected every six (6) months to ensure the property meets
applicable city and state life safety, health and fire codes for the health and welfare of both the property owners
and guests.
(c) A reinspection will not be necessary if the owner (or property manager) submits sufficient proof to the city
from which the city is able to determine that all noted violations have been appropriately repaired. Sufficient
proof shall include an affidavit stating that the repairs have been completed, a copy of the receipt for materials
used in the repair or a receipt for the work done to make the repair, and photographs of the repair(s). No
certificate shall be issued, and no release of utilities shall be given if, as a result of an inspection, it is determined
that the premises does not comply with the minimum housing standards contained in this code.
Sec. 6.12.008 Certificate issued
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/618
When the building official determines that a rental property and premises are in compliance with the provisions
of this and other applicable codes, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
Sec. 6.12.009 Rental property registration fee
The annual fees and/or inspection fees for activities and services performed by the building inspection division
in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in the fee schedule as established by
resolution of the city shall be charged for compliance with this article.
Sec. 6.12.010 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Every day a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2018-11-45 adopted 11/12/18)
CHAPTER 8
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 8.02 ALARM SYSTEMS†
Sec. 8.02.001 Purpose and intent
(a) The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to alarm systems,
alarm businesses, and alarm users as defined in this article.
(b) Alarm permitting is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or
implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a
notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an
alarm permit, the alarm permit holder acknowledges that police department response may be influenced by
factors such as the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency
conditions, staffing levels and prior response history.
Sec. 8.02.002 Administration and funding
(a) Responsibility for administration of this article is vested with the city manager or his designee.
(b) The city manager may designate an alarm administrator to carry out the duties and functions described in
this article.
(c) Monies generated by false alarm service fees and registration fees assessed pursuant to this article shall be
dedicated for use for administration of the alarm program and for recovery of general police services lost to false
alarm response.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/618
(d) The city manager or designee may conduct an annual evaluation and analysis of the effectiveness of this
article and identify and implement system improvements as warranted.
Sec. 8.02.003 Disclaimer
(a) The permit requirements and regulations set forth in this article in no way constitute an endorsement of any
business or of the concept of alarm systems as a positive aid to the police department, and do not obligate city
emergency personnel to respond in any manner to any notification as a result of a summons based on an alarm
system.
(b) The fact of emergency personnel response(s) to one or more alarm system notifications in no way is to be
construed as the policy of the city or the intent of this article. The establishment of such policy by this article is
expressly denied.
(Ordinance 2007-02-05 adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 8.02.004 Definitions
Alarm administrator. The police chief to issue, renew, or revoke or otherwise administer, control and review
false alarms and the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 2014-10-25 adopted 10/20/14)
Alarm installation company. A person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in an alarm site. This definition shall also include
individuals or firms that install and service the alarm systems that will be used in their private or proprietary
facilities. This does not include persons doing installation or repair work where such work is performed without
compensation of any kind (i.e., “do-it-yourselfers”).
Alarm notification. A communication intended to summon emergency personnel, which is designed either to be
initiated purposely or by the person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of
unauthorized intrusion.
Alarm permit holder. A person who has received an alarm system permit as required by this article.
Alarm response manager (ARM). A person designated by an alarm installation company to handle alarm issues
for the company and act as the primary point of contact for the jurisdiction's alarm administrator.
Alarm site. A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each unit, if served by a
separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site. If an alarm
site includes a multi-unit dwelling where the owner of such dwelling provides or makes available an alarm
system for his tenants, then, for purposes of the issuance of a permit, each tenant shall obtain a separate alarm
permit for their respective unit.
Alarm system. A device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems
interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emits or transmits
a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon law
enforcement response, including local alarm systems. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a
vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site. [Alarm
system does not include:]
(1) Any device or system designed solely to detect or give notice of fire, smoke, or water flow;
(2) An alarm system designed solely to alert the occupants of a building or residence which will
not emit a signal either audible or visible from outside the building or residence.
Alarm system user. A person who owns or controls the premises upon which an alarm system is located.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/618
ANSI/SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. The ANSI (American National Standard Institute) approved Security
Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details
recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming
devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters'
Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: “Design evaluated
in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction.”
Emergency personnel. Police personnel or fire personnel of the city.
False alarm notification. The activation of an alarm system that results in notification to city emergency
personnel and response by emergency personnel at a time when the responding personnel find no evidence of
unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, or any other violation that
the alarm system was intended to report.
Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a
structure.
Monitoring. The process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an
alarm dispatch request to the municipality for the purpose of summoning law enforcement to the alarm site.
Monitoring company. A person in the business of providing monitoring services.
One-plus duress alarm. The manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering at an arming station a code
that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one-plus duress code =
1235).
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity.
Police department. The police department of the city.
Protective/reactive alarm system. An alarm system that is wired or connected to produce a temporary disability
or sensory deprivation through use of chemical, electrical or sonic defense, or by any other means, including use
of vision obscuring/disabling devices.
Robbery alarm (also duress alarm or hold-up alarm). An alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic
activation of a device or any system, device, or mechanism on or near the premises intended to signal that a
robbery or other crime is in progress, and that one or more persons are in need of immediate police assistance in
order to avoid injury, serious bodily harm or death at the hands of the perpetrator of the robbery or other crime.
Special trunkline. A telephone line leading into the communications center of the police or fire department that
is for the primary purpose of receiving alarm notifications.
Verify. An attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm permit
holder by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to
determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a police dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an
unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this article, telephone verification shall require as a
minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who
can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting an officer
dispatch. Names and numbers or [of] those contacted or attempted to contact, must be provided when requested.
Sec. 8.02.005 Violations; penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate an alarm system during the period in which an alarm permit is under
revocation. Each day of such operation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2007-02-05 adopted 2/26/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/618
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an alarm system without a permit or in violation of a
provision of this article. Each day or operation of an alarm system or violation of this article shall be separate
offenses or violations subject to citation and fine. (Ordinance 2014-10-25 adopted 10/20/14)
(c) Any person in violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section
1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 2007-02-05 adopted 2/26/07)
(d) A violation of any provision of this article shall be a class C misdemeanor punishable provided in this
code. (Ordinance 2014-10-25 adopted 10/20/14)
Sec. 8.02.006 Permit required; permit required for police response; application; issuance
(a) Permit required. No person shall operate or maintain an alarm system without first obtaining a permit for
each alarm site. This requirement is applicable to the person in control of the property which the alarm system is
designed to protect.
(b) Response. A valid alarm permit issued by the chief of police is required for anyone to operate or causes to
operate an alarm system. Subject to the limitation in section 8.02.002, the police department shall respond to any
alarm notification from an alarm site.
(Ordinance 2013-10-32, sec. 1, adopted 10/28/13)
(c) Application. Upon receipt of a completed application form, the chief shall issue an alarm permit to the
applicant unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under section 8.02.018 or has had an alarm
permit for the alarm site revoked, and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected.
(d) Each permit application must contain the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and be
responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees
assessed under this article;
(2) The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated;
(3) Classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial;
(4) Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed;
(5) The name of one other person to respond to an alarm in the event the permit holder is
unavailable;
(6) Any other information required by the alarm administrator which is necessary for the
enforcement of this article;
(7) Name, address and telephone number of the alarm monitoring company, if any;
(8) Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site such as dogs or other animals or
any type of alarm system that is rigged to produce a temporary disability or sensory deprivation
through use of chemical, electrical or sonic defense, or by other means, including use of vision
obscuring/disabling devices.
(e) False statements. Any false statement of a material matter made by the applicant for the purpose of
obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit and/or for revocation of a permit
already issued.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/618
(f) Transfer; changes in information. An alarm permit is nontransferable to any other person or entity. A
permit holder shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters information listed on the permit
application within five (5) days of the occurrence of the change.
(g) Fees. All fees for an alarm permit or an alarm permit renewal shall be established by resolution of the city
council and must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed.
Sec. 8.02.007 Duration and renewal of permit
A permit is valid, unless revoked, from the date of issuance for one year, upon receipt of the annual fee. A permit
will be automatically renewed for a one-year period, unless revoked, upon receipt of the annual fee, unless
cancelled by the permit holder.
Sec. 8.02.008 Operation and maintenance
(a) A permit holder or alarm system user shall:
(1) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of
the alarm system;
(2) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications;
(3) Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time when notified
by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, [or] to provide access to the
premises. A permit holder may present extenuating circumstances regarding the reasonableness of
his/her response time at any administrative hearing under this article;
(4) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the
alarm system was intended to report.
(b) A person in control of an alarm system shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted
so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than ten (10) minutes after being activated.
(c) All alarm permit holders shall agree with their alarm installation company and/or monitoring company to
go through an “acclimation period” for the first seven (7) days after installation of an alarm system during which
time the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company will have no obligation to and will not respond
to any alarm signal from the alarm site and will not make an alarm dispatch request to the police department,
even if the alarm signal is the result of an actual alarm event.
Sec. 8.02.009 Manual reset
A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system which has an automatic resetting device, and which
system causes three (3) or more alarms within a twenty-four-hour period, shall manually reset the system.
Sec. 8.02.010 Use of relaying intermediary
A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall not allow alarm signals to be reported through a
relaying intermediary that does not comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations
promulgated by the city, or is not licensed by the state private security bureau.
Sec. 8.02.011 Duties of persons relaying alarm notifications
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall:
(1) Make notification by a human operator only after attempting to call the permit holder or person
in control of premises a minimum of two times, to two different numbers, prior to reporting the alarm
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/618
response to the police department.
(2) Report alarms only on special trunk lines designated by the alarm administrator.
(3) Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form designated by the alarm
administrator.
(4) Notify the police department's communication center of any alarm site that it knows, or
reasonably should know, is fitted with a protective/reactive device. A responsible party for the alarm
site should be contacted and confirmed that he/she will respond to the alarm site to disarm the device.
In all cases where a protective/reactive device is present at an alarm site, the police dispatch request
shall include a warning for officers not to enter the alarm site until the responsible party is present
and has disarmed the device.
Sec. 8.02.012 Records of alarm businesses
(a) A person engaged in the business of selling, leasing, installing, or otherwise distributing alarm systems
shall maintain records at its place of business which will show the names and addresses of persons to whom an
alarm system was sold, leased, installed, or otherwise distributed, as well as the date of such transactions.
(b) Said alarm businesses or persons shall make said records available during regular business hours to the
alarm administrator or his designee for inspection. The express purpose of this section is to assure that alarm
system users are in compliance with this article, and not to regulate in any manner any person engaged in the
alarm business.
Sec. 8.02.013 Duties of installers and monitoring companies
(a) On the installation or activation of an alarm system, an alarm systems company shall distribute to the
occupant of the alarm system city information summarizing:
(1) The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the potential for penalties and revocation
or suspension of a permit;
(2) How to prevent false alarms; and
(3) How to operate the alarm system.
(b) An alarm systems company shall notify the city in which the alarm system is located of an installation or
activation of an alarm system not later than the 30th day after the date of the installation or activation. The alarm
systems company shall provide to the city:
(1) The alarm systems company name;
(2) The alarm systems company license number;
(3) The name of the occupant of the alarm system location;
(4) The address of the alarm system location; and
(5) The date of installation or activation.
(c) An alarm installation company and/or monitoring company that purchases alarm system accounts from
another person shall notify the alarm administrator of such purchase and provide a complete list of the acquired
customers, in a format the alarm company is capable of producing, that includes the following:
(1) Permit number (where applicable).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/618
(2) Customer name.
(3) Alarm site address.
(4) Acquisition date.
(5) Alarm company license number.
The duties imposed by this section on an alarm installation company do not apply to the installation or activation
of a personal emergency response system, as defined under Texas Occupation Code, section 1702.331.
(d) Upon the effective date of this article, alarm installation companies shall not program alarm systems so
that they are capable of sending one-plus duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report one-plus
duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one-plus duress alarms prior to enactment of this
article. However, upon the effective date of this article, when a takeover or conversion occurs, an alarm
installation company must remove the one-plus duress alarm capability from such alarm systems.
(e) Upon the effective date of this article, alarm installation companies shall not install a device to activate a
holdup alarm, which is a single action, non-recessed button.
(f) An alarm installation company may not install any alarm system on or after January 1, 2007, that includes a
detection device control panel unless the control panel meets or exceeds ANSI/SIA CP-01 Control Panel
Standard, Features for False Alarm Reduction.
(g) An alarm installation or monitoring company shall not use automatic voice dialers.
(h) The monitoring company shall not make an alarm dispatch request of the police department in response to
a burglar alarm signal, excluding robbery, panic, duress and holdup signals, during the first seven (7) days
following an alarm system installation. The alarm administrator may grant an alarm user's request for an
exemption from this waiting period based upon a determination that special circumstances substantiate the need
for the exemption.
Sec. 8.02.014 Automatic dialing devices prohibited
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic dialing device which, when activated, uses a
telephone device or attachment to automatically select a telephone line leading into the police department of the
city and then transmit any prerecorded message or signal.
Sec. 8.02.015 Operating instructions to be maintained at alarm site
A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of
written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combinations, or passwords shall not be
included in these instructions.
Sec. 8.02.016 Dispatch records
(a) Emergency personnel responding to a dispatch resulting from an alarm system notification shall record
such information as necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited
to, the following information:
(1) Identification of the permit holder;
(2) Identification of the alarm site;
(3) Time of notification, and time dispatched, arrived, and cleared;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/618
(4) Time of day, date;
(5) Weather conditions;
(6) Name of the permit holder's representative on the premises, if any.
(b) Responding personnel shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the notification was caused by a false
alarm.
Sec. 8.02.017 System performance reviews
If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in the manner that ensures
proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm
permit holder and the individual or association responsible for maintenance of the alarm system to review
circumstances of each false alarm. Any such conference will be held only after a ten-day notice on mailing to the
permit holder, such notice to be effective on mailing to the permit holder at the address listed on the application.
Sec. 8.02.018 Service fees for false alarms
An alarm permit holder shall be subject to fees for services, depending on the number of false alarms within the
preceding 12-month period, as established by resolution of the city council.
Sec. 8.02.019 Grounds for revocation of permit
The alarm administrator may revoke an alarm permit if he determines that:
(1) There is any violation of this article;
(2) There is a false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit;
(3) An alarm system has generated in excess of eight (8) false alarms during any twelve (12) month
period;
(4) The permit holder has failed to make payment of any service fee, permit fee, late fee or
revocation hearing fee assessed under this article within ninety (90) days of the assessment;
(5) Failure to attend the conference provided for in section 8.02.017.
(Ordinance 2007-02-05 adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 8.02.020 Appeal of action on permit or assessment of fine
(a) If the alarm administrator denies the issuance, renewal, revocation or a reinstatement of an alarm permit,
the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal to the
affected applicant or the alarm permit holder and the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company.
(b) The alarm permit holder, alarm installation company or monitoring company may appeal the alarm
administrators decision under this section by setting forth in writing the reason for appeal within fifteen (15)
business days after receipt of the fine or notice of revocation. The alarm user or the alarm installation company
or monitoring company may file the [to] appeal the decision of the alarm administrator to the municipal court
judge as [follows]:
(1) The applicant, alarm permit holder, alarm installation company or monitoring company may
file a written request for a review by paying an appeal fee as established by resolution of the city
council and setting forth the reasons for the appeal within twenty (20) business days after the date of
notification of the decision from the alarm administrator. Appeal fees will be returned to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/618
appealing alarm permit holder, alarm installation company or monitoring company if the appeal is
upheld.
(2) The municipal court judge shall conduct a hearing within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the
request and consider the evidence by any interested person(s). The city shall make its decision on the
basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing.
(c) Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator revoking an alarm permit
[until the] court has completed its review. If a request for appeal is not made within the twenty (20) business day
period, the action of the alarm administrator is final.
(d) The alarm administrator may adjust the count of false alarms based on:
(1) Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act of God;
(2) Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of the telephone company;
(3) Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage lasting longer than four (4) hours;
(4) Evidence that the alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm;
(5) Evidence that the police department response was not completed in a timely fashion; and/or
(6) In determining the number of false alarms, multiple alarms occurring in any twenty-four (24)
hour period shall be counted as one false alarm, to allow the alarm user time to take corrective action,
unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user.
(e) In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a
corporation, partnership, or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent
acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership, or other association, within the scope of this employment.
(f) An appeal hearing fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid before a permit appeals
hearing is perfected or scheduled. The fee will be returned if the appeal hearing is upheld.
(Ordinance 2014-10-25 adopted 10/20/14)
Sec. 8.02.021 Forfeiture of fees upon revocation of permit
When the revocation of a permit is final, all permit fees shall be forfeited.
Sec. 8.02.022 Reinstatement of permit after revocation
(a) Should an alarm system user or his agent, after final permit revocation, desire to reapply for a permit, he
shall be required to submit a new permit application, including the required permit fees, and a reinstatement fee
as established by resolution of the city council.
(b) The applicant shall also submit satisfactory proof of compliance with this article. In addition, the alarm
administrator may require one or more of the following as a condition to reinstatement:
(1) Proof that an employee of the alarm installation company or monitoring company caused the
false alarm;
(2) Upgrade the alarm control panel to meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01;
(3) A written statement from an independent inspector designated by the alarm administrator or
designee that the alarm system has been inspected and is in good working order;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/618
(4) Confirmation that all motion detectors are “dual technology” type;
(5) Confirmation that the alarm system requires two independent zones to trigger before
transmitting an alarm signal to the monitoring company;
(6) Confirmation that the alarm system requires two independent detectors to trigger before
transmitting an alarm signal to the monitoring company;
(7) Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the
need for a officer is confirmed by a listen-in device;
(8) Certification that the monitoring company will not request an alarm dispatch unless the need
for a officer is confirmed by a camera device;
(9) Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the
need for an officer is confirmed by a person at the alarm site; or
(10) The alarm user successfully completes an on-line alarm awareness class and test.
Sec. 8.02.023 Confidentiality of information
All information provided by a permit holder pursuant to this article shall be confidential to the extent possible
under the Texas Public Information Act, section 552.001 et seq., Texas Government Code, and shall be utilized
solely by the police department; provided that said information shall be available to the permit holder.
Sec. 8.02.024 Applicability to government bodies
The United States government, the state, or any county government or school district situated within the
corporate city limits shall comply with the requirements of this article; provided, however, that they shall be
exempt from the payment of fees.
(Ordinance 2007-02-05 adopted 2/26/07)
ARTICLE 8.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 8.03.001 Title
This article is hereby adopted and shall be known as the alcoholic beverage ordinance of the city. (2002 Code,
sec. 4.1501)
Sec. 8.03.002 Scope
The provisions of this article apply to any person, firm, corporation, business or entity currently or proposing to
sell alcoholic beverages within the city or who owns, possesses, is in custody of or exercises control of property
wherein alcoholic beverages are sold within the city. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1502)
Sec. 8.03.003 Definitions
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms, as used in this article, shall be construed according to
the definitions given below:
Alcoholic liquor. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent of
alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
Fraternal or veterans club. A corporation as defined under section 32.11 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code,
not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale and consumption of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/618
alcoholic liquors, which conforms to the definition of a club as provided by the statute.
Hotel. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a
place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to
travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty-five (25) or more rooms are
used for the sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in
connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
Intoxicated person. Any person who is presently impaired, physically, mentally or emotionally, as a result of the
presence of alcohol in the person's body.
Private club. An establishment such as a country club which dispenses alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption, provides regular food service and holds a permit under chapter 32 of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code.
Restaurant. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where
meals are served, and where meals actually are served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations,
such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for
its guests. Provided further that no restaurant licensed as such shall sell alcoholic liquor except with meals.
Retail sale. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1503)
Sec. 8.03.004 Local permit required
(a) No person, corporation, or association shall sell alcoholic beverages within the city without first having
applied for and been granted a valid permit issued by the city to sell alcoholic beverages. Upon the exhibition of
a license or permit duly issued by the state to the applicant, the city secretary shall, in the name of the city, issue
and deliver to the applicant a permit to engage in the business in the city of the character described in and
authorized by the license or permit from the state held by the applicant. The license or permit so issued in the
name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the license or
permit from the state and shall remain in force only so long as the license or permit form the state remains in
force.
(b) An applicant for the permit under this section shall pay a fee at the time of the submission of the
application. The fee [shall be] established by resolution of the city council and shall not exceed one-half of the
annualized state fee for each permit issued for premises located within the city.
(Ordinance 2010-11-26 adopted 11/8/10)
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee
authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
Sec. 8.03.005 Location restrictions
No private club or retail sale establishment which serves and/or sells alcoholic beverages, whether for onpremises
or off-premises consumption, shall be licensed to operate within 300 feet from a church, public or
private school, or public hospital. For a church or public hospital, the 300 feet shall be measured along the
property lines of the street fronts and from the front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections.
For public or private schools, the measurement of distance shall be in a direct line from the property line of the
public or private school to the property line of the private club and in a direct line across intersections. Provided
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/618
that the limitations of this section shall not apply to a private club which is in operation at the time of the passage
of this article. (Ordinance 2008-08-31 adopted 8/25/08)
Charter reference–Sale of liquor or beer in residential areas, sec. 2.18.
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
Sec. 8.03.006 Possession on privately owned parking lots
(a) Findings; purpose. The city council hereby finds that:
(1) A significant problem exists with persons, particularly minors, who possess and consume
alcoholic beverages on privately owned parking lots open to the public.
(2) Said persons create a public safety hazard by the consumption of alcoholic beverages and the
subsequent driving of motor vehicles, especially when the possession and consumption of alcohol on
private lots mainly occurs adjacent to major traffic thoroughfares of the city. The mayor and city
council find and declare that the aforementioned problem is of such substantial and significant
proportions that it threatens the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens so as to require
the immediate passage of an ordinance prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages in privately
owned parking lots open to public traffic.
(3) The city is authorized to enact this article pursuant to its police power and its home rule power.
The purpose of the following regulations is to help control the problems mentioned above.
(b) Prohibition.
(1) No person shall possess alcoholic liquor upon or within any off-street parking lot or parking
garage, except in its original unopened container with the seal unbroken.
(2) The term “alcoholic liquor” shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 8.03.003. The term
“off-street parking lot” and the term “parking garage” shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the
development code of the city, as amended.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1504)
Sec. 8.03.007 Consumption in street or other public place
(a) Prohibition. No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor while in or upon public streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parking lots or other public ways.
(b) Open containers. No person shall be in the possession of any glass, can or open container containing
alcoholic liquor on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or any other public way.
(c) Duties of sellers. No person, firm or corporation licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, or the employees or
agents of such person, firm or corporation, shall permit any person to remove from such premises any alcoholic
liquor in any open container.
(d) Open containers in motor vehicles. No person shall have in his or her possession an open container
containing alcoholic liquor within or on a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a
public street or public parking lot in the city, or while such vehicle is in motion.
(e) Sign required. All premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall post a notice at each exit stating
that “NO BEER, LIQUOR OR WINE MAY BE CARRIED IN AN OPEN CONTAINER OUT OF THIS
BUILDING.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/618
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1505)
Sec. 8.03.008 Beer gardens in parks or other public grounds
(a) Authorized. The governing body of the city has deemed it advisable to allow and license limited public
sale at retail and consumption on the sale premises of cereal malt beverages in specific areas of the public parks
of the city, and during community-wide celebrations on certain other public grounds. Such sale shall be by
responsible persons otherwise duly licensed under the city code and shall be allowed for limited periods of time
as hereinafter specifically provided.
(b) License created. There is hereby created a license to be denominated a class A beer garden license. A
person to whom the city has issued a current valid beer garden license will hereinafter be referred to as a class A
beer garden licensee.
(c) Designation of area. A class A beer garden license shall designate specifically an area in a city park, or,
alternatively, other public grounds in the central business district in the city, which area shall be used for the
purposes of the license and which area will hereinafter be referred to as a beer garden.
(d) Use of license; duties and qualifications of licensee. No cereal malt beverage may be sold at retail or
consumed in any city park of the city, or on any other public grounds of the city, whether in the central business
district or otherwise, except that a class A beer garden license may use the beer garden designated on the beer
garden license for purposes of retail sale and consumption by adult consumers of cereal malt beverages on the
premises of the beer garden, and further provided that:
(1) Such sale and consumption shall be limited to the designated beer garden.
(2) The licensee must comply with all applicable laws and ordinances.
(3) The licensee must have all of the qualifications set out in city ordinances and state statutes for a
liquor dealer's license.
(4) The licensee must pay a license fee under this section, which shall be determined by a
resolution of the city council.
(5) The licensee must hold a current valid license from the city for the sale of alcoholic liquor or
beer at retail for consumption on the premises.
(e) Maximum area; boundaries. The beer garden shall not exceed one thousand square feet in area, shall be
contiguous and shall have its boundaries clearly marked.
(f) Issuance of license restricted. No beer garden license shall be issued for premises other than in a city park
of the city, except in the city's central business district. No beer garden license shall be issued for public grounds
in the central business district of the city except during community-wide public celebrations or holidays. For
purposes of this article, “central business district” is defined as the Historic Town Square.
(g) Duration of license; number of licenses; transfer. The duration of a beer garden license shall not exceed
two days. No person shall be issued more than three beer garden licenses during any calendar year. No beer
garden license shall be transferred by the beer garden licensee to whom it was originally issued.
(h) Compliance with other regulations. Each class A beer garden, while in operation, shall comply with all of
the requirements of the ordinance relating to dealers in alcoholic liquor, to wit, provided that no additional
permit shall be required and no additional fee shall be required.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1506)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/618
ARTICLE 8.04 BINGO GAMES*
Sec. 8.04.001 Regulation
(a) Compliance with state law. Bingo games in the city shall be conducted in accordance with the Bingo
Enabling Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 2001.
(b) Zoning regulations. No bingo games which require state licensing may be played as a primary or accessory
use on any property except in areas zoned for bingo parlors.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.801)
Sec. 8.04.002 Gross receipts tax
(a) Pursuant to the Bingo Enabling Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 2001, a gross receipts tax equal
to one (1) percent of gross receipts is hereby imposed upon all bingo games in the city requiring state licensing.
(b) The state comptroller of public accounts is hereby authorized to collect the gross receipts tax on behalf of
the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.802)
ARTICLE 8.05 COIN-OPERATED MACHINES*
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
Coin-operated machine. Any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin, metal slug, token or check,
including a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine.
Commissioner. The consumer credit commissioner.
Financial interest. Includes a legal or equitable interest, including the ownership of shares or bonds of a
corporation.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.201)
Game of chance.
(1) Any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance that for a consideration affords
the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or
partially by chance, even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically
paid by the contrivance. This definition includes devices which award both cash and noncash items.
This definition shall not include any game, device, or product issued or approved by the Texas
Lottery Commission.
(2) This definition also includes, but is not limited to: gambling device versions of bingo, keno,
blackjack, eight-liners, slot machines, roulette, video poker, or similar electronic, electromechanical,
or mechanical games, or facsimiles thereof, that operate by chance or partially so, that as a result of
the play or operation of the game award credits, cash, certificates, or tickets, and that record the
number of free games or credits so awarded and the cancellation or removal of the free games or
credits.
(Ordinance 2016-10-28 adopted 10/10/16)
Music coin-operated machine. Any kind of coin-operated machine, including a phonograph, piano or
graphophone, that:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/618
(1) Dispenses music or is used to dispense music;
(2) Is operated by inserting a coin, metal slug, token or check; and
(3) Is not an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child.
Operator. A person who exhibits or displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed, a coin-operated machine in
this state in a place of business that is not owned by the person.
Owner. A person who owns a coin-operated machine in this state.
Person. Includes a individual, association, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation or organization, or a
manager, agent, servant or employee of an individual, association, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation or
organization.
Service coin-operated machine. Any kind of machine or device, including a pay toilet or telephone, that
dispenses only a service. The term does not include a machine or device that dispenses merchandise, music, skill
or pleasure.
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. Any kind of coin-operated machine that dispenses or is used or is
capable of being used to dispense or afford amusement, skill or pleasure or is operated for any purpose other
than for dispensing only merchandise, music or service. The term:
(1) Includes a marble machine, marble table machine, marble shooting machine, miniature
racetrack machine, miniature football machine, miniature golf machine, miniature bowling machine,
billiard or pool game, or machine or device that dispenses merchandise or commodities or plays
music in connection with or in addition to dispensing skill or pleasure; and
(2) Does not include an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.201)
Sec. 8.05.002 Offenses; penalty
(a) A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Exhibits, displays, or offers for playing any game of chance;
(2) Exhibits or displays a coin-operated machine in this city for which outstanding tax is due or
which does not have a city tax seal properly affixed;
(3) Falsifies, fails to maintain or refuses or fails to make available to the city manager and/or an
authorized representative of the city manager, on request, records of coin-operated machines that the
person is required to maintain;
(4) Uses an artful device or deceptive practice in this city to conceal a violation of this article;
(5) Misleads the city manager and/or an authorized representative of the city manager in
connection with the enforcement of this article;
(6) Breaks a seal attached by the city manager and/or an authorized representative of the city
manager without the city manager's approval;
(7) Exhibits or displays a coin-operated machine that has a broken seal without the city manager's
and/or an authorized representative of the city manager's approval;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/618
(8) Removes a coin-operated machine from the location where the city manager and/or an
authorized representative of the city manager affixed a seal to the machine; or
(9) Violates this article or a rule adopted under this article.
(b) An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 2016-10-28 adopted 10/10/16)
Sec. 8.05.003 Occupation tax levied; exemptions
(a) Every owner or operator who owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or
displayed in this city any coin-operated machine shall pay and there is hereby levied on each coin-operated
machine an annual occupation tax in the amount established by the city council.
(b) Service coin-operated machines are expressly exempt from the tax levied herein.
(c) The tax levied by this section shall be paid to the tax assessor/collector of the city and a receipt issued
therefor showing evidence of payment for each such machine, and [he] shall affix the appropriate seal
evidencing such payment to each machine.
(d) A corporation or association owning, leasing or renting a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine
is exempt from these provisions if:
(1) The corporation or association is organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable,
educational or benevolent purposes;
(2) The corporation's or association's net earnings do not inure to the benefit of a private
shareholder or individual; and
(3) The corporation or association owns, leases or rents the coin-operated machine:
(A) For the corporation's or association's exclusive use; and
(B) To further a purpose of the corporation or association.
(e) A tax may not be assessed against a corporation or an association exempt under this section if assessment
of the tax is prohibited by other law.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.202)
State law reference–Taxation of coin-operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2153.451.
Sec. 8.05.004 Location restrictions
For zoning purposes, the exhibition of a music and skill or pleasure coin-operated machine is indistinguishable
from the principal use to which the property where the machine is exhibited is devoted. The exhibition of a coinoperated
amusement machine which is subject to the tax levied herein shall be prohibited within three hundred
(300) feet of a church, school or hospital. (2002 Code, sec. 4.203)
Sec. 8.05.005 Sealing of machines on which tax is not paid; release fee
(a) The city may seal a coin-operated machine if the tax imposed is not paid.
(b) A fee as established by the city council shall be charged for the release of a sealed coin-operated machine.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/618
(2002 Code, sec. 4.204)
Sec. 8.05.006 Right of entry
Any peace officer, code enforcement official or building official, may freely enter upon the licensed business
premises during normal business hours when open for public access or by lawful warrant for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with this article. (Ordinance 2016-10-28 adopted 10/10/16)
ARTICLE 8.06 POOL HALLS
Sec. 8.06.001 Prohibited
The establishment, operation or maintenance of a commercial pool hall within the city limits is hereby
prohibited. (2002 Code, sec. 4.301)
Sec. 8.06.002 Definition
Commercial pool hall is meant to and does include any commercial establishment wherein one (1) or more pool
tables are operated or displayed for operation by the public or any members thereof, whether for hire or not, but
such term is not meant to and does not include the operation or use of a pool table in a private home or private
club not open to members of the public generally, or by any beneficent, fraternal, religious, educational,
eleemosynary or philanthropic institution or organization which shall operate or use such pool table or tables for
the recreation and amusement of its members and guests without making a charge or collecting a fee for the
operation or use thereof. (2002 Code, sec. 4.302)
Sec. 8.06.003 Penalty
Violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction therefor, shall be punishable by
fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec.
4.303)
ARTICLE 8.07 TEMPORARY OCCASIONAL SALES OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
Occasional sale. Garage sales, patio or porch sales or lawn sales. The sale of tangible personal property at retail
within the city limits by a person or persons who do not hold themselves out as engaging, or do not habitually
engage in, selling such property commercially.
Tangible personal property. Property that belongs to the seller personally and has not been purchased or obtained
from other persons for the purpose of resale.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.501)
Sec. 8.07.002 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall upon conviction be punished by a fine in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each day's failure of compliance
with any such provisions shall constitute a separate violation. (2002 Code, sec. 4.505)
Sec. 8.07.003 License required; application
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct within the city limits an occasional sale without first obtaining a
license for such occasional sale. An application for such license shall be made to the city manager or his/her
designee in writing and shall state the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/618
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Dates of the sale;
(3) Signature of the applicant acknowledging that he/she has received a copy of the regulations.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.502)
Sec. 8.07.004 General regulations
(a) An occasional sale license shall be issued only to the resident of the address where the occasional sale is to
be held.
(b) An occasional sale shall be held only at a person's place of residence and not on commercially used
property, except as may be provided for nonprofit organizations.
(c) An occasional sale license is valid only for three (3) consecutive days, and no more than one (1) occasional
sale may be held during any six (6) month period at any single address.
(d) Licenses issued for occasional sales must be posted in a place where the permit shall be visible to the
public.
(e) The city manager or his/her designee may authorize an occasional sale license for up to three (3) days for
activities conducted by and for the benefit of a religious, charitable, philanthropic or other nonprofit
organization. The location of such sales is allowed at locations other than a residence if approved by the property
owner of said location, including commercially utilized properties.
(f) The city reserves the right to suspend issuance of occasional sale licenses where such sale conflicts with
other special events that are likely to create disturbances and traffic congestion.
(g) This section is not intended to prohibit commercial establishments from sidewalk sales or truckload sales
as would normally be associated with their business operation.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.503)
Sec. 8.07.005 Signs
(a) One (1) sign is permitted, not to exceed two (2) square feet, upon the property where the sale is taking
place. All other signs advertising such sale are prohibited.
(b) The city may remove and destroy any signs prohibited under this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.504)
ARTICLE 8.08 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND HANDBILL
DISTRIBUTORS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.08.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this
section, except where the context indicates otherwise:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/618
Canvassing. To examine or discuss in detail, to make the subject of a discussion or debate, or to go through
places or among people asking, requesting or engaging for votes/opinions concerning religious, political, or
other topics of public concern, but in no event shall the term “canvass” be construed to mean solicitation of
funds or soliciting merchandise as provided in this division.
Charitable purpose. Philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy,
sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the
benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic
organization; or the benefit of any educational institution. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include
any direct benefit to the individual making the solicitation, to include the benefit of any political group or
political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
Commercial solicitation or soliciting. The act of asking, bartering, or communicating in any other such manner,
whether orally, by written and/or printed material including but not limited to handbills or leaflets, by hand
signing or by any other method, direct or implied, by an individual or group of individuals for a for-profit
purpose, which includes promoting, advertising, or receiving or obtaining money, alms, gifts or items of value,
real or intrinsic, for said individual or group of individuals, or for-profit organization, joint venture, joint stock
company, partnership, club, company, corporation, business trust, or establishment. However the term does not
include solicitation for religious, political, charitable, or other noncommercial purposes.
Consumer. An individual who seeks or acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal,
family or household purposes.
Consumer transaction. A sales transaction in which one (1) or more of the parties is a consumer.
Handbill. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, or
booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.
Handbill distributor. Any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing handbills,
other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or
indirectly for the distribution of such handbills.
Handbill sponsor. Any person, firm or corporation who utilizes handbills as a medium of advertising or
spreading a message.
Home solicitation. Soliciting in person or by telephone call from house to house for the purposes of selling or
attempting to sell goods, merchandise, wares, services or anything of value or to take or attempt to take orders
for the future delivery of goods, merchandise, wares, or any personal property of any nature whatsoever, or to
take or attempt to take orders for services to be furnished or performed in the future.
Home solicitation transaction. A consumer transaction for the purchase of goods, services, or realty, payable in
installments or in cash, in which the merchant engages in a personal solicitation of the sale to the consumer at a
residence, in person or by telephone, and the consumer's agreement or offer to purchase is given at the residence
to the merchant in person or by telephone. A home solicitation transaction shall not include a sale made pursuant
to a preexisting revolving charge account or retail charge agreement, or a sale made pursuant to prior
negotiations between the parties at a business establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are
offered or exhibited for sale, or a sale of realty in which transaction the purchaser is represented by a licensed
attorney or in which the transaction is being negotiated by a licensed real estate broker.
Individual. A natural person.
Itinerant vendor. Any person who sets up and operates a temporary business on privately owned property,
whether improved or unimproved, in the city, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take
orders for, any goods or services. A temporary business is one that continues for forty-five (45) days or less, and
exists whether solicitation is from a stand, vehicle, or freestanding. Any business that exists more than forty-five
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/618
(45) days shall be deemed to be a permanent occupancy and is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy from
the building inspection department.
Job placement activities. Any request, offer, enticement, or action which announces the availability for or of
employment, or seeks to secure employment. “Job placement activities” shall be deemed complete when made,
whether or not an actual employment relationship is created.
Merchant. A party to a customer transaction other than a consumer.
Person. An individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association or any other legal entity.
Political purpose. Any form of communication relating to a political issue, a particular candidate to a position or
nonpartisan office, or a political party.
Public rights-of-way. The traveled portion of a roadway, traffic medians and the area that is within ten feet (10')
of the curbline. In the absence of a curbline, the area within ten feet (10') of the shoulder of a road or highway.
Residence. Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained
within any type of building or structure.
Residential street. A thoroughfare with a right-of-way of fifty (50) feet and pavement width of twenty-six (26)
feet where the paved section allows for two (2) travel lanes with one (1) parking lane.
Solicitation, soliciting, solicited, or any other form of the word solicit. The act of asking, begging, bartering, or
communicating in any other such manner, whether orally, by written and/or printed material including but not
limited to handbills or leaflets, by hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied, by an individual or
group of individuals for the purpose of receiving or obtaining money or items of value, real or intrinsic, for said
individual or group of individuals, an organization, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, club,
company, corporation, business, trust, or any other organization or affiliate thereof, and includes a home
solicitation and home solicitation transaction.
Solicit funds or solicitation of funds. Any home solicitation transaction; any request for money, property, or
anything of value; or the pledge of a future payment of money, or delivery of property, or anything of value; or
the selling or offering for sale of any property, real or personal, or delivery of tangible or intangible [property],
whether of value or not, including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets, publications or
subscriptions to publications. Expressly excluded from the meaning of “solicit funds” or “solicitation of funds”
is any offer of membership in any organization. A solicitation of funds is complete when the solicitation is
communicated to any individual then located within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 8.08.002 Solicitation in right-of-way restricted
(a) A person may solicit for charitable or political purpose in or upon the public rights-of-way, except those
areas prohibited in this division.
(b) A person may conduct commercial solicitation in or upon the public- rights-of-way, except those areas
prohibited in this division, if the solicitor has obtained a permit or who is a member of an organization that has
obtained a permit.
(c) Solicitation in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted only during the hours of daylight, that is, onehalf
hour after sunrise and one-half hour before sunset.
(d) It shall be unlawful for a person younger than eighteen (18) years of age to solicit in the public rights-ofway.
(e) It shall be unlawful for a solicitor at any time to enter or remain in the traveled portion of the roadway
unless the solicitor has been granted authorization pursuant to section 552.0071 of chapter 552 of the Texas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/618
Transportation Code. The restriction on solicitation in the traveled portion of the roadway does not apply to
public residential streets.
(f) It shall be unlawful for a solicitor at any time to enter or remain in the traveled portion of the roadway,
except on residential streets provided that their presence does not impede the flow of traffic on said residential
street.
(g) It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit in the public right-of-way that is within one thousand (1,000)
feet of any public or private elementary or secondary school between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on
days when such school is in session. The measurement of the distance shall be from the nearest property line of
the public or private elementary or secondary school.
Sec. 8.08.003 Solicitation in right-of-way prohibited near certain intersections
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, at any time, in the public rights-of-way, within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the following intersections:
(1) W. Pleasant Run Road at I-35 Service Road.
(2) W. Pleasant Run Road at S. Houston School Road.
(3) W. Pleasant Run Road at Blue Grove Road.
(4) W. Pleasant Run Road at N. Dallas Avenue.
(b) The restrictions in this section do not apply to a solicitor who has received authorization pursuant to
section 552.0071 of the Texas Transportation Code.
Sec. 8.08.004 Solicitation and handbill distribution on private property
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct commercial solicitation upon residential property within the
city without first obtaining a written permit as prescribed by this division.
(b) All solicitation on private property, including the distribution of handbills, shall occur only during the time
that is one-half hour after sunrise and one-half hour before sunset, except when the solicitor is on the property by
the express prior invitation of the owner or occupant of the property.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, handbill distributor or handbill sponsor to distribute or cause to be
distributed, deposited, placed, thrown, scattered, or cast any handbill upon any private premises which are
inhabited and which are not posted as provided by this division except by handing or transmitting such handbill
directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private premises, or by placing
or depositing the same in a manner to secure and to prevent such handbill from being blown or drifting about
such premises, except that mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by applicable federal or state law.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed, deposited, placed, thrown,
scattered or cast any handbill upon any premises if requested by the owner or any occupant thereof not to do so,
or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the premises a
weatherproof card, not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size, bearing the words “No Trespassing,”
“No Peddlers,” “No Advertisements,” “No Solicitation,” “No Handbills,” or any similar notice indicating in any
manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to have any such handbills left upon such premises.
The letters on such cards shall be not less than two-thirds (2/3) of an inch in height.
(e) No person shall go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door or
create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the purpose
of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a solicitation, if a card
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/618
described in subsection (d) above is exhibited in a conspicuous place at or near the main entrance of the
residence, unless at the request of the owner or occupant.
(f) No person, other than the occupant of the premises, shall remove, deface or render illegible a card placed
by the owner or the occupant under subsections (d) and (e) above.
(g) Any person who has gained entrance to premises or an audience with the occupant, whether invited or not,
shall immediately depart such premises when requested to leave by the occupant.
Sec. 8.08.005 Display of identification cards
(a) The person(s) in charge of conducting commercial solicitation shall provide each commercial solicitor with
a copy of the permit issued by the city as prescribed by this section. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to
engage in commercial solicitation without having a copy of the permit in their possession. It shall be unlawful
for any commercial solicitor to fail or refuse to show or display such copy upon the request of any person.
(b) The applicant for the permit required under this division shall at the time application is made provide, by a
separate list, the names and addresses of all agents or employees for whom permits are to be issued.
Sec. 8.08.006 Display of permit
The person(s) in charge of conducting the solicitation shall provide each solicitor with a copy of the permit
issued by the city as prescribed by this division. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation
without having a copy of the permit required by this division in such person's immediate possession while
engaged in such solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in a solicitation to fail or refuse to show
or display such copy of the permit upon the request of any person, or to display a permit issued in the name of
another person.
Sec. 8.08.007 Solicitation for unauthorized purpose
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to solicit in the city for a purpose other than that set out in the application
upon which the permit was issued.
Sec. 8.08.008 Permit required for commercial solicitation; fee
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct commercial solicitation within the city without first obtaining a
written permit from the city police department. Every application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit fee established by resolution of the city council from time to time. A permit fee shall be charged for each
person engaged in a solicitation.
Sec. 8.08.009 Application for permit
(a) A person or organization who desires to conduct commercial solicitation within the city shall make written
application with the city's police department on a form provided by the city. Such application shall contain at a
minimum the following:
(1) The full and legally recognized names and any associated aliases, logos, nicknames, and
abbreviated names of the entity or person applying for the permit;
(2) If the purpose of the solicitation is for the distribution of handbills, the name of the handbill
distributor and handbill sponsor;
(3) Whether the person applying is an individual, partnership, corporation or association, and:
(A) The business or residence address and telephone number of the applicant;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/618
(B) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and
telephone number of each partner;
(C) If a corporation, the person applying shall state whether it is organized under the laws of
this state or is a foreign corporation, and must include the mailing address, business address,
telephone number, the name of the individual in charge of such corporation, and, if a foreign
corporation, the place of incorporation;
(D) If an association, the application shall state the association's principal business address
and telephone number if any, and shall state the names and principal business or residence
addresses and telephone numbers of all members of the association unless in excess of ten (10)
members, in which event the application shall so state and the application must contain the
name and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and
directors or trustees of the association. If the association is a part of a multi-state organization or
association, the application shall state the mailing address and business address of its central
office, in addition to the mailing address and business address of the local office;
(4) The names, mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct
charge or control of the solicitation;
(5) The time period and dates during which the solicitation is to be made, the date of the
commencement of solicitation and its projected conclusion, and how often the applicant will solicit
during the year;
(6) A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation is to be accomplished;
(7) The nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, or the nature of the services to be
furnished;
(8) Whether such applicant, upon any such order so obtained, will demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
(9) A statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, such permit will not be used as or
represented to be an endorsement by the city or any of its officers or employees;
(10) Any other information which the city deems necessary for the administration of this division.
(b) The application must be signed by the applicant if the person applying is an individual; if the applicant is a
partnership, by the partner charged with disbursing funds solicited; if a corporation or an association, by the
officer charged with disbursement of the funds solicited. The individual signing the application shall sign the
application and swear before an officer authorized to administer oaths that such person has carefully read the
application and that all the information contained therein is true and correct.
(c) The application information provided by the applicant will be subject to verification by the police
department.
(d) The application shall also contain satisfactory written proof of the individual's authority to represent the
applicant.
(e) The application must be accompanied by a copy of a valid state sales tax certificate, if applicable.
(f) The application shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable permit fee. No permit shall be issued until such
fee has been paid by the applicant.
Sec. 8.08.010 Issuance of permit; duration; form
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/618
(a) A permit applied for under this division shall be issued by the city police department within ten (10) days
after a completed permit application is filed, unless it is determined that the applicant has provided false or
incomplete information.
(b) A permit applied for under this division shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed
thirty (30) days. Permits for handbill distribution shall be exempt from this time limitation.
(c) The city shall prescribe the form of the permit. Each such permit shall be printed in black except that the
following shall be printed prominently thereon in red: “The issuance of this permit is not an endorsement by the
City of Lancaster or any of its officers or employees.” Each permit shall bear a permit number which is the same
as the file containing the application filed by the same applicant.
Sec. 8.08.011 Denial or revocation of permit
A permit required under this division may be denied or revoked, and the person prohibited from reapplying for
the period covered by the original application, when it has been determined that:
(1) An applicant has knowingly given false or misleading information in an application;
(2) A permit holder is charged and subsequently convicted of theft or fraud, or a violation of any
city, state, or federal law, in connection with a solicitation in the city;
(3) A permit holder has made, or caused to be made, false statements or misrepresentations to any
member of the public with regard to the solicitation;
(4) A permit holder violates any provision of this division; or
(5) A permit holder creates a traffic or safety hazard to themselves or others.
Sec. 8.08.012 Appeals
A person denied a permit, or who has had a permit revoked, may appeal that action to the city manager, or
designee, by submitting a letter to the city secretary within ten (10) days of the complained action. A hearing on
such appeal will then be scheduled within seven (7) days after the receipt of the appeal, with the hearing to be
held within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the appeal. The city manager, or designee, shall render a decision on
the appeal within three (3) days after the date of the hearing, which shall be final.
Sec. 8.08.013 Supervision of child solicitors
It shall be unlawful for any person to use children thirteen (13) years of age or less for any type of solicitation or
handbill distribution purposes unless said children are actively supervised by a person at least eighteen (18)
years of age who has been issued a permit under this division, or who is the agent of the permittee. In all cases,
the supervising person shall be within one hundred (100) yards of the child solicitor.
Sec. 8.08.014 Itinerant vendors operating on private property
(a) Permit required. No itinerant vendor may intermittently occupy any privately owned property for the
purpose of operating a temporary business within the city without having previously obtained a temporary sales
permit from the city. The applicant must have such permit within his or her personal possession during the time
that the temporary business is in operation and must display the permit in such a manner that it is clearly visible
from the abutting street.
(b) Permit fee. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant must pay the city a permit fee in the amount as
established by the city council. The city will not require payment of this permit fee by locally based charitable
organizations or organizations engaged in activities such as bake sales or carwashes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/618
(c) Permit duration. A permit requested under this section will issue for a minimum of five (5) days, but not to
exceed forty-five (45) days. Each eligible property may only allow use of the property for a temporary business
for a maximum of forty-five (45) days per calendar year.
(d) Requirements for permit issuance. The city shall only issue a permit if the applicant has complied with the
following requirements:
(1) The itinerant vendor must conduct his business on the property in a manner that does not
violate any code of the city, including all zoning, building, and health codes. The city will exempt an
itinerant vendor from zoning provisions where the proposed location of the temporary business is an
improved property that contains an active institutional use, such as a church or school;
(2) The itinerant vendor must possess a valid state sales tax certificate or proof of a tax exemption;
(3) The itinerant vendor must provide the city with a copy of either a lease or written permission
from the owner of the private property showing that the itinerant vendor may use the property;
(4) The itinerant vendor must submit a dimensioned or scaled site plan indicating the location of
the display area, curb cuts, and parking area;
(5) The itinerant vendor must provide one unisex portable sanitary facility. In lieu of the portable
sanitary facility, the vendor may provide a permission letter from the owner or manager of a property
located within a two-hundred-foot radius of the temporary business granting permission to use their
sanitary facilities; however, the property where the itinerant vendor has permission to use the sanitary
facilities cannot be located across a thoroughfare of four lanes or larger; and
(6) If the sale involves food products, the itinerant vendor must obtain all the necessary health
permits.
(e) An itinerant vendor may not use a tent or temporary building, except a portable sanitary facility, in
conjunction with a temporary sale.
(Ordinance 2008-06-24 adopted 6/23/08)
Secs. 8.08.015–8.08.040 Reserved
Division 2. Distribution of Handbills
Sec. 8.08.041 Definitions
Handbill. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, card, or
advertising matter, or any matter or literature which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing or directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity for the
purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Private premises. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, ground, lawn, walk, driveway, porch, steps or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such
dwelling house, building or other structure.
Public place. Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/618
(2002 Code, sec. 4.801)
Sec. 8.08.042 Depositing or distributing in public place
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or
upon any public place within this city; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out
or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill in any public place to any person willing to
accept such handbill.
(b) Distribution of handbills on city-owned property. No person may distribute handbills on city-owned
property except as permitted in this subsection. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute handbills or
otherwise occupy the travel portion of any street or alley, median or greenway. A person may distribute handbills
on municipal-owned property on areas reasonably designated by regulations adopted by the city manager which
prevent such person(s) engaged in the distribution of handbills from unreasonably interfering with the general
public use and enjoyment of such property. The city manager may adopt such additional reasonable regulations
which shall conform to the requirements set forth herein after publication in a newspaper of general circulation
and on the city website, and notice and comment to the city council for a period of thirty (30) days in order to
receive public comment. Thereafter, such reasonable regulations may become effective on the tenth day
following such period.
(Ordinance 2014-03-03, sec. 1, adopted 3/31/14)
Sec. 8.08.043 Placement in or on vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any
automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing,
transmitting or distributing of any handbill personally to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other
vehicle who is willing to accept the same. (2002 Code, sec. 4.803)
Sec. 8.08.044 Depositing on uninhabited or vacant private premises
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any
private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (2002 Code, sec. 4.804)
Sec. 8.08.045 Distributing on inhabited private premises
(a) No person licensed under the provisions of this division nor any other person shall distribute, deposit or
cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any
such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or any other person then present in or upon such private premises,
or by placing or securing such handbill in such manner as to prevent it from being blown or drifted about such
premises or elsewhere; provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or
cast any handbill upon such premises in any manner if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is
placed on said premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words “No
Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisements,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner
that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be disturbed, or to have any such handbill left upon such
premises.
(b) Mailboxes may not be used for distribution of handbills when so prohibited by federal postal laws or
regulations.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.805)
Sec. 8.08.046 Permit required; duration; hours of operation
(a) Permit required; application. Any person desiring to engage in the business of distributing handbills shall
make application to and receive from the city secretary, or other officer empowered to issue the same, a permit in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/618
the manner and for the period prescribed by the terms of this section and all other relevant provisions of the city
code. Such applicant shall make written application to the city secretary upon a form provided for such purpose
by the city secretary. Such form shall contain the name of the applicant, address, social security number, driver's
license number, date of birth and a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the
applicant. Each application shall designate one person authorized to use such permit on behalf of any applicant
which is a firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or other organization. It shall be unlawful to
distribute, deposit, place, throw or scatter any handbill whatsoever unless the person distributing such articles
has in his possession a permit duly issued by the city.
(b) Duration of permit. The permit shall be valid for a period of fifteen (15) days unless earlier revoked by the
issuing officer for good cause as hereinafter set out.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.806)
(c) Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit under a provision of this division or
for any other person to distribute, deposit or place any handbill at any time other than between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(d) Exception for political or religious purpose. A permit or registration is not required for the distribution of
handbills for religious purposes or political purposes.
(Ordinance 2014-03-03, sec. 2, adopted 3/31/14)
Sec. 8.08.047 Permit fee
Each applicant seeking a permit under the provisions of this division shall pay a fee as established by the city
council for each fifteen-day period for which a permit is sought. (2002 Code, sec. 4.807)
Sec. 8.08.048 Investigation of applicant for permit
The chief of police shall make an investigation of each applicant who applies for a handbill distribution permit.
Such investigation shall be made as the chief deems necessary to accomplish the provisions of this division.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.808)
Sec. 8.08.049 Denial or revocation of permit
(a) If as a result of the investigation made pursuant to section 8.08.048 above it is found that the applicant has
been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has committed a violation of this
division of the city code within a period of ninety (90) days prior to the filing of such application, the city
secretary shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that his permit is denied.
(b) If as a result of such investigation it is found that the applicant has falsified his application in any way, the
city secretary shall likewise advise the applicant that his application is disapproved and his permit is denied.
(c) A permit which was obtained pursuant to an application containing a false or fraudulent statement may be
revoked by written notice to the permit holder at the address shown on his permit application.
(d) A permit may be revoked in the manner aforesaid upon commission by the permit holder of any violation
of this division of the city code.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.809)
Sec. 8.08.050 Records of permits
The city secretary shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. (2002 Code, sec. 4.810)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/618
ARTICLE 8.09 SELLING FROM VEHICLE
Sec. 8.09.001 Penalty
For any violation of any provision of this article, all persons violating the same shall be punished by fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, by proceedings before the
municipal court of the city. Each provision hereof which may be violated and each occasion upon which such
violation may occur shall be considered separate offenses. (2002 Code, sec. 4.404)
Sec. 8.09.002 Operation on street or other public property prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for sale or display, or cause or attempt to
sell, offer for sale or display any goods, wares or merchandise from any vehicle occupying any public street,
alleyway or other public property within the city, whether such vehicle is moving, stopped, parked or standing.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.401)
Sec. 8.09.003 Use of chimes, bells or other sounds
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use, to cause to be used, or to attempt to use any
chimes, bells, whistles, music or other sound which may be heard at a distance of greater than fifty (50) feet on
any vehicle from which goods, wares or merchandise are sold, displayed or offered for sale in the city while the
vehicle is occupying any public street, alleyway or other public property within the city. (2002 Code, sec. 4.402)
Sec. 8.09.004 Operation on private property
The provisions of section 8.09.002 hereof shall not be applicable when the vehicle from which any person, firm
or corporation sells, displays or offers to sell any goods, wares or merchandise is lawfully parked or standing on
private property or where the person or persons operating such vehicle or selling, displaying or offering for sale,
goods, wares and merchandise contained within such vehicle leave such vehicle and sell, display or offer for sale
such goods, wares and merchandise upon private property, provided all other applicable ordinances have been
complied with. (2002 Code, sec. 4.403)
ARTICLE 8.10 TEMPORARY USE OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Sec. 8.10.001 Permit required
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to carry on a temporary
use or construct a temporary building for the use of an asphalt or concrete batch plant, carnival, circus, real
estate sales office, construction office, portable church or school building and other temporary use as determined
by the city manager or his designated representative, within the city, without having first obtained a permit
therefor from the city. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1001)
Sec. 8.10.002 Applicability
All temporary uses will be required to apply for a temporary use permit. These shall include but not be limited
to:
(1) Asphalt batching plant.
(2) Cement batching plant.
(3) Construction office.
(4) Real estate office.
(5) Portable church building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/618
(6) Portable school building.
(7) Mobile or modular home.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1002)
Sec. 8.10.003 Definitions
Asphalt batching, temporary. A designated area, allowable after application, for the temporary manufacturing of
asphalt for installation within subdivisions in the city as approved by the city manager or his designated
representative.
Cement batching, temporary. A designated area, allowable after application, for the temporary manufacturing of
cement for installation within subdivisions in the city as approved by the city manager or his designated
representative.
Construction office. The use of a portable trailer for supervision of a construction site allowable for a specific
period of time in a designated area upon issuance of a temporary use permit as approved by the city manager or
his designated representative.
Mobile home or modular home. A home certified to meet the building code of the state department of housing
and community affairs which is occupied by an elderly or disabled person and which is located on or is
contiguous to property developed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code with a home occupied by a
relative within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, and which shall be allowed in cases of extreme
hardship as determined by the city council. The status of a temporary permit for a mobile or modular home shall
be reviewed on an annual basis by the city council.
Portable church building. The use of a portable building or structure as an accessory building or structure in
conjunction with the primary use of real property by a congregation, classes or assembly of people for a church
or church-related activities, allowable for a specific period of time in a designated area upon issuance of a
temporary use permit as approved by the city manager or his designated representative.
Portable school building. The use of a portable building or structure as an accessory building or structure in
conjunction with or for the primary use of real property by a class or assembly of people for a school or schoolrelated
activities, allowable for a specific time period in a designated area upon issuance of a temporary use
permit as approved by the city manager or his designated representative.
Real estate sales office. The use of a portable or permanent building or structure for the sale of real estate within
a new subdivision allowable for a specific time upon the issuance of a temporary use permit as approved by the
city manager or his designated representative.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1003)
Sec. 8.10.004 Application for permit
Each application for a temporary use permit shall be in writing to the city building official on forms furnished by
the building official, and shall set out the following:
(1) Name of the applicant;
(2) Applicant's permanent address;
(3) Name and address of the firm the applicant represents;
(4) Narrative statement of the specific temporary use applied for;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/618
(5) Specific site plan drawn to scale showing the specific dimensions and arrangement of the
proposed temporary use; and
(6) Specific time period for which the applicant is requesting the temporary use.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1004)
Sec. 8.10.005 Fees established
The permit fees for administering temporary uses within the city shall be as established by the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1005)
Sec. 8.10.006 Double fees when work commenced without permit
Where work for which a permit is required by this article is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said
permit, the fees shall be doubled. The payment of such fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying
with the regulations prescribed in this article. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1006)
Sec. 8.10.007 Exemption from fees
Fees for approved uses may be exempted for nonprofit charitable organizations when the applicant files with the
required application supporting documentation. For the purpose of this section, proof of 501(c)(3) Internal
Revenue tax exemption will suffice as supporting documentation. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1007)
Sec. 8.10.008 General requirements
All temporary uses shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) If temporary power is required, it must be supplied overhead or underground directly to the
specific use. No open wiring lying directly on the ground will be allowed.
(2) All building or structure setbacks shall conform to the current zoning district for principal uses
on the land in which the temporary use is occurring.
(3) The maximum time period for a temporary use permit for real estate sales offices and
construction offices is twelve (12) months. The time period for all other temporary use requests will
be determined by the city manager.
(4) A new permit is required for each new location, whether or not the temporary use is located on
the same property or on a new site.
(5) A minimum of four (4) parking spaces shall be designated on the general site plan for
construction offices and real estate sales offices.
(6) The building official may revoke a temporary use permit for noncompliance with the above
requirements.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1008)
Sec. 8.10.009 Approval; designation of time limit
(a) The city manager or his designated representative shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove all
temporary use requests presented, except as approved by the building official under section 8.10.008(5) and (6)
[sic].
(b) The city manager shall designate a specific time limit on all temporary uses approved.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/618
(c) No appeal on the same request shall be filed within a period of one year from the date of denial.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1009)
ARTICLE 8.11 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER AMUSEMENT SHOWS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.11.001 Definitions
Amusement ride. Any mechanical device or devices that carry or convey passengers along, around or over a
fixed or restricted route or course within a defined area for purposes of giving the passengers amusement,
pleasure or excitement.
Carnival. A fair or festival with amusement rides, games, food and/or entertainment allowable for a specific
period of time in a designated area upon issuance of a temporary use permit as approved by the city council.
Circus. An open or covered arena used for performances of physical skill, wild animal acts and/or jugglers and
clowns allowable for a specific period of time in a designated area upon issuance of a temporary use permit as
approved by the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1101)
Sec. 8.11.002 Standards for operation
(a) No temporary use permit shall be approved by the city council unless the application complies with section
8.11.033.
(b) Sufficient security personnel shall be available to control traffic to and from the entertainment and to
ensure against breaches of the peace and violation of state and municipal laws by persons attending such
entertainment and, in particular, violation of laws against the possession and use of controlled substances as such
are defined by state law. The number of security personnel required shall be determined by the director of police
services of the city.
(c) The entertainment shall be conducted in such a way as not to be in violation of any ordinance or code of
the city in regard to fire prevention, and that the physical facilities, exits, emergency fire exits and other
precautionary measures are adequate to protect the health, safety and welfare of those persons attending the
entertainment and the general public.
(d) Adequate restrooms shall be available to provide for the welfare of those persons attending the
entertainment. A minimum of two (2) restroom facilities shall be required.
(e) All circuses, carnivals, fairs and other amusement and entertainment shall comply with the fire prevention,
fire, electrical, health and other appropriate codes, ordinances and regulations of the city.
(f) The city council shall have the right to refuse to grant a temporary use permit when the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city are determined to be likely endangered by traffic, inadequate sanitation
facilities, other health hazards, possible violence, illegal narcotics sale or use, immoral conduct, illegal conduct
or any other similar problem or hazard.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1105)
Secs. 8.11.003–8.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/618
Sec. 8.11.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a circus, carnival, fair or other amusement type
show without first having obtained a temporary use permit therefor from the city council. (2002 Code, sec.
4.1102)
Sec. 8.11.032 Fee
A fee for such temporary use permit shall be in an amount determined by the city council by resolution from
time to time, and shall be paid at the time the application for such temporary use permit is made and shall not be
returned if the application is denied. Upon special request by a nonprofit institution organized for philanthropic
or eleemosynary purpose, to the city manager, such fee may be waived or modified, as determined by the city
manager, where a portion of the proceeds from such circus, carnival, fair or other amusement show shall be used
for charitable purposes. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1103)
Sec. 8.11.033 Application
The application for a temporary use permit shall be filed not less than thirty (30) days prior to the first
performance, exhibition or other operation, and shall contain the following information, be signed by the
applicant and be sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of any other person, organization,
firm or corporation on whose behalf the application is made;
(2) The date and time requested for the temporary use permit;
(3) The type or kind of entertainment and the place where such entertainment will be held;
(4) If held indoors, the number of restrooms available within the facility where the entertainment
will be held and an accurate drawing or plat showing the location in the facilities for drinking water,
location of all ingress and all egress, and a showing of a fire exit and/or emergency exit plan;
(5) The time and hours of such entertainment;
(6) The number of security personnel which shall be available to control the traffic going to and
leaving the entertainment area, and the number of security personnel to be made available for the
control, supervision and direction of pedestrian patrons after entering the entertainment area;
(7) Any other additional information requested by the city which may be pertinent due to the
specific nature or type of entertainment enterprise;
(8) Proof that all state and municipal requirements for inspection, safety and insurance have been
satisfied.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1104)
Sec. 8.11.034 Revocation
A violation of any provision of this article, a failure to conduct such circus, carnival, fair or other amusement
show in compliance with the application for a temporary use permit, or the conduct of any such entertainment in
such a way as to present a hazard to the health, safety and/or welfare of the citizens attending such entertainment
shall be grounds for revocation of such temporary use permit. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1106)
ARTICLE 8.12 AUTOMOBILE JUNKYARDS AND WRECKING YARDS*
Sec. 8.12.001 Prohibited; declaration of nuisance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/618
The operation of any automobile wrecking yard or any automobile junkyard or the use of any property for the
storage of wrecked or junked automobiles within the city limits or within an area of five thousand (5,000) feet
from such city limits is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and to be unlawful. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1601)
Sec. 8.12.002 Penalty
Any person who shall within the city limits or within an area of five thousand (5,000) feet from such city limits,
as such limits may now be or may hereafter be extended, who shall operate an automobile wrecking yard or an
automobile junkyard, or who shall use any property within such area as a storage place for wrecked or junked
automobiles, shall upon conviction thereof be found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day such offense is committed
shall be considered a separate offense. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1602)
Sec. 8.12.003 Abatement
The city council is authorized to require any person violating the terms of this article to cease and desist from
such violation, and upon failure of the person or persons responsible for such violation to voluntarily cease and
desist therefrom the council may through appropriate court proceedings enjoin such violation. Such authority on
the part of the council to abate such nuisance by court action shall not in any wise affect the penalty provisions
of this article. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1603)
ARTICLE 8.13 SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS†
Sec. 8.13.001 Purpose
This article is an exercise of the city's police power to promote, through regulation of secondary metals
recyclers, the recovery of stolen property. This article provides licensing and recordkeeping requirements and
enforcement procedures that will enable the police department to identify and recover public and private
property composed of certain metals that may have been illegally appropriated.
Sec. 8.13.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, phrases and the derivations thereof shall have the
meanings given herein:
Chief. The chief of police for the city or a designated representative.
Ferrous metal. A metal that contains significant quantities of iron or steel.
Hold notice. Written notification by the chief to a secondary metals recycler stating that the secondary metals
recycler may not sell, redeem, or dispose of certain regulated metal property that the chief has reasonable cause
to believe has been stolen.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license has been issued under this article or a person listed as an applicant
on the application for a license.
Nonferrous metal. A metal that does not contain significant quantities of iron or steel, including, but not limited
to, copper, brass, aluminum, bronze, lead, zinc, nickel, and their alloys.
Passport. A passport issued by the United States government or issued by another country and recognized by the
United States government.
Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, and any other legal entity.
Personal identification certificate. A personal identification card issued by the state department of public safety
under chapter 521, subchapter E, of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, or a similar card or certificate
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/618
issued by another state.
Purchase transaction. A transaction in which a secondary metals recycler gives consideration in exchange for
regulated metal property.
Regulated metal property. Any item composed in whole or in part of any ferrous or nonferrous metal, other than
an item composed in whole of tin.
Secondary metals recycler. Any person who:
(1) Is engaged in the business of purchasing, collecting, or soliciting regulated metal property; or
(2) Operates or maintains a facility where regulated metal property is purchased or kept for
shipment, sale, transfer, or salvage.
Seller. Any person who, in a purchase transaction, receives consideration from a secondary metals recycler in
exchange for regulated metal property.
Sec. 8.13.003 Penalty; defenses
(a) A person who violates any provision of this article, or who fails to perform a duty required of him under
this article, commits an offense. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each item of regulated metal property
involved in a violation of this article. An offense under this article is punishable by a fine in accordance with
section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the regulated metal property involved:
(1) Was purchased from a charitable, philanthropic, religious, fraternal, civic, patriotic, social, or
school-sponsored organization or association or from any organization that is exempt from taxation
under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended;
(2) Was purchased from any public officer acting in an official capacity as a trustee in bankruptcy,
executor, administrator, or receiver; from any public official acting under judicial process or
authority; or from a sale on the execution or by virtue of any process issued by a court;
(3) Consists of aluminum food or beverage containers, used food or beverage containers, or similar
food or beverage containers for the purpose of recycling, other than beer or beverage kegs; or
(4) Was purchased from a manufacturing, industrial, or other commercial vendor that generates or
sells regulated metal property in the ordinary course of its business.
(c) The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense under this article is governed by this
code.
Sec. 8.13.004 Records of purchases
(a) A secondary metals recycler shall maintain an accurate and legible record of each purchase transaction.
Each transaction must be recorded separately.
(b) The record of each purchase transaction must be in English and contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the secondary metals recycler;
(2) The name or initials of the individual recording the information required by this section for the
secondary metals recycler;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/618
(3) The seller's name, address, sex, and birth date and the identifying number from the seller's
driver's license, military identification card, passport, or personal identification certificate;
(4) The license number of any motor vehicle in which the regulated metal property is delivered in a
purchased transaction;
(5) The place, date and time of the purchase transaction;
(6) The weight, quantity, or volume and a description, made in accordance with the custom of the
trade, of the regulated metal property purchased;
(7) A general description of the predominant types of regulated metal property purchased in the
purchase transaction;
(8) The amount of consideration given in a purchase transaction for the regulated metal property;
(9) A signed statement from the seller in a purchase transaction affirming a legal right of ownership
and the right to sign over title to the regulated metal property offered for sale; and
(10) A photograph, videotape, or similar likeness of the seller that clearly depicts the seller's facial
features.
(c) A person selling or attempting to sell regulated metal property to a secondary metals recycler shall:
(1) Display to the secondary metals recycler the person's driver's license, military identification
card, passport, or personal identification certificate; and
(2) Sign a written statement provided by the secondary metals recycler affirming that the person is
the legal owner of, or is lawfully entitled to sell, the regulated material offered for sale.
(d) The secondary metals recycler or the recycler's agent shall visually verify the accuracy of the identification
presented by the seller at the time of each purchase of regulated metal property.
(e) A secondary metals recycler shall maintain on file the information required by this article for not less
twenty-four (24) months from the date of the purchase transaction. A secondary metals recycler shall make these
records available for inspection by any police officer, upon request, at the secondary metals recycler's place of
business during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metals recycler.
(f) The recordkeeping requirements of this article, other than subsections (b)(7) and (b)(10), do not apply to
purchase transactions involving regulated metal property composed solely of the following nonferrous metal
materials, for which definitions and recordkeeping requirements are provided by chapter 1956, subchapter A, of
the Texas Occupations Code, as amended:
(1) Copper or brass material in excess of 50 pounds.
(2) Bronze material.
(3) Aluminum material in excess of 40 pounds.
(g) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(10) of this section that:
(1) A photograph of the seller, taken within the preceding six months, was currently on file with the
secondary metals recycler; and
(2) At the time of the purchase transaction, the secondary metals recycler, or an employee of the
secondary metals recycler, visually verified that the seller was actually the person depicted in the file
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/618
photograph.
Sec. 8.13.005 Notice to sellers
(a) A secondary metals recycler shall at all times maintain in a prominent place in the secondary metals
recycler's place of business, in open view to a seller of regulated metal property, a notice in two-inch lettering
that contains the following or similar language approved by the chief. “A PERSON ATTEMPTING TO SELL
ANY REGULATED METAL PROPERTY MUST PRESENT SUFFICIENT IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED
BY CITY OF LANCASTER ORDINANCE.”
(b) The notice required by this section may be contained on a sign that contains another notice required by law
to be displayed by the secondary metals recycler.
Sec. 8.13.006 Facsimile, telecopier or similar equipment required
A secondary metals recycler shall maintain at its place of business, or otherwise have immediate access to, a
facsimile, telecopier, or other equipment of similar function on which notifications of stolen property or other
notifications relating to regulated metal property may be expeditiously received from the police department. The
equipment must be operable at all times during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metals
recycler. The secondary metals recycler shall maintain the facsimile number or other access number of the
equipment on file with the chief and shall notify the chief within 24 hours after any change in the number.
Sec. 8.13.007 Restrictions on purchase of regulated metal property
(a) A secondary metals recycler shall conduct all purchase transactions only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
(b) A secondary metals recycler shall not purchase any item of regulated metal property from an intoxicated
person.
(c) A secondary metals recycler shall not purchase any of the following items of regulated metal property
without obtaining proof that the seller owns the property (such as by a receipt or bill of sale) or proof that the
seller is an employee, agent, or contactor of a governmental entity, utility company, cemetery, railroad,
manufacturer, or other person, business, or entity owning the property and the seller is authorized to sell the item
of regulated metal property on behalf of the person, business, or entity owning the property:
(1) A manhole cover.
(2) An electric light pole and its fixtures and hardware.
(3) A guard rail.
(4) A street sign, traffic sign, or traffic signal and its fixtures and hardware.
(5) Communication, transmission, and service wire.
(6) A funeral marker or funeral vase.
(7) A historical marker.
(8) Railroad equipment, including but not limited to a tie plate, switch plate, E-clip, or rail tie
junction.
(9) Any metal item that is marked with any form of the name, initials, or logo of a governmental
entity, utility company, cemetery, or railroad.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/618
(10) A copper or aluminum condensing or evaporator coil from a heating or air conditioning unit.
(11) An aluminum or stainless steel container or bottle designed to hold propane for fueling fork
lifts.
(d) A secondary metals recycler shall maintain on file the information required by subsection (c) of this
section for not less than one (1) year from the date of purchase of the item of regulated metal property. A
secondary metals recycler shall make these records available for inspection by any police officer, upon request,
at the secondary metals recycler's place of business during the usual and customary business hours of the
secondary metals recycler.
(e) The requirements of subsections (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to purchase transactions involving
regulated metal property composed solely of the following nonferrous metal materials, for which definitions,
recordkeeping requirements and other regulations [are] provided by chapter 1956, subchapter A of the Texas
Occupations Code, as amended:
(1) Copper or brass materials in excess of 50 pounds.
(2) Bronze material.
(3) Aluminum material in excess of 40 pounds.
Sec. 8.13.008 Hold on regulated property; segregation, labeling and inspection
(a) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a secondary metals recycler shall retain possession of
purchased regulated metal property at the secondary metals recycler's local place of business and withhold the
property from alteration, processing, resale, or salvage use for 72 hours after purchase, unless the property is
released sooner by written order of the chief or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a secondary metals recycler shall segregate all
regulated metal property purchased from a seller from regulated metal property purchased from other sellers and
attach to the property, or to the container in which the property is held, a label indicating the name of the seller,
the date on which the property was purchased, and the number of the receipt on which the purchase information
is recorded. If in any single purchase transaction there are multiple items of regulated metal property of the same
general type, only one representative item from each type of regulated property must be segregated and labeled
in accordance with this subsection.
(c) The hold, segregation, and labeling requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to
any item of regulated metal property composed solely of ferrous metal material, unless the secondary metals
recycler has received notice that the chief has, in accordance with this subsection, designated the item or type of
item as being subject to those requirements. The chief shall periodically review theft statistics on ferrous
regulated metal property and establish a list of items or types of items that the chief determines are subject to the
requirements of subsections (a) and (b). A current list must be maintained on file in the chief's office, or in
another designated office of the police department, so that it may be inspected by the public during the city's
normal business hours. Notice of the list must be given to secondary metals recyclers in accordance with
schedules and procedures established by the chief. A secondary metals recycler is presumed to have received
notice of the list if the police department transmits the list to the facsimile number or access number provided by
the secondary metals recycler under this article.
(d) While in possession of purchased regulated metal property, a secondary metals recycler shall make the
property available for inspection by any police officer at the secondary metals recycler's place of business during
the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metals recycler.
Sec. 8.13.009 Hold on alleged stolen property; hold notice
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/618
(a) Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that certain items of regulated metal property in
the possession of a secondary metals recycler are stolen, the chief may issue a hold notice. The hold notice must:
(1) Identify those items of regulated metal property alleged to be stolen and subject to hold; and
(2) Inform the secondary metals recycler of the restrictions imposed on the regulated metal
property under subsection (b) of this section.
(b) A secondary metals recycler may not, for 60 days from the date of receiving a hold notice under this
section, process or remove from the secondary metals recycler's place of business any regulated metal property
identified in the hold notice, unless the property is released sooner by the chief or by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction. At the expiration of the hold period, the hold is automatically released, and the secondary
metals recycler may dispose of the regulated metal property unless otherwise directed by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(c) This section does not apply to items of regulated metal property composed solely of the following
nonferrous metal materials, for which definitions and hold notice requirements are provided by chapter 1956,
subchapter A, of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended:
(1) Copper or brass materials in excess of 50 pounds.
(2) Bronze material.
(3) Aluminum material in excess of 40 pounds.
(Ordinance 2008-06-19 adopted 6/9/08)
ARTICLE 8.14 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.14.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein image-producing devices which
depict sexual activities are maintained.
Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment which offers for sale or rental books,
magazines or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures or videocassettes, which depict or
describe sexual activities.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or which shows films, motion pictures or video reproductions depicting sexual
activities.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or his duly authorized representative.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license is issued to operate a sexually oriented business.
Nudity or state of nudity. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female
breasts; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or
areola of the female breast.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/618
Sexual activities. Includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or
sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated;
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the above activities.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes,
offers for any form of consideration physical contact between persons of the same or opposite sex when such
contact is sexual in nature and one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, sexual encounter
center or other commercial enterprise, the primary business of which is the offering of a service of the selling,
renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification
to the customer.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.601)
Sec. 8.14.002 Location
A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one
thousand (1,000) feet of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, residential or historic
district, public park, or the property line of a lot devoted to residential use. (2002 Code, sec. 4.605)
Sec. 8.14.003 Display of sexually oriented materials to minors
A person commits an offense if he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, videocassette or other
display or advertising in a location visible to persons under the age of seventeen (17) years, if the cover of any
such materials depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit
sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any human sexual activity. “Display” shall also include locating
an item in such a manner that it is visible to the general public outside the interior portions of the licensed
premises of the sexually oriented business. (2002 Code, sec. 4.606)
Secs. 8.14.004–8.14.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 8.14.031 Required; application; issuance
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by
the city.
(b) An application for a license must be made in a form provided by the chief of police.
(c) The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises of
the sexually oriented business.
(d) A person wishing to operate a sexually oriented business must sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each individual owning more than twenty (20) percent of the business must sign the application for
license.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/618
(e) The chief of police shall approve the license if he finds, within thirty (30) days after receipt of an
application, the following to be true:
(1) The applicant is over the age of twenty-one (21) years.
(2) The applicant is not overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed
against or imposed upon him.
(3) The applicant has provided information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license and
has truthfully answered the questions or requests for information on the application form.
(4) The applicant or the applicant's spouse has not been convicted of a violation of this article or
any crime involving sexual activity of any form and described in chapter 21, 22 or 43 of the Texas
Penal Code.
(5) The license fee required by this article has been paid.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.602)
Sec. 8.14.032 Fee
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be established by fee resolution of the city council
in the same manner in which other license fees in the city are established. (2002 Code, sec. 4.603)
Sec. 8.14.033 Term; suspension or revocation; transfer
(a) Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of its issuance and may be renewed only by making
the application required by section 8.14.031. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days
before the expiration date.
(b) The chief of police shall suspend the license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if a licensee has
violated any provision of this article, has engaged in the excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the
premises of the sexually oriented business, has refused to allow an inspection as authorized by this article, has
knowingly permitted gambling on the premises or has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage the
business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner.
(c) The chief of police shall revoke a license for a second suspension within twelve (12) months or if he
determines that a licensee gave false information in his application or the licensee or an employee has knowingly
allowed the possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or has allowed the premises to be
used for prostitution, or has allowed the premises to be used for any sexual contact as defined in section 21.01 of
the Texas Penal Code. A revocation shall continue for one (1) year.
(d) A licensee shall not transfer his license to another person.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.604)
ARTICLE 8.15 TAXICABS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.15.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/618
Driver. An individual who drives or operates a taxicab.
Holder. A person who is granted an annual operating permit to operate a taxicab service under the provisions of
this article.
Operate. To drive or be in control of a taxicab.
Operating permit. Permission granted by the city to operate a taxicab service inside the city for a period of one
(1) year, renewable under the provisions of this article.
Operator. The driver of a taxicab, the owner of a taxicab or the holder of an annual operating permit.
Person. An individual, corporation, agency, trust, partnership or two (2) or more persons having a joint or
common economic interest.
Taxicab. A chauffeured motor vehicle used to transport persons for hire on a call or demand basis upon the
streets of the city, with the following exceptions:
(1) A vehicle being operated pursuant to a permit issued by the city or pursuant to a franchise or
permit legally issued by the railroad commission of the state or pursuant to permission duly granted
by the proper authority of the city for a vehicle to operate over a regular route, upon a set schedule, or
pursuant to any permission duly granted by the city council, or a vehicle being operated as a
chartered bus under a contract to carry twelve (12) or more passengers;
(2) Vehicles being used as ambulances;
(3) Vehicles rented or leased for self-operation by the person actually driving the same, unless such
a vehicle is transporting for compensation persons other than the one who actually rented or leased
the same.
Taxicab driver's license. A license issued to a person by the city authorizing that person to operate a taxicab in
the city.
Taxicab service. A passenger transportation service operated for hire that uses taxicabs in the operation of the
service and includes (but is not limited to) a facility from which the service is operated, taxicabs used in the
operation and a person who owns, controls or operates the service.
Taximeter. A device that automatically computes a taxi fare based upon the distance traveled or the time the
taxicab is engaged or both.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1201)
Sec. 8.15.002 Reciprocal privileges for drivers and vehicles qualified by other entities
(a) Anyone licensed by the City of Dallas or the Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport Authority to operate a
taxicab is deemed to have been issued a taxicab driver's license by the city under the provisions of this article.
(b) Any taxicab inspected and qualified by the City of Dallas or the Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport
Authority shall be deemed to have been duly inspected and qualified by the city under the provisions of this
article.
(c) Any person deemed to have been issued a taxicab driver's license under the provisions of this section shall
be subject to revocation as set forth in section 8.15.063. Any person deemed to have been issued a taxicab
driver's license under the provisions of this section shall be subject to revocation of that privilege in the event the
City of Dallas or Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport Authority revokes his taxicab driver's license. Any taxicab
deemed to have been duly inspected and qualified may be disqualified if it fails to meet the requirements of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/618
section 8.15.004 or if it is the disqualified by the City of Dallas or the Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport
Authority.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1210)
Sec. 8.15.003 Conduct of drivers
While on duty a driver shall conduct himself in a reasonable, prudent and courteous manner. (2002 Code, sec.
4.1213)
Sec. 8.15.004 Requirements for vehicles; inspection of vehicles
Before being allowed to operate upon the streets of the city, each taxicab shall be inspected and approved
annually by the chief of police or his representative. No taxicab shall be driven or operated upon the streets of
the city unless the same is in safe condition and free from mechanical defects, and it must further meet the
following requirements:
(1) Have a current valid state inspection sticker and be in compliance with the safety requirements
of the Texas Transportation Code as amended;
(2) Be not more than five (5) years old when it is initially qualified for service, and when it is over
five (5) years old, be capable of passing an inspection which determines that the paint and body
condition, interior, seating and upholstery, as well as all safety and mechanical equipment, are in
good condition before it can continue to serve as a taxicab;
(3) Have a seat belt for each passenger;
(4) Have an operating heater and air conditioner;
(5) Have a two-way radio on the holder's dispatch frequency;
(6) Have a current valid taxicab sticker issued by the city affixed to the windshield; and
(7) Have painted on both sides the trade name of the organization under whose operating permit
such taxicab is being operated, the taxicab unit number and the business telephone number of the
holder of the operating permit. Such letters and numbers shall be not less than three (3) inches high
with one-half-inch stroke, painted on each taxicab with permanent, non-washable paint of a color
sharply contrasting to the color of the taxicab so that the same can be readily apparent. Each holder of
an operating permit for taxicab service in the city shall cause each taxicab to be painted in such a
manner to properly distinguish it from private vehicles and taxicabs operated by different taxicab
services. The color combinations to be used shall be filed with the city secretary, and no two (2) such
taxicab services shall be permitted to use the same or similar color combinations. Provided, however,
painted numbers may be exempted where an approved magnetic sign is affixed to both sides of such
taxicab in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1214)
Sec. 8.15.005 Taximeter
(a) Every taxicab operating under an operating permit granted by the city shall have affixed thereto a
taximeter which shall calculate fares in accordance with services rendered and rates established by the city
council.
(b) The rates to be charged for taxicab service in the city shall be established by the city council as it may
from time to time determine by resolution.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/618
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1215)
Sec. 8.15.006 Refusal to convey passenger
(a) While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse to convey a person who requests service unless:
(1) The person is disorderly;
(2) The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service; or
(3) The driver is in fear of his personal safety.
(b) While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse service requested by a radio dispatch when the location
for pickup is within a reasonable distance from the location of the taxicab.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1216)
Sec. 8.15.007 Posting of rates
Every taxicab operator shall post in each taxicab operated by him, in a conspicuous place in view of the
passengers to be conveyed, a schedule of fares to be charged for service. Such schedule shall be printed on a card
in not less than twenty-four point boldface type letter spaced and giving the rates and distances for which such
rates apply. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1217)
Secs. 8.15.008–8.15.030 Reserved
Division 2. Operating Permit
Sec. 8.15.031 Required
No person shall drive, operate or cause to be operated, nor shall any person employ, permit or allow another to
drive, operate or cause to be operated, any taxicab upon any street in the city for the purpose of transporting a
passenger or passengers for compensation, nor shall any person accept compensation for the transportation of
passengers, without first having obtained from the city, under the provisions of this article, an operating permit
authorizing such operation and acts, except a vehicle which is lawfully transporting a passenger or passengers
from a point outside the city to a destination within the city, or, after discharging such a passenger within the
city, is returning empty by the most direct route to its regular place of business outside the city; provided,
however, that no such vehicle without such operating permit shall solicit or accept a passenger or passengers
from any point within the city for transportation to any destination whatsoever, and no such vehicle without such
operating permit shall remain waiting for more than five (5) minutes at any point in the city for a passenger
brought in by it for the purpose of continuing the journey of such passenger or for any other purpose except to
have repairs made upon it at a garage or other place where automotive repairs are customarily made. (2002
Code, sec. 4.1202)
Sec. 8.15.032 Transfer
An operating permit issued under the provisions of this article may not be transferred to another person unless
such transfer is approved by the city council. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1203)
Sec. 8.15.033 Application requirements
(a) To obtain an operating permit, a person shall file a written application with the city secretary in the manner
prescribed by this section. That applicant must be the person who will own, control or operate the proposed
taxicab service. An applicant shall file with the city secretary a written verified application containing the
following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/618
(1) The form of business of the applicant; if the business is a corporation or association, a copy of
the documents establishing the business and the name, address and citizenship of each person with a
direct interest in the business;
(2) Name, address, race, sex, age and verified signature of the applicant;
(3) An actual or pro forma income statement and balance sheet showing the liabilities and the
assets of the business;
(4) Description of any past business experience of the applicant, particularly in providing
passenger transportation services, identification and description on any revocation or suspension of a
franchise or permit held by the applicant or business before the date of filing the application;
(5) The number of vehicles and description of the vehicles the applicant proposes to use in the
operation of the taxicab service; the description of the operations of the proposed taxicab service and
the location of the fixed facilities to be used in the operation;
(6) The description of the proposed insignia and color scheme for the applicant's taxicab;
(7) Documentary evidence from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state
indicating a willingness to provide liability insurance required by this article;
(8) Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to be used in
connection with the operation of the proposed taxicab service;
(9) The amount the applicant proposes to charge for the rendition of such services;
(10) Such additional information as the city council considers necessary to assist or promote the
implementation or enforcement of this article or the protection of the public safety.
(b) When an application for an operating permit containing the required information in full, properly verified,
is filed with the city secretary, it shall be placed on the agenda of the city council for the next regular meeting of
the city council following the filing of such application.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1204)
Sec. 8.15.034 Application fee
Each applicant for a license to operate a vehicle for transporting of passengers for hire within the city shall pay a
nonrefundable fee as established by the city council to cover the cost of processing the application. (2002 Code,
sec. 4.1205)
Sec. 8.15.035 Investigation; criteria for granting; term; renewal
(a) After receiving any application for an operating permit, the city council shall make or cause to be made by
its agents or employees, or by persons designated by it, such investigation as it may consider necessary. The city
council shall determine whether or not the public necessity and convenience requires the operation of such
taxicabs and whether or not the applicant is fit and proper, qualified and able to officially conduct such business
and render such service to the public, but the operating permit will not be granted unless:
(1) The holder of the operating permit provides taxicab service to the entire city with an adequate
number of taxicabs (as determined by the city council) registered for service;
(2) The holder of the operating permit provides taxicab service between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/618
(3) The holder of the operating permit provides dispatch service to taxicabs between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week;
(4) The holder of the operating permit provides proof of minimum insurance for each taxicab in
accordance with the statutes of the state under the Texas Safety Responsibility Act or amendments
thereto; and
(5) The holder of an operating permit pays an annual fee based on a rate as the city council may
determine from time to time by resolution.
(b) An operating permit may not be granted for a period longer than one (1) year; however, the annual
operating permit is automatically renewed, provided, however, the holder thereof is in full compliance with the
provisions of this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1206)
Sec. 8.15.036 Public hearing; issuance
No permit to operate a taxicab service in the city shall be granted until a public hearing shall have been held
before the city council on such request at a regular meeting of the city council. Upon approval of an application
for an operating permit by the city council, the permit will be granted in the manner prescribed by this article,
containing such terms or conditions as are included by the city council. Unless the permit expressly indicates
otherwise, the provisions of this article shall apply to the permit and are deemed to be part of each permit as if
the provisions of this article were expressly set forth therein. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1207)
Sec. 8.15.037 Revocation
(a) The city council may revoke an operating permit if it determines that the holder has done any of the
following:
(1) Failed to comply with any provision of this article;
(2) Breached any of the terms of the operating permit;
(3) Failed to pay city ad valorem taxes on the property of the holder having taxable suits in the city,
used directly or indirectly in connection with the taxicab service;
(4) Failed to pay the annual permit fee when due.
(b) If the city council desires to revoke an operating permit, it shall deliver to the holder of the operating
permit in writing the reasons for such revocation; and, after a hearing, may revoke and cancel such operating
permit. In the event of such revocation, the operating permit shall be null and void.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1208)
Secs. 8.15.038–8.15.060 Reserved
Division 3. Driver's License
Sec. 8.15.061 Required
(a) A person may not drive a taxicab inside the city unless he has a valid taxicab driver's license issued to him
under the provisions of this article.
(b) A holder may not employ or contract with a driver or otherwise allow a person to drive for hire a taxicab
owned, controlled or operated by the holder unless the person has a valid taxicab driver's license issued to him
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/618
under the provisions of this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1209)
Sec. 8.15.062 Qualifications
To qualify for a taxicab driver's license, an applicant must:
(1) Be a legal resident of the United States;
(2) Hold a valid Texas driver's license, class C;
(3) Be able to communicate in the English language;
(4) Not have been convicted of more than four (4) moving traffic violations arising out of separate
transactions, nor involved in more than two (2) automobile accidents in which it could be reasonably
determined that he was at fault, within a twelve-month period during the preceding thirty-six (36)
months;
(5) Not have been under indictment or convicted of any crime involving murder, theft, burglary,
robbery, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, public lewdness, a sexual offense or a drug-related
offense, unless five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement, whichever is the later date;
(6) Not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or defined or deferred adjudication for,
driving while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs within the last two (2) years and more than
once in the last seven (7) years;
(7) Pay a taxicab driver's license permit fee annually based on a rate as determined by the city
council from time to time by resolution.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1211)
Sec. 8.15.063 Revocation
The city may revoke a taxicab driver's license if it determines that the licensee has failed to comply with any of
the provisions of this article. The revocation of the taxicab driver's license is effective immediately upon
notification in writing to the driver or the holder of the annual operating permit. The licensee may appeal the
revocation to the city manager within five (5) calendar days of receipt of the notice of revocation of the taxicab
driver's license. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1212)
ARTICLE 8.16 LIMOUSINE SERVICES*
Sec. 8.16.001 Definitions
In this article:
Limousine. A vehicle that has a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of not more than fifteen (15) passengers
and that is used for the transportation of persons.
Limousine service. The business of offering transportation of persons for hire by a limousine in which the driver
is included as part of the service.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1401)
Sec. 8.16.002 Permit required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/618
(a) A person shall not operate a limousine service for the transport of persons between locations within the
city or from locations within the city to locations outside the city without a permit granted under this article.
(b) For purposes of this article, a permit to operate a limousine service shall be granted in the same manner as
is provided by article 8.15 of this chapter for a taxicab service.
(c) Limousines permitted hereunder shall not be required to contain a meter and shall not be required to have
any exterior markings or insignia except a valid limousine sticker issued by the city affixed to the windshield.
(d) Each limousine shall be required to have an operating license and shall pay an annual license fee to the
city, which fee shall be established by the city council from time to time by appropriate resolution.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1402)
Sec. 8.16.003 Permit application fee
Each limousine service operator shall be subject to a nonrefundable permit application fee as established by the
city council to cover the cost of processing the application. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1403)
Sec. 8.16.004 Reciprocal privileges
The reciprocal privileges granted taxicab operators under section 8.15.002 of this chapter shall be granted in the
same manner to limousine drivers and limousines. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1404)
Sec. 8.16.005 Vehicle maintenance
The owner of a limousine service shall maintain vehicles used in the service in safe mechanical condition and
shall maintain the interior and exterior of the vehicles in good repair. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1405)
ARTICLE 8.17 HOTEL/MOTEL PROPERTY REGULATIONS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.17.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Bathroom. An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers or both, and which may also include
toilets, lavatories or fixtures serving similar purposes.
Cooking appliance. Any device which is used in the preparation of food or drinks, specifically for the purpose of
heating food or drinks, including but not limited to stoves, ovens, microwaves, hot plates, electric skillets and
electric kettles. This does not include electric coffee pots with a capacity of twelve cups or less.
Extended stay hotel. Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which
are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied not in excess of thirty (30) days or which are occupied for sleeping
purposes for guests and, may contain kitchen facilities for food preparation including but not limited to such
facilities as refrigerators and microwaves. Stoves, ovens, and hotplates are permitted only if the structure is
equipped with necessary fire prevention equipment.
Floor space. The total area of all habitable space.
Guest. Any person who occupies a rental unit in a hotel/motel building for living or dwelling purposes on a
temporary or transient basis with the property owner, property manager or resident manager's consent.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/618
Habitable space. The space occupied by one or more persons while living, sleeping, eating, and cooking,
excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, closets, storage spaces,
foyers, hallways, utility rooms, mechanical rooms and basements and or recreational rooms.
Hotel. An establishment providing, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and customary lodging services for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days, including maid service, the furnishing and upkeep of furniture and bed
linens, and telephone and desk service. Related ancillary uses may include but shall not be limited to conference
and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, and recreational facilities.
Kitchenette. A space, less than sixty (60) square feet in floor area used for preparation of food. Kitchenettes shall
have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
Light and ventilation conforming to code shall be provided.
Lender. Any person who holds a mortgage, deed of trust or any other security interest in the premises.
Motel. A building or group of buildings in which lodging is designed, intended or used primarily for the
accommodation of transient guests for compensation, said accommodation not to exceed thirty (30) days, and in
which access to and from each room or unit is through an exterior door. A motel is distinguished from a hotel
primarily by reason of providing direct independent access to, and adjoining parking for, each rental unit.
Owner. A person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership dominion or title of real property, including but
not limited to:
(1) Holder of simple title;
(2) Holder of life estate;
(3) Holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more;
(4) The buyer in a contract for deed;
(5) A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trusts in control of real property buy not including the
holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five (5) years.
Person. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, two (2) or
more persons having a joint common interest, or any other legal or commercial entity.
Plumbing fixtures. Include gas pipes, water pipes, toilets, lavatories, sinks, laundry tubs, dishwashers, garbage
disposal units, clothes washing machines, catchbasins, washbasins, bathtubs, shower baths, sewer pipes, sewage
systems, septic tanks, drains, vents, traps, and other fuel burning or connections to pipes.
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structure thereon and furthermore including a rental unit,
appurtenances thereto, grounds and facilities held out for the use of guests generally and any other area or
facility whose use is promised to the guest.
Property manager. A person who for compensation has managing control of real property for owner.
Rental unit. A unit located in a motel, hotel, or extended stay hotel which is rented and used as a guest room or
sleeping place by one (1) or by two (2) or more persons, to the exclusion of others, on a temporary or transient
basis.
Resident manager. The owner, property manager and/or resident manager or resident manager of a hotel/motel
building or any other person held out by any owner or property manager as the appropriate person who is in
control or management of the property, who rents or causes to be rented a rental unit, or the person a guest
contacts concerning the rental agreement or hotel/motel building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/618
Residential group R-1 occupancy. Residential occupancies containing sleeping units where the occupants are
primarily transient in nature.
Residential group R-2 occupancy. Residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling
units where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature.
Transient. Occupancy of a dwelling unit or sleeping unit for not more than 30 days.
Sec. 8.17.002 Building official, power and duties
(a) The building official is herby designated as the administrator of this article.
(b) In addition to the powers and duties otherwise prescribed for the building official or his designated
representative, as administrator of this article, he is required to:
(1) Administer and enforce all provisions of this article.
(2) Keep records of all licenses issued.
(3) Adopt rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, with respect to
the form and content of application for licenses, the investigation of applicants, and other matters
incidental or appropriate to his powers and duties as may be necessary for the proper administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(4) Conduct on his/her initiative, periodic inspections of hotel and motel buildings throughout the
city, concerning their compliance with this article.
Sec. 8.17.003 Minimum standards; responsibilities of the property owner and property manager
(a) Property standards. The property owner and property manager of a hotel, motel or extended stay hotel
shall:
(1) Ensure that the property maintains a R-1 occupancy classification and that the length of time
for guest accommodations does not exceed thirty (30) days per guest per rental unit. In the event
guests are permitted to rent rental units for a period in excess of thirty (30) days the occupancy
classification will change to R-2, triggering additional structural requirements under the building
code.
(2) Eliminate a hole, excavation, sharp protrusion, and other objects or conditions that exist on the
premises and are reasonably capable of causing injury to a person.
(3) Securely cover or close a well, cesspool or cistern.
(4) Provide an adequate number of solid waste receptacles or containers on the premises.
(5) Provide adequate drainage to prevent standing water and flooding on the land.
(6) Remove dead trees, tree limbs, shrubs and landscaping that are reasonably capable of causing
injury to a person.
(7) Keep the doors and windows of a vacant unit or vacant portion of a hotel/motel building
securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry.
(8) Keep all areas of the building, grounds, facilities and appurtenances in a clean and sanitary
manner.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/618
(9) The property owner and property manager shall address a resident complaints within the
prescribed time listed in section 8.17.006 of this article.
(10) All exterior surfaces shall be painted and sealed to prevent rust or rotted materials.
(11) There shall not be any cooking appliance other than a microwave used or stored in any rental
unit classified as residential group R-1 or residential group R-2 occupancy unless the structure is
properly equipped with fire prevention equipment required under this code, and those codes adopted
therein, including but not limited to the International Mechanical Code, the International Electrical
Code and the fire code.
(12) There shall not be more than one living quarters unit per hotel/motel complex or address
dedicated for use by the residential manager, property manager or property owner.
(b) Structural standards. A property owner and property manager of a hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel
shall, in compliance with the appropriate codes of the city:
(1) Protect the exterior surfaces of a structure which are subject to decay, by application of paint or
other coating.
(2) Provide and maintain railings for stairs, steps, balconies, porches, and elsewhere as specified in
compliance with the established codes in this code.
(3) Repair holes, cracks, and defects reasonably capable of causing injury to a person in stairs,
porches, steps and balconies.
(4) Maintain the property in a weathertight and watertight condition.
(5) Maintain floors, walls, ceilings, and supporting structural members in a sound condition,
capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
(6) Repair or replace chimney flue vent attachments that do not function properly.
(7) Repair holes, cracks, breaks and loose surface materials that are health or safety hazards in or
on floors, walls or ceilings.
(8) Maintain all interior unit exhaust fans, light fixtures in good working order.
(9) Maintain all hotel/motel emergency fixtures in working order, including those fixtures required
under the fire code. In the event rental units are rented by guests for longer than thirty (30) days, the
occupancy classification of the structure will change to R-2, and the property owner and property
manager will be required to install a fire sprinkler system.
(c) Utility standards. A property owner and property manager of a hotel, motel or extended stay hotel shall, in
compliance with the appropriate codes of the city:
(1) Provide and maintain in working order connections to discharge sewage from a structure or
deposit into a public sewer system.
(2) Provide and maintain in working order a toilet connected to a water source and to a public
sewer in each rental unit.
(3) Provide and maintain in working order connections and pipes to supply potable water at
adequate pressure to a rental unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/618
(4) Provide and maintain a device to supply hot water of a consistent minimum temperature of one
hundred and twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit within each rental unit.
(5) Provide, connect and maintain in working order a bathtub or shower and lavatory, and if a
kitchen or kitchenette is present in the rental unit a kitchen sink, to a cold and hot water source in a
rental unit.
(6) Connect plumbing fixture and heating equipment that the owner supplied in accordance with
the plumbing and mechanical codes of the city.
(7) Provide heating equipment capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of sixty-eight
(68) degrees Fahrenheit in each room of the rental unit.
(8) Provide and maintain air-conditioning equipment capable of maintaining inside temperature of
seventy-eight (78) degrees Fahrenheit with an outside temperature of ninety-eight degrees Fahrenheit.
(9) Provide and maintain supply lines for electrical service to each rental unit.
(10) Connect each heating device that burns solid fuel to a chimney or flue.
(11) Provide and maintain electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to safely carry a load imposed by
normal use of appliance and fixtures.
(12) Maintain all electrical, plumbing, heating and other facilities supplied by the owner in good
working order at all times.
(d) Health standards. A property owner and property manager shall.
(1) Eliminate rodents and vermin in or on the premises;
(2) Maintain the interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure free from rubbish and
garbage;
(3) Keep the interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of any structure free from insects,
rodents and vermin; and
(4) Provide and maintain appropriate receptacles and conveniences for the removal of ashes,
rubbish, garbage and any other waste material and to arrange for frequent removal of such waste
materials.
(e) Exemption. A violation of this article under subsection (a) of this section shall not apply when the
premises concerned is the site of new construction and reasonable and continuous progress is being made to
complete the construction.
Sec. 8.17.004 Responsibility of guest
A guest shall:
(1) Maintain the interior of a rental unit occupied by the guest free from rubbish and garbage.
(2) Remove an animal or animals from a rental unit if the presence of the animal or animals is a
health hazard to a guest.
(3) Connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the guest supplies in accordance with
the plumbing code and the mechanical code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/618
(4) Place all ashes, rubbish, garbage and any other waste material in the appropriate receptacles
provided for same by the resident manager.
(5) Not alter a structure or its facilities so as to create nonconformity with section 8.17.003.
(6) Use in a reasonable manner all electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating airconditioning,
and other facilities and appliances, including elevators, in the premises.
(7) Not deliberately or intentionally destroy, deface, damage, impair or remove any part of the
premises or unknowingly permit any person to do so.
(8) Conduct himself or herself, and require other persons on the premises with his consent to
conduct themselves, in a manner that will not disturb his neighbors peaceful enjoyment of the
premises. For purposes of this section such unalloyed conduct includes, but is not limited to, any load
playing of music, television, radio, instrument or any other mechanical device.
(9) When vacating the rental unit, remove all trash and debris or risk loss of a portion of the
security deposit.
Sec. 8.17.005 Repair duties
(a) The property owner and property manager have the duty to furnish and maintain premises in accordance
with the standards enumerated in section 8.17.003. In addition the property owner and property manager shall at
all times during the occupancy of a guest make all repairs necessary to keep and maintain the premises in
accordance with the standards provided for in section 8.17.003.
(b) Upon notice by the guest in writing of any defective condition in the premises or rental unit in
noncompliance with the standards stated in section 8.17.003, the property owner and property manager shall
repair such condition within a reasonable period of time. If the property owner and property manager fail to
complete such repairs within twenty-four (24) hours, the guest may file a complaint in writing to the building
official for enforcement based upon the nature of repair and the difficulty involved, and shall issue a citation to
the property owner only, if the violation is not corrected within such reasonable time.
(c) In emergency situations, the guest shall notify the property owner, property manager or resident manager
on premises. For purposes of this section, “emergency situations” are defined as a stopped up commode,
overflowing bathtub or sink, broken pipes, leaking roof, emergency electrical malfunction or other situations
having immediate adverse effects on the health or safety of the guest or his/her rental unit. Upon notification, the
property owner, property manager or resident manager shall respond immediately and furnish assistance to the
guest within one (1) hour from such notification, where possible.
Sec. 8.17.006 Notice requirements
(a) A person “notifies” or “gives a notice or notification” to another person by taking steps reasonably
calculated to inform the other in ordinary course whether or not the other actually comes to know it. A person
receives a notice or notification when:
(1) It comes to his attention; or
(2) In case of the property owner, property manager or resident manager it is delivered at the place
of business of the property owner, property manager or resident manager through which the rental
agreement was made or at any place held out by him as the place for receipt of the communication, or
in the case of the guest, it is delivered in hand to the guest or mailed by registered or certified mail to
him at the place held out by him as the place for receipt of the communication, or in the absence of
such designation, to his last known place of residence.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/618
(b) A guest may not file a complaint with the building official under the terms of this section until twenty-four
(24) hours have elapsed following written notice to the property owner, property manager or resident manager. A
copy of the written notice must accompany the guest complaint.
Sec. 8.17.007 Affirmative defenses
Notwithstanding all other sections of this article, it will be an affirmative defense to a complaint if the defendant
property owner, property manager or resident manager or guest is able to establish that:
(1) The noncomplying condition described in the complaint was repaired within the prescribed
time limits set forth in section 8.17.005.
(2) The noncomplying condition was repaired within the time limits established by the building
official, or that the period for repair was reasonable due to circumstances beyond the control of the
resident manager.
(3) The required notice in section 8.17.006 was not provided.
(4) The noncomplying condition was caused by the deliberate or intentional conduct of the
complaining party.
(5) The noncomplying condition could have been corrected but for the guest's refusal to permit
access to his rental unit.
Sec. 8.17.008 Rental agreement; disclosure; administrative responsibilities
(a) A property owner and property manager shall disclose to the guest, by properly posting in the office, the
name and address of:
(1) Each property manager and resident manager.
(2) The management company responsible for the operation of the company.
(b) A property owner, property manager or resident manager shall leave notice of entry, whenever it is
necessary to enter the rental unit without the specific permission of the guest. Such notice shall include date,
time, and purpose of the person who has entered the rental unit.
Sec. 8.17.009 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Every day a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.
Secs. 8.17.010–8.17.040 Reserved
Division 2. Hotel/Motel License
Sec. 8.17.041 Required trade name registration
(a) No person shall maintain, conduct, operate or rent a rental unit in a hotel, motel or extended stay motel for
compensation within the city, or act as agent for another who is renting rental units in a hotel, motel or extended
stay hotel, without first obtaining hotel/motel license from the building official. Should a person own or maintain
a hotel, motel or extended stay hotel at more than one (1) location, a duplicate license is required for each
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/618
additional location. The license issued to an owner authorizes such owner and its bona fide agents or employees
to rent rental units to guests.
(b) An owner shall register with the building official the trade name of his owner of his hotel, motel, or
extended stay hotel and shall not use or permit to be used more than one (1) trade name at a single location.
Sec. 8.17.042 Application; place of business; issuance, renewal and expiration
(a) An applicant for a license shall file with the building official a written application upon a form provided
for that purpose, which shall be signed by the owner and his property manager. Should an applicant own a hotel,
motel or extended stay hotel at more than one (1) location, a separate application must be filed for each location.
The following information shall be required in the application: Name, primary address, telephone number of the
owner, property manager, resident manager and lender and the street address of the hotel, motel or extended stay
hotel building(s), and if incorporated, the name of the registered agent on file with the secretary of state.
(b) The hotel/motel license expires on December thirty-first (31st) of each year.
(c) The building official may, at any time, require additional information of the owner or property manager, to
clarify items on the application.
(d) When the resident manager of a hotel, motel or extended stay hotel is changed, notice of such change,
together with name, address and telephone number of the new agent shall be provided to the building official
within ten (10) days.
Sec. 8.17.043 Fee
(a) All fees for any permit under this article shall be established by resolution of the city council.
(b) No license fee shall be required for all new hotels/motels for five years from the date of issuance of the
first certificate of occupancy for said hotel/motel. This provision applies only to new establishments, and does
not extend to pre-existing hotel/motels which have undergone a change in ownership or management.
Sec. 8.17.044 Display, replacement and transferability
(a) Each license issued pursuant to this article together with a copy of this article must be posted, displayed
and kept in a conspicuous place in the hotel/motel structure in which the guest has access.
(b) A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed or mutilated, upon application on the form
provided by the building official. A replacement license shall have the word “replacement” stamped across its
face and shall bear the same number as the one it replaces.
(c) A hotel/motel license is not assignable or transferable.
(d) An owner or property manager shall notify the building official within ten (10) days of a change of partial
change in ownership, lender or management of the hotel or motel, or a change of address or trade name.
(Ordinance 2013-07-06 adopted 7/8/13)
ARTICLE 8.18 BOARDING HOME FACILITIES
Sec. 8.18.001 Purpose
(a) The purposes of this article are to ensure that:
(1) Residents of boarding home facilities live in safe, sanitary, and decent housing;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/618
(2) These residents are not abused, neglected, or exploited by the owners, operators, or employees
of boarding home facilities;
(3) Adequate fire-rescue and police personnel and vehicles are available to serve these residents;
and
(4) The city can identify and facilitate appropriate responses for residents who may require special
assistance during an emergency or at any other time.
(b) The city is accomplishing those purposes by implementing standards for construction, maintenance,
reporting, recordkeeping, education, and care for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of residents of
boarding home facilities. These standards are adopted pursuant to the authority granted under chapter 260 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code and pursuant to the city's home-rule authority under article XI, section 5 of the
Texas Constitution and the authority to license lawful businesses subject to the city's police power granted by
sections 54.004 and 215.075 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(c) The city council also intends that this article fully comply with the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act
of 1988 (“FHAA”), as amended, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (“ADA”), as amended, and all
other applicable state and federal legislation. It is the express intent of the city council that this article be
construed in a manner consistent with the FHAA, the ADA, and all other applicable state and federal legislation
at all times.
Sec. 8.18.002 Definitions
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall apply:
Abuse.
(1) The negligent or willful infliction of injury, unreasonable confinement, intimidation, or cruel
punishment with resulting physical or emotional harm or pain to a resident by the person's caretaker,
family member, or other individual who has an ongoing relationship with the person; or
(2) Sexual abuse of a resident, including any involuntary or nonconsensual sexual conduct that
would constitute an offense under section 21.08 of the Texas Penal Code (indecent exposure), as
amended, or chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code (assaultive offenses), as amended, committed by the
person's caretaker, family member, or other individual who has an ongoing relationship with the
person.
Alcohol. Any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of
use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted.
Appeals board. The city's zoning board of adjustment shall serve as the appeals board for purposes of this article.
Assistance with self-administration of medication.
(1) Assisting a resident by reminding the resident to take medication;
(2) Opening and removing medications from a container;
(3) Placing medication in a resident's hand or in or on a clean surface such as a medication
reminder box; and
(4) Reminding a resident when a prescription medication needs to be refilled.
Boarding home facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/618
(1) An establishment that furnishes, in one or more buildings, lodging to three or more persons
who are unrelated to the owner of the establishment by blood or marriage;
(2) Provides community meals, light housework, meal preparation, transportation, grocery
shopping, money management, laundry services, or assistance with self-administration of medication
but does not provide personal care services to those persons; and
(3) Is not listed in section 8.18.005 of this article.
Controlled substance. A substance regulated under 21 C.F.R. section 1308, as amended.
Conviction. A conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a
state or foreign nation that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. “Conviction” includes disposition of
charges against a person by probation.
Department. Designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article.
Direct threat. A significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of
policies, practices, or procedures, or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services.
Director. The director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article
and includes representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director.
Disability. Defined in 42 U.S.C. section 12102, as amended.
Emergency condition. Any fire, natural disaster, collapse hazard, burst pipe, leaking sewage, lack of working
utilities, dangerous utilities, serious police incident, or other condition that requires an immediate response to
prevent harm to the property, the occupants of the property, or the public.
Employee. A person who performs caretaking duties or regularly works in a boarding home facility.
Exploitation. The illegal or improper act or process of an owner, operator, employee, caretaker, family member,
or other individual who has an ongoing relationship with the resident using the resources of a resident for
monetary or personal benefit, profit, or gain without the informed consent of the resident.
Injury, incident, or unusual accident. An event that resulted in a change in a resident's physical or mental status
that requires intervention by a private or public entity responsible for medical or mental health services or an
event that requires the facility to take safety and protection measures for the resident or others. This term
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) An allegation of abuse, neglect, or exploitation;
(2) Death;
(3) A resident's unexplained absence from the boarding home facility;
(4) Fire;
(5) Criminal acts; or
(6) Fights between residents.
Licensee.
(1) Person in whose name a boarding home facility license has been issued;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/618
(2) Each individual listed as an owner or operator of the boarding home facility on the application
for a boarding home facility license;
(3) Each individual who has an ownership interest in the corporation or other legal entity owning
or operating the boarding home facility, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature
appears on the boarding home facility license application; and
(4) Each officer of the corporation or other legal entity owning or operating a boarding home
facility, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the boarding home
facility license application.
Neglect. Failure of a resident or licensee to provide goods or services, including medical services that are
necessary to avoid physical or emotional harm or pain or the failure of a caretaker to provide such goods or
services.
Operator. Person in control of a boarding home facility.
Owner. Individual who has an ownership interest in a corporation or other legal entity operating a boarding
home facility or the owner of the real property where a boarding home facility is located.
Personal care.
(1) Assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing, or other personal needs or maintenance;
(2) The administration of medication by a person licensed to administer medication or the
assistance with or supervision of medication; or
(3) General supervision or oversight of the physical and mental well-being of a person who needs
assistance to maintain a private and independent residence in an assisted living facility or who needs
assistance to manage the person's personal life, regardless of whether a guardian has been appointed
for the person.
Resident. Person who is residing in a boarding home facility.
Sec. 8.18.003 Authority of director
The director shall implement and enforce this article and may by written order establish such rules, regulations,
or procedures, not inconsistent with this article or other city ordinances, rules, or regulations, or any county,
state, or federal laws or regulations, as the director determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or to
effect the policy of this article.
Sec. 8.18.004 License required
(a) A person commits an offense if he owns or operates a boarding home facility in the city without a valid
license issued under this article.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this article if a person operates a boarding home facility while an
application under section 8.18.006 is pending.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person operates a facility listed in section 8.18.005 of
this article.
Sec. 8.18.005 Exemptions
This article does not apply to the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/618
(1) Home and community support services licensed under chapter 142 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended.
(2) Convalescent and nursing homes and related institutions licensed under chapter 242 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(3) Continuing care facilities licensed under chapter 246 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as
amended.
(4) Assisted living facilities licensed under chapter 247 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as
amended.
(5) Intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded licensed under chapter 252 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(6) A person that provides home health, hospice, or personal assistance services only to persons
enrolled in a program funded wholly or partly by a state agency with jurisdiction over mental health
and mental disability and monitored by that state agency or its designated local authority in
accordance with standards set by that agency as set forth in chapter 142 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended.
(7) An establishment conducted by or for persons who have a sincere religious belief in providing
facilities to care and treat the sick by depending exclusively on prayer or spiritual means for healing,
without the use of any drug or material remedy, if the establishment complies with safety, sanitary,
and quarantine laws and rules including sections 8.18.022, 8.18.023, 8.18.024, 8.18.027(h), 8.18.029,
8.18.030, 8.18.031, 8.18.032, 8.18.033, and 8.18.034 of this article.
(8) A hotel as defined by section 156.001 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(9) A retirement community as defined by section 11.18 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(10) A monastery or convent.
(11) A child-care facility as defined by section 42.002 of the Texas Human Resources Code, as
amended.
(12) A family violence shelter center as defined by section 51.002 of the Texas Human Resources
Code, as amended.
(13) A college dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house associated with an institution of higher
education.
Sec. 8.18.006 License application
(a) To obtain a license to operate a boarding home facility, a person must submit an application to the director
on a form provided for that purpose. The applicant must be the owner or operator of the boarding home facility.
If the owner or operator is not an individual, an authorized officer or agent of the owner or operator must file the
form. The application must contain the following information before it is considered to be complete:
(1) The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, telephone number, a legible copy of
the driver's license or other official state or federal identification card, and date of birth of the
applicant. The street address may not be the address of the boarding home facility unless the
applicant actually resides full-time at the boarding home facility.
(2) The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, telephone number, a legible copy of
the driver's license or other official state or federal identification card, and position of the authorized
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/618
officer or agent filing the form on behalf of the applicant, if the applicant is not an individual. The
street address may not be the address of the boarding home facility unless the authorized officer or
agent actually resides full-time at the boarding home facility.
(3) The form of business of the applicant; the name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address,
telephone number, a legible copy of the driver's license or other official state or federal identification
card, and date of birth of a high managerial agent of the business; and, if the business is a legal entity,
such as a corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business.
(4) The street address and telephone number of the boarding home facility.
(5) The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, and telephone number of a person or
persons to contact in an emergency as required by section 8.18.017 of this article.
(6) Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes, fees, fines, and penalties owed to the
city in connection with the boarding home facility.
(7) The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, e-mail addresses, telephone numbers, legible
copies of the drivers' licenses or other official state or federal identification cards, and dates of birth
of any owners, operators, or employees of the boarding home facility other than the applicant. The
street address may not be the address of the boarding home facility, unless the owner, operator, or
employee actually resides full-time at the boarding home facility.
(8) Completed state or federal request and release forms authorizing the city to obtain a criminal
history report on each owner and operator of the boarding home facility.
(9) The maximum number of residents that will reside at the boarding home facility.
(10) The services to be offered or provided to the residents of the boarding home facility.
(11) A list of disabilities of the residents.
(12) If the boarding home facility has one or more residents who are recovering from an addiction
to alcohol or a controlled substance but are not currently using alcohol or the controlled substance, a
document that describes the applicant's, owner's, or operator's plan for ensuring that the residents
continue to refrain from using alcohol or the controlled substance, including all rules by which
residents must abide, as required by section 8.18.034 of this article.
(13) A statement that, by filing the application, the applicant swears or affirms under penalty of
perjury that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, all information contained in the application is
true and correct and that the application is complete and includes all information required to be
disclosed under this section.
(14) Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or that the director deems
necessary to aid in the determination of whether the requested license should be granted.
Sec. 8.18.007 Notification of change of information
The licensee shall notify the director within 10 days after any material change in the information contained in the
application for a license to operate a boarding home facility, including any change in ownership or operation of
the property and any new disabilities served by the boarding home facility.
Sec. 8.18.008 Fees
(a) The fee for a license to operate a boarding home facility shall be established by resolution by the city
council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/618
(b) No refund of a license fee will be made.
(c) An applicant for a license may file an application with the director seeking a waiver or reduction of the
annual license fee if the boarding home facility serves one or more persons with a disability and payment of the
fee would result in substantial financial hardship to the applicant. The application must include the following
information before it will be considered complete:
(1) The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, telephone number, a legible copy of
the driver's license or other official state or federal identification card, and date of birth of the
applicant.
(2) The number of residents of the boarding home facility with a disability.
(3) A list of the disabilities of the residents and the number of residents with each disability.
(4) The services provided by the boarding home facility to the residents.
(5) An explanation of the nature and severity of the financial hardship to the applicant if the fee
were to be paid.
(6) A copy of the balance sheets and income statements for the boarding home facility, or
equivalent documents, establishing the applicant's financial condition for the last three years in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, unless the boarding home facility has been
open for less than three years, in which case it must provide a copy of those documents during the
time the facility has been in operation.
(7) A statement that, by filing the application, the applicant swears or affirms under penalty of
perjury that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, all information contained in the application is
true and correct and that the application is complete and includes all information required to be
disclosed under this article.
(8) Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or that the director deems
necessary to aid in the determination of whether the requested waiver or reduction should be granted.
(d) The director may waive or reduce the annual license fee if the director, after reviewing the complete
application, finds that the applicant provides services to one or more persons with a disability and payment of the
fee would result in substantial financial hardship to the applicant.
(e) An applicant may appeal a decision of the director under this section to the appeals board by filing a
written notice with the director within 10 days after the date of the decision of the director. The appeals board
shall hear and decide the appeal at its next available meeting. The appeals board shall use the same standard
required for the director. The appeals board may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the director. Appeal to
the appeals board constitutes the final administrative remedy.
Sec. 8.18.009 Issuance and denial of license
(a) Upon payment of all required fees and the submission of a complete application, the director shall issue a
license to operate a boarding home facility to the applicant if the director determines that:
(1) The applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of the license;
(2) The applicant, owners, operators, and employees of the boarding home facility meet the
criminal history qualifications of section 8.18.037 of this article;
(3) The applicant, owners, operators, or employees of the boarding home facility do not own or
operate another licensed boarding home facility in the city for which the license is currently
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/618
suspended or has been revoked;
(4) The applicant has not made a false statement as to a material matter in the application for a
license;
(5) The condition and use of the boarding home facility comply with the zoning regulations in the
city zoning ordinance, the building regulations in chapter 6 that are applicable to the property, and the
standards in this article applicable to the property; and
(6) The applicant, owners, and operators do not owe the city any ad valorem taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties.
(b) If the director determines that the requirements of subsection (a) have not been met, the director shall deny
the license.
(c) If the director determines that an applicant should be denied a license, the director shall notify the
applicant in writing that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement
informing the applicant of the right of appeal.
Sec. 8.18.010 Prohibition of new residents; suspension of license
(a) The director may suspend a boarding home facility license for a period not to exceed 90 days if the director
finds that the licensee or an employee of the boarding home facility has:
(1) Failed to comply with any provision of this article, any other ordinance, or any state or federal
law applicable to the operation of a boarding home facility; or
(2) Intentionally or knowingly impeded or refused to allow an inspection by the director authorized
under this article.
(b) A boarding home facility for which the license has been suspended may not admit any new residents
during the time the license is suspended.
(c) The director shall send to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement of the
reasons for the suspension, the date the suspension is to begin, the duration of the suspension, and the licensee's
right to appeal.
(d) A licensee whose license is suspended may not be granted a license to operate additional boarding home
facilities during the period of suspension.
(e) A licensee commits an offense if he operates or owns a boarding home facility that admits new residents
during the time that the suspension of the license is in effect.
Sec. 8.18.011 Revocation of license
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), the director shall revoke any license issued to operate a boarding
home facility if the director determines that:
(1) The licensee fails to meet the criminal history qualifications of section 8.18.037 of this article
or employs a person at the facility who fails to meet the criminal history qualifications;
(2) The licensee intentionally made a false statement as to a material matter in the application or in
a hearing concerning the license;
(3) The licensee failed to pay a fee required by this article at the time it was due; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/618
(4) A cause for suspension under section 8.18.010 has occurred and the license has already been
suspended at least once within the preceding 12 months.
(b) Before revoking a license under subsection (a), the director shall notify the licensee in writing by certified
mail, return receipt requested, that the license is being considered for revocation. The notice must include the
reason for the proposed revocation, action the licensee must take to prevent the revocation, and a statement that
the licensee has 10 days to comply with the notice.
(c) If, after 10 days from the date the notice required in subsection (b) was sent or delivered, the licensee has
not complied with required actions listed in the notice, the director shall revoke the license and notify the
licensee in writing of the revocation. The notice must include the reason for the revocation, and a statement
informing the licensee of the right of appeal.
(d) If a license has been revoked, the licensee has 10 days to relocate the residents of the facility and cease
operations. An appeal of the revocation does not suspend or toll this deadline.
Sec. 8.18.012 Appeals
If the director denies issuance or renewal of a license or suspends or revokes a license issued under this article,
the action is final unless the licensee files an appeal with the appeals board.
Sec. 8.18.013 Expiration and renewal of license
(a) A license to operate a boarding home facility expires one year after the date of issuance.
(b) A licensee shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the expiration of the license on a form provided
by the director. The licensee shall update the information contained in the original license application required
under section 8.18.006 of this article, or any subsequent renewals under this section, if any of the information
has changed. The licensee shall sign a statement affirming that there is either no change in the information
contained on the original license application and any subsequent renewal applications, or that any information
that has been updated is accurate and complete.
(c) The director shall follow the procedures set forth in section 8.18.009 when determining whether to renew a
license.
Sec. 8.18.014 Nontransferability
A license to operate a boarding home facility is not transferable to another owner, operator, or location.
Sec. 8.18.015 Records
(a) The licensee shall maintain the records listed in subsection (b) at the boarding home facility to which the
records pertain. The licensee shall make those records available for inspection by the director or a peace officer
at reasonable times upon request for purposes of administering this article.
(b) Records that must be maintained by the licensee include, but are not limited to:
(1) Current records of ownership of the property where the boarding home facility is located;
(2) Records documenting any reasonable accommodation granted under section 8.18.019;
(3) Records demonstrating compliance with applicable laws and regulations, as required by section
8.18.020;
(4) Records documenting that each resident has received training on the emergency evacuation
plan of the boarding home facility at least two times per calendar year, as required by section
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/618
8.18.029;
(5) Records documenting that each resident was shown how to use all emergency exits from the
facility within 24 hours of arrival at the facility, as required by section 8.18.029;
(6) Records documenting injuries, incidents, and unusual accidents that involve residents, as
required by section 8.18.034;
(7) Records documenting any allegations of abuse, neglect, or exploitation of a resident, as
required by section 8.18.034;
(8) Financial records for each resident for which the licensee is the representative payee, as
required by section 8.18.034;
(9) A copy of the service agreement signed by each current resident, as required by section
8.18.034;
(10) Records documenting required in-service education of boarding home facility staff;
(11) Records documenting annual assessment and periodic monitoring of current residents to
determine if residents are capable of self-administering medication and completing basic elements of
personal care, as required by section 8.18.039;
(12) A roll of current residents, including their date of arrival, assigned room, and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or entity that referred them to the facility;
(13) A roll of former residents, including their date of departure, and the name, address, and
telephone number of the person or entity in control of the residence to which they moved (if known);
and
(14) Any other records deemed necessary by the director for the administration and enforcement of
this article.
(c) Except as otherwise provided, a licensee shall maintain a record that concerns a resident for three years
after the resident no longer resides at the boarding home facility.
(d) Except as otherwise provided, a licensee shall maintain a record that does not concern a resident for three
years.
Sec. 8.18.016 Posting requirements
The licensee shall prominently and conspicuously post for display in a public area inside the boarding home
facility that is readily available to residents, the operator, employees, and visitors the following:
(1) The license issued under this article to operate the boarding home facility. The license must be
presented upon request to the director or to a peace officer for examination.
(2) A sign prescribed by the director specifying how complaints may be registered with the city.
(3) A notice in a form prescribed by the director stating that inspection and related reports are
available at the facility for public inspection and providing a telephone number that may be used to
obtain information concerning the facility.
(4) A copy of the most recent inspection report relating to the facility by the city or a concise and
accurate summary of that inspection report.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/618
(5) A notice in a form prescribed by the director that lists the name, location, and contact
information for:
(A) The closest local public health services agency in the proximity of the facility; and
(B) A local organization or entity that represents, advocates, or serves elderly persons or
persons with disabilities, including any related toll-free contact information for reporting
emergencies to the organization or entity.
Sec. 8.18.017 Emergency response information
(a) The licensee shall provide the director with the name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, and
telephone number of a person or persons who can be contacted 24 hours a day, seven days a week in the event of
an emergency condition on the property where the boarding home facility is located.
(b) The licensee shall notify the director within five days after any change in the emergency response
information.
(c) The licensee, or an authorized agent, must arrive at the property within one hour after a contact person
named under this section is notified by a city employee or emergency response personnel that an emergency
condition has occurred on the property.
Sec. 8.18.018 Failure to pay ad valorem taxes, fees, fines, and penalties
A licensee commits an offense if he allows any ad valorem taxes, fees, fines, or penalties owed to the city in
connection with the boarding home facility to become delinquent.
Sec. 8.18.019 Reasonable accommodations
(a) Purpose. The city, pursuant to the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (“FHAA”) 42 U.S.C. section
3601, et seq., as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (“ADA”), 42 U.S.C. section 12101,
et seq., as amended, intends to ensure that all persons with a disability have an equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling by providing such persons with reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, and
procedures promulgated under this article. This section allows a person to seek relief from the enforcement of
any regulation contained in this article that would result in illegal discrimination against the disabled.
(b) Method of submitting a request for a reasonable accommodation; fees; confidentiality.
(1) A request for a reasonable accommodation may be submitted at any time that the
accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.
(2) A request for a reasonable accommodation may be submitted by an individual with a disability,
the person's representative, or a licensee providing housing for one or more individuals with
disabilities.
(3) A request for a reasonable accommodation must be submitted in writing to the director on the
form provided by the department, or in the form of a letter.
(4) There is no fee for an application requesting a reasonable accommodation.
(5) The city will retain any information identified by an applicant as confidential in compliance
with applicable law and will not disclose the information unless required by law.
(6) If an individual needs assistance in making a request for a reasonable accommodation, the city
will provide assistance to ensure that the application process is accessible to the individual.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/618
(c) Application. An applicant shall submit the following information before an application for a reasonable
accommodation is considered to be complete:
(1) The applicant's name, mailing address, street address, telephone number, and e-mail address.
(2) The applicant's relation to the individual or individuals with a disability, if applicable.
(3) The address of the property to which the requested reasonable accommodation would apply.
(4) Information substantiating that the individual who would obtain the benefit of the reasonable
accommodation is disabled.
(5) The section or sections of this article from which a reasonable accommodation is being
requested.
(6) A brief explanation of why the requested accommodation is necessary for the individual or
individuals with disabilities to have equal access to housing.
(d) Review of application by director; required findings; appeals.
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application for a reasonable accommodation, the director shall
review the application and issue a written ruling that grants, grants with conditions, or denies the
application.
(2) Before making a decision, the director may request an inspection of the boarding home facility
and the land on which it is located. If the director makes such a request:
(A) The director has no obligation to make a decision until 10 days after the date the
inspection occurs; and
(B) The applicant must make the property, the facility, and its records available for the
inspection within 20 days after the date of the request or the request is automatically denied.
(3) Before making a decision, the director shall consult with the city attorney to determine whether
the accommodation should be granted.
(4) The director may impose reasonable conditions on any accommodation granted consistent with
the purpose of this article.
(5) The written decision must be consistent with the FHAA and based on a consideration of the
following factors:
(A) Whether the housing that is the subject of the request will be used by one or more
individuals with a disability.
(B) Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to
one or more individuals with a disability.
(C) Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the city.
(D) Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the
nature of a city program or law.
(E) The potential impacts of the requested accommodation on the applicant, the other
residents of the boarding home facility, and the surrounding neighborhood.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/618
(F) Whether a failure to grant an accommodation would result in the property having no
economically viable use.
(G) Whether there are alternative accommodations that are reasonable and have an equal or
less of an impact on the city, the applicant, the other residents of the boarding home facility, and
the surrounding neighborhood.
(6) The director shall issue a written decision within 20 business days of receipt of a completed
application, provided that the director is able to issue a decision based on the information provided in
the original request. If the director deems it necessary to request additional information from the
applicant consistent with federal law, the director shall contact the applicant in writing and specify the
additional information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made,
the 20-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request.
(7) All written decisions must explain in detail the basis of the decision and notify the applicant of
the right to appeal the director's decision to the appeals board.
(8) If the director denies an application for a reasonable accommodation, the action is final unless
the applicant files an appeal with the appeals board.
Sec. 8.18.020 Inspection fees
(a) Required inspections.
(1) A boarding home facility must pass all required inspections.
(2) The licensee shall keep a current file of reports and other documentation on site that is needed
to demonstrate compliance with applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations. Inspection records must
be signed and dated by the appropriate authority and there must be no pending corrective actions.
(3) The following inspections are required:
(A) Licensing inspection.
(B) Annual licensing renewal inspection.
(C) Annual fire inspection.
(D) Annual kitchen inspection for a boarding home facility that provides meal preparation.
(E) A gas pipe pressure test performed every three years by the local gas company or a
licensed plumber for a boarding home facility that receives natural gas service.
(F) Annual inspection of liquefied natural gas systems performed by an inspector certified by
the Texas Railroad Commission for a boarding home facility with a liquefied natural gas
system.
(b) Other inspections. The director may inspect any boarding home facility for the purpose of ascertaining
whether violations of this article or any other city ordinances exist. The director is authorized at a reasonable
time to inspect:
(1) The exterior of a structure and the surrounding premises; and
(2) The interior of a structure if the permission of the owner, occupant, or person in control is given
or a search warrant is obtained.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/618
(c) Consequences of refusal to inspect. If the owner, occupant, or person in control denies permission to
search any part of the interior or exterior of the structure or the surrounding premises, the director may suspend
the license to operate a boarding home facility in accordance with section 8.18.010.
(d) Reinspections. Whenever a boarding home facility is inspected by the director and a violation of this code
is found, the building or premises will, after the expiration of any time limit for compliance given in the notice
or order issued because of the violation, be reinspected by the director to determine that the violation has been
eliminated.
(e) Reinspection fee. The licensee shall pay:
(1) To the director of code compliance $50.00 for each reinspection after the first reinspection by
that department that must be conducted before the violation is determined to be eliminated; and
(2) To the director of any other city department the fee required (if any) by the applicable code for
each reinspection by that department that must be conducted before the violation is determined to be
eliminated.
Sec. 8.18.021 Reports to Texas Health and Human Resources Commission
Before September 30th of each year, the director shall submit a report to the Texas Health and Human Services
Commission. The report must contain the following information:
(1) The total number of boarding home facilities licensed by the city during the preceding state
fiscal year.
(2) The total number of boarding home facility applications for which licenses were denied,
including a summary of the causes for denial.
(3) The total number of boarding home facility licenses that were active on August 31st of the
preceding state fiscal year.
(4) The total number of residents housed in each boarding home facility reported.
(5) The total number of inspections conducted by the city at each boarding home facility.
(6) The total number of licenses suspended or revoked as a result of an inspection.
(7) A summary of the outcome for any residents displaced by suspension or revocation of a license.
Sec. 8.18.022 Construction, remodeling and maintenance
(a) In general. Each licensee shall ensure the residents' health, safety, comfort, and protection through the
standards contained in this section that address the construction, remodeling, and maintenance of a boarding
home facility.
(b) Applicable regulations. Each boarding home facility must comply with the following codes and
regulations:
(1) The city zoning development ordinance.
(2) Chapter 6 (building regulations), as applicable.
(3) The International Fire Code, with the adopted local amendments, and any other applicable
federal, state, or local fire codes and standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/618
(4) Federal, state, and local health and safety codes.
(5) Federal and state accessibility regulations.
(c) Interior doors. An interior door to a living space, bedroom, bathroom, or toilet room must fit the opening in
which it is hung, be properly equipped with hardware, and be maintained in good working condition. Unless a
resident has a disability that requires frequent check-ups by others, a door with a locking device must be
provided to provide privacy to and protection of the resident.
(1) Every closet door latch must be such that it can be readily opened from the inside in case of
emergency.
(2) Every bathroom door or door lock must permit immediate opening of the locked door in case of
emergency.
(d) Public pathways and stairways. A public pathway or stairway in a building must maintain a minimum
unobstructed width in accordance with the city fire code, as amended, and must be provided with a convenient
light switch controlling an adequate light system.
(e) Windows and exterior doors.
(1) Every habitable room must have at least one window that can be easily opened, or such other
device as will ventilate the room.
(2) Locks that can be easily opened manually from inside must be provided on all exterior doors.
(3) All windows must be capable of being opened without tools. Window openings must meet the
requirements of the city building regulations, as applicable, for emergency egress.
(4) The bottom of the window opening must be not more than 44 inches above the floor.
(f) Maintenance.
(1) The licensee shall maintain the dwelling and premises in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) The licensee shall keep a boarding home facility in good repair and maintenance in a manner
that will promote the health, comfort, safety, and well-being of residents.
Sec. 8.18.023 Sleeping rooms
(a) Sleeping space per person. Each room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant must contain at
least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person must
contain at least 60 square feet of floor space for each occupant.
(b) Bed spacing. Beds must be spaced at least three feet apart when placed side-by-side or end-to-end.
(c) Ceiling height. A sleeping room must have a ceiling height of at least seven feet, six inches (7'6").
(d) Accessibility. A sleeping room must provide accessibility for nonambulatory residents and residents with
conditions that substantially limit ambulation or mobility.
(e) Beds.
(1) The licensee shall provide one bed for every resident. It is presumed that the boarding home
facility has one resident for every bed present in the facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/618
(2) All beds must be at least six feet long and three feet wide.
(3) The licensee shall equip all beds with a bed frame, supportive springs, and a clean, unsoiled
supportive mattress, all of which must be in good condition.
(4) The licensee shall equip all beds provided for nonambulatory residents or residents with a
mobility impairment or reduced bladder or bowel function with mattress covers that prevent bodily
fluids from soiling the mattress.
(5) More than two levels of stacked bunk beds are prohibited.
(6) The clear space above the top of the lower mattress of a double decker bunk bed and the bottom
of the upper bunk must be at least 27 inches.
(7) The distance from the top of the upper mattress to the ceiling must be at least 36 inches.
(f) Pillows and sheets.
(1) The licensee shall provide each bed with at least one pillow with a clean, unsoiled pillow case,
at least two clean, unsoiled sheets, and a cover such as a blanket or quilt.
(2) The licensee shall provide each resident with at least two extra, unsoiled pillow cases, sheets,
and blankets.
(g) Storage.
(1) The licensee shall provide at least one chest of drawers in good working condition, or its
equivalent, for each resident. The chest of drawers must contain a sufficient number of lockable
drawers to house all necessary items of clothing and personal belongings of a resident.
(2) The licensee shall provide sufficient space in each resident's room or closet for residents to
hang up clothes that are not stored in a chest of drawers.
(3) Clothing may not be stored on the floor.
(h) Personal hygiene items. The licensee shall provide bath towels, washcloths, soap, combs or brushes, and
toothbrushes at all times in a quantity sufficient to meet the needs of residents.
(i) Emergency exit. Each sleeping room must provide access to an emergency exit without passing through
another sleeping room.
(j) At least one chair shall be provided in each sleeping room. A minimum of one end table in good condition
located adjacent to each bed in each sleeping room shall also be provided.
Sec. 8.18.024 Bathroom facilities
(a) If a boarding home facility has a resident who is nonambulatory or has a mobility impairment:
(1) The licensee shall provide a toilet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower on each floor when not
provided in an individual room; and
(2) A bathroom door must have a minimum opening of 32 inches with the door open 90 degrees,
measured between the face of the door and the opposite stop.
(b) The licensee shall provide toilets, lavatories, and bathtubs or showers at a ratio of one toilet, one lavatory,
and one bathtub or shower for each eight residents, or fraction of eight residents.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/618
(c) Toilets, lavatories, and bathtubs or showers must be accessible to residents without going outside of the
building or without going through a sleeping room of another resident.
(d) The licensee shall keep all bathroom facilities clean and in good repair.
(e) The licensee shall ensure that all bathroom facilities are well-lighted and ventilated.
(f) The licensee shall adequately supply all bathroom facilities with toilet paper, soap, and hand towels.
(g) The licensee shall supply bathtubs and showers with nonslip surfaces and curtains or other safe enclosures
for privacy.
Sec. 8.18.025 Telephone
A telephone that is connected to a land line must be available 24 hours a day, be easily accessible, and afford
privacy for use by residents. A list of emergency telephone numbers, including the numbers of the city police
department, city fire department, ambulance, the director, the Texas Department of Family and Protective
Services (DFPS), the local mental health authority, and the Texas Information and Referral Network, must be
placed in plain view on or next to the telephone and made accessible to persons who are visually or hearing
impaired, as needed.
Sec. 8.18.026 Landry facilities
A washer or dryer:
(1) Cannot be located in the kitchen area; and
(2) Must be properly vented to the outside of the structure.
Sec. 8.18.027 Kitchen
(a) A kitchen must be accessible to each resident without going through a sleeping room of another resident.
(b) A kitchen must have a food preparation area of at least six square feet that is smooth, impermeable, free of
cracks, and easily cleanable. This surface area must not be primarily used for eating.
(c) If a boarding home facility has a kitchen without a dining area attached, the licensee shall provide a
separate dining area of 15 square feet per resident. A kitchen with an attached dining area must be at least 100
square feet in area.
(d) A kitchen must contain a sink with at least two compartments for manual dishwashing.
(e) A kitchen must contain an operational cooking stove with at least two burners fuelled by gas or electricity
or an operational microwave oven.
(f) A kitchen must contain at least one cabinet with a minimum of five cubic feet of storage space per resident,
suitable for storage of food and utensils.
(g) A kitchen must be equipped with at least one electrical outlet suitable for plugging in small kitchen
appliances.
(h) The licensee shall keep the kitchen in a clean and sanitary condition.
(i) A kitchen must contain a refrigerator that is equipped with a thermometer and is maintained in an
operational, clean, and sanitary condition. A refrigerator must maintain foods at the temperatures required by
section 8.18.033.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/618
Sec. 8.18.028 Dining room
(a) A dining room must be accessible to residents without going through the sleeping room of another
resident.
(b) The minimum floor area for a dining room is 15 square feet per resident.
(c) If a boarding home facility provides community meals, the licensee shall equip a dining room with one
dining chair and two linear feet of dining table space for each resident.
Sec. 8.18.029 Emergency precautions
(a) The licensee shall provide fire escapes and exits that are kept in good repair and accessible at all times in
accordance with the city building and fire codes, as amended.
(b) The licensee shall implement a written fire and evacuation plan that sets forth the responsibilities and steps
to be taken by staff and residents in the event of a fire or other emergency. If a boarding home facility has a
resident who is nonambulatory or has a mobility impairment, the licensee shall submit the written plan to the city
fire department and obtain its approval of the plan.
(c) The licensee shall post an emergency evacuation plan in each sleeping room and the kitchen of the facility.
(d) The licensee shall ensure that each resident receives training on the emergency evacuation plan at least two
times per year and shall maintain documentation of such training.
(e) Flammable supplies and gasoline-operated maintenance equipment and lawn care equipment must be
stored in the garage of the facility or in a detached storage shed.
(f) The licensee shall provide a sufficient number of accessible fire extinguishers in accordance with the city
fire code, as amended. The licensee shall ensure that a person licensed to inspect fire extinguishers inspects the
fire extinguishers annually. The licensee shall ensure the fire extinguishers are recharged when needed by a
person licensed to inspect fire extinguishers.
(g) The licensee shall provide a smoke alarm approved by the fire marshal in each place in the facility
required by the city fire code, as amended. The licensee shall maintain a smoke alarm in good working order.
(h) If a boarding home facility has a resident that is hearing impaired, the licensee shall install and properly
maintain a visual smoke alarm that is capable of alerting a hearing impaired person of the presence of fire or
smoke in accordance with the city fire code, as amended.
(i) The licensee shall install and properly maintain carbon monoxide detectors near sleeping rooms in
accordance with section 42.060 of the Texas Human Resources Code, as amended.
(j) The licensee shall ensure that all residents are shown how to use all emergency exits from the boarding
home facility within 24 hours after arrival at the boarding home facility. The licensee shall maintain
documentation of such training.
(k) First-aid supplies.
(1) The licensee shall provide first-aid supplies that are equivalent to the 16-unit first-aid kit that
complies with the latest edition of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/International
Safety Equipment Association (ISEA) standard Z308.1.
(2) The licensee shall ensure that the first-aid supplies are readily accessible to all the residents and
inform the residents of the location of the supplies.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/618
(3) The licensee shall provide one set of such supplies for each 50 persons, or fraction of 50
persons, residing in the boarding home facility.
Sec. 8.18.030 Water quality
If a boarding home facility uses well water, the licensee shall supply the director with annual test results for
water samples taken from the water well from a laboratory accredited by the state under the National
Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program. If the sample results show coliform bacteria present, a
resample must be taken within seven days after receipt of the results. The licensee shall supply results of testing
the resample to the director within seven business days of receipt.
Sec. 8.18.031 Linens and laundry
(a) If a boarding home facility provides laundry service or has laundry facilities on site, all linens and laundry
must be placed in a closed bag or covered hamper before being transported to the laundry area.
(b) If a boarding home facility provides laundry service, all linens and laundry must be properly identified to
prevent loss.
(c) Soiled linens and laundry must not be sorted or processed in kitchens, food preparation areas, or food
storage areas.
Sec. 8.18.032 Poisonous, toxic and flammable materials
(a) The licensee shall ensure that poisonous, toxic, and flammable materials:
(1) Are stored and maintained away from bed linens, towels, food items, and kitchen equipment;
and
(2) Are not used in a way that contaminates food equipment or utensils or constitutes a hazard to
employees or residents.
(b) The licensee shall prominently and distinctly label poisonous, toxic, and flammable materials for easy
identification of contents.
Sec. 8.18.033 Food and drink; meals
(a) General. If a boarding home facility serves meals to one or more residents, the licensee shall ensure the
following:
(1) All food and drink is clean and free from spoilage, pathogenic organisms, toxic chemicals, and
other harmful substances.
(2) All food and drink is prepared, stored, handled, and served so as to be safe for human
consumption.
(3) All food or drink subject to spoilage is maintained at a temperature of 41 degrees Fahrenheit or
below.
(4) Hot foods that are ready to be served are maintained at 135 degrees Fahrenheit or above at all
times.
(5) All food or drink stored in the freezer is maintained at a temperature of no higher than 0
degrees Fahrenheit.
(6) Alternative food selections are provided for residents on medically prescribed diets.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/618
(7) A time schedule for meals is posted daily.
(8) Meals are:
(A) Nutritionally balanced and provide the U.S. Department of Agriculture recommended
daily allowance of vitamins, minerals, and calories;
(B) Of sufficient quantity and quality to meet the nutritional needs of residents; and
(C) Served with not more than 14 hours between the beginning of the evening meal and the
beginning of the morning meal.
(9) A valid food handler's certificate issued under section 6.803 [sic] of this code has been issued in
the name of the licensee.
(10) After each usage, all eating and drinking utensils are thoroughly washed and sanitized in hot
water containing a suitable soap or synthetic detergent and rinsed in clean hot water. If a mechanical
dishwasher is used, dish detergent is required.
(b) Animals prohibited. With the exception of service animals for persons with disabilities, birds, cats, dogs,
or other animals are not permitted in areas where food is prepared or stored, or where utensils are washed or
stored.
(c) Food handling.
(1) An owner, operator, employee, or resident engaged in food handling shall:
(A) Observe sanitary methods, including handwashing; and
(B) Not be assigned to preparing foods for others at the facility if carrying a disease that can
be transmitted to others.
(2) If preparing meals for residents, staff must meet food handling requirements and training
approved by the director.
Sec. 8.18.034 Policies and procedures to ensure resident health and safety
(a) Initial screening. Before permitting a potential resident to move into a boarding home facility, the licensee
shall ask each potential resident whether he or she:
(1) Has the ability to comply with the requirements of being a resident at the boarding home
facility, including:
(A) Paying rent or other fees in accordance with the service agreement between the operator
and the resident, unless the payment of rent or other fees is excused under the service agreement
or by law;
(B) Complying with the rules for the boarding home facility established by the licensee;
(C) Paying for any damage to the boarding home facility caused by the resident; and
(D) Timely vacating the premises when the service agreement, including any extension,
expires or is terminated;
(2) Is qualified to reside at the boarding home facility if the boarding home facility is available
only to persons with disabilities or to persons with a particular type of disability;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/618
(3) Is currently an illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance;
(4) Is currently on probation or parole;
(5) Is currently using any prescription drugs; or
(6) Has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
(b) Individualized assessment.
(1) Before allowing an individual to reside at a boarding home facility, the licensee shall conduct
an individualized assessment of that individual to determine if the individual would constitute a direct
threat. The assessment must consider:
(A) Any prior criminal or violent acts of the person;
(B) The amount of time that has elapsed since the commission of any such acts; and
(C) Any treatment or medication received by the person that may have eliminated the direct
threat.
(2) In the case of any resident or potential resident who has been convicted of an offense requiring
registration with any sex offender registry, the individualized assessment must include a psychosexual
evaluation of such person performed by a duly licensed psychiatrist or an individual having a
Ph.D. in psychology. The licensee shall be responsible for determining whether any resident or
potential resident has been convicted of an offense requiring registration with any sex offender
registry.
(3) Prior to the occupancy of any boarding home facility and at least quarterly thereafter, the
licensee shall certify in a sworn affidavit to the director that, based on the individualized assessment
performed for each resident, no person will or does reside in the boarding home facility whose
tenancy would likely constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of that person or other
individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(c) Persons who may not reside in a boarding home facility. The licensee shall not allow the following
individuals to reside at a boarding home facility:
(1) An individual convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
(2) An individual who, based upon an individualized assessment, is likely to constitute a direct
threat to the health or safety of the individual or other individuals or whose tenancy would likely
result in substantial damage to the property of others.
(3) An individual who requires the provision of personal care services or other services that state
law requires a license to provide.
(d) Illegal drug use.
(1) All residents in a boarding home facility shall completely abstain from using controlled
substances. The licensee shall immediately expel any resident who uses a controlled substance,
whether on or off the premises, and shall not readmit the resident to any boarding home facility under
the control of the licensee for a period of at least 60 days following the violation. However, nothing
contained in this subsection may be construed to prohibit a resident from taking a prescription drug
for which that resident has a valid and current prescription.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/618
(2) If the boarding home facility has residents who are recovering from an addiction to a controlled
substance, the licensee must develop a written plan for ensuring that the residents continue to refrain
from using controlled substances, including any and all rules by which residents must abide, and must
provide such plan to the director at his request.
(e) Duty to document. The licensee shall document the following:
(1) A resident's illegal use of a controlled substance.
(2) A resident who poses a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals.
(3) A resident who poses a direct threat of substantial damage to the property of others.
(f) Log. If a resident is currently taking a prescription medication, the licensee shall note whether the resident
has taken, or been reminded to take, his or her medication. Unless prohibited by law, the licensee shall make
copies of the log available to the director for inspection upon request.
(g) Injuries, incidents, and unusual accidents.
(1) The licensee shall notify a resident's legal guardian, resident's legally authorized representative,
or a family member designated by the resident, the legal guardian, or the legally authorized
representative of any injury, incident, or unusual accident involving the resident.
(2) The licensee shall investigate and document on a form provided by the director any injuries,
incidents, or unusual accidents to a resident by providing the following information:
(A) The resident's name.
(B) The date and time the injury, incident, or unusual accident occurred.
(C) Description of the injury, incident, or unusual accident.
(D) Description of any medical or mental health treatment the resident received.
(E) Steps taken by the owner or operator to prevent future injuries, incidents, or unusual
accidents if a problem at the boarding home facility resulted in the injury, incident, or unusual
accident.
(F) When the resident's legal guardian, resident's legally authorized representative, or a
family member designated by the resident, the legal guardian, or the legally authorized
representative was notified about the injury, incident, or unusual accident.
(h) Access to records. Within one business day after a request by a resident, the resident's guardian, the
resident's legally authorized representative, or a family member designated by the resident, the legal guardian, or
the legally authorized representative, the licensee shall allow access to, and provide copies at a reasonable cost
of, the records documenting any injury, incident, or unusual accident involving that resident. Upon request, the
licensee must explain how to examine the records.
(i) Abuse, neglect, and exploitation.
(1) A licensee shall report any allegations of abuse, neglect, or exploitation of a minor, an adult age
65 or older, or an adult with a disability to the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services.
Failure to report suspected abuse, neglect, or exploitation of a minor, an elderly adult, or an adult with
a disability is a class A misdemeanor under state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/618
(2) A licensee shall ensure that no resident is harassed, threatened, or intimidated at any time for
making a report of abuse, neglect, or exploitation.
(3) A licensee shall provide each resident with a copy of the definitions of abuse, neglect, or
exploitation as outlined in chapter 48 of the Texas Human Resources Code, as amended.
(4) A licensee shall allow law enforcement, emergency medical, and fire personnel access to the
boarding home facility when these professionals are responding to a call at the boarding home
facility.
(5) An owner, operator, or employee may not refer a person to the boarding home facility with
which he is associated or to any other facility if he knows or reasonably should know that the facility
or its services are not appropriate for the condition of the person being referred.
(6) If the licensee or an employee has any medical or mental health professional examine,
diagnose, treat, or provide any other medical or mental health services to a resident, the licensee or
employee must provide the resident with:
(A) The name, business address, and telephone number of the person who examined,
diagnosed, treated, or provided any other service to the resident;
(B) A written explanation of the nature and results of the examination, diagnosis, treatment,
or other service; and
(C) A copy of any prescription for any medicine.
(7) No licensee or employee may:
(A) Use corporal punishment on a resident; or
(B) Involuntarily seclude a resident from other residents.
(8) Physical and chemical restraints.
(A) No licensee or employee may use a physical restraint or chemical restraint on a resident.
(B) For purposes of subsection (i)(8)(A), a physical restraint includes a vest, a hand mitt, and
a seatbelt, and a chemical restraint includes an anti-psychotic drug and a sedative.
(C) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (i)(8)(A) that:
(i) The restraint was authorized by a physician, in writing, for a specified and limited
period of time; or
(ii) The licensee or employee is the spouse, legal guardian, or next of kin of the resident
or former resident.
(9) Access.
(A) A licensee shall allow a resident's personal physician, nurse, or other health care provider
to have immediate access to the resident.
(B) A licensee shall allow the relatives, the guardian, and the legally authorized
representative of a resident to have immediate access to the resident during the boarding home
facility's visiting hours unless the resident objects.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/618
(j) Conflicts of interests. The purposes of this subsection are to ensure both that residents have the right to
manage their own affairs or to choose someone they trust to manage their affairs for them and that licensees and
employees do not abuse their positions of power and trust for their own private gain.
(1) A licensee or employee of a boarding home facility shall not:
(A) Borrow money from or loan money to residents;
(B) Be a beneficiary of a current or former resident's will or life insurance;
(C) Co-mingle a resident's funds with the funds of the licensee, employee, or another
resident;
(D) Employ a resident;
(E) Go into business with a resident;
(F) Serve as an employee or independent contractor of a resident;
(G) Have sexual relations with a resident; or
(H) Have a power of attorney for a resident's affairs for any purpose.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution:
(A) Under subsection (1) that the licensee or employee is the spouse, legal guardian, or next
of kin of the resident or former resident;
(B) Under subsection (1)(D) that the licensee or employee employed the resident on the
property where the boarding home facility is located; and
(C) Under subsection (1)(H) that the licensee or employee is assisting the resident to establish
eligibility for a federal or state program that provides financial assistance for medical services,
such as [sic]
(3) No licensee or employee may be a representative payee for a resident or assist a resident with
general money management unless the resident, the resident's guardian, the resident's legally
authorized representative, or a family member designated by the resident, the legal guardian, or the
legally authorized representative authorizes in writing the licensee or employee to be a representative
payee or assist the resident with general money management.
(4) If a licensee or employee becomes the representative payee for a resident or assists a resident
with general money management, the licensee or employee shall do the following:
(A) Maintain separate financial records for each resident for which the licensee or employee
is the representative payee for the entire period of time the licensee or employee is the resident's
representative payee and continue to maintain the resident's records for one year past the last
calendar day the licensee or employee is the resident's representative payee.
(B) Include in the records an itemized list of expenditures that the licensee or employee has
made on behalf of the resident, including the charges that are assessed by the licensee or
employee.
(C) Maintain receipts for all expenditures in addition to the itemized documentation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/618
(D) Develop a budget with the resident outlining routine expenditures and ensure that
expenditures that are not routine are discussed with the resident before the resident's funds are
expended.
(E) Within one business day after receiving a request, allow the resident, the resident's
guardian, the resident's legally authorized representative, or a family member designated by the
resident, the legal guardian, or the legally authorized representative access to the resident's
financial records that are maintained by the licensee or employee.
(k) Service agreement.
(1) A licensee shall develop a service agreement with each resident and maintain a copy of the
agreement signed by the resident, the resident's guardian, or the resident's legally authorized
representative. The licensee shall give a copy of the signed agreement to the resident, the resident's
guardian, or the resident's legally authorized representative.
(2) The service agreement must specify the following:
(A) The length of the contract.
(B) The amount of rent charged and the date upon which rent is due.
(C) If service is accepted in lieu of rent, the dollar amount the rent is reduced per hour of
service.
(D) The amounts of other fees or fines charged, an explanation of what those fees and fines
are for, when they are charged, and why.
(E) The party responsible for paying the monthly rent and other fees.
(F) Any services to be provided or that could be provided by the boarding home facility.
(G) If the resident has a guardian, legally authorized representative, or a family member
designated by the resident, the legal guardian, or the legally authorized representative, that
person's name, address, e-mail address, and telephone number.
(H) The rules and regulations of the boarding home facility.
(I) That a resident will be expelled if the owner or operator determines that the resident:
(i) Has used a controlled substance within the past 30 days without a valid prescription;
(ii) Has violated the rules of the boarding home facility if those rules require the
expulsion for the violation;
(iii) Poses a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals; or
(iv) Poses a direct threat of substantial damage to the property of others.
(l) If the resident earns any income from the licensee or an employee of the boarding home facility that
exceeds the monthly rent owed, the licensee or employee's plan to allocate the income or system of disbursement
of that income.
(m) Disclosure of charges and fees to resident. No licensee or employee may charge a resident for a service or
item unless the licensee or employee has previously disclosed in writing that providing the service or item will
incur an additional fee and the amount of that fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/618
(n) Visitors. Operators, employees, and volunteers of the boarding home facility shall not have visitors on the
premises, except for visitation necessary for the operation of the facility, for emergencies, or by family members
of an operator, employee, or a volunteer.
Sec. 8.18.035 Assistance with self-administration of medication
(a) Assistance with self-administration of medication may be provided to an adult resident who can identify
his or her medication and knows when the medication should be taken but requires assistance with selfadministration.
Assistance with self-administration of medication may not be provided to a minor.
(b) Assistance with self-administration of medication is limited to:
(1) Reminding the resident to take medication;
(2) Opening a container, removing medication from a container, and placing medication in a
resident's hand or in or on a clean surface, such as a pill cup or medication reminder box, for the
resident's self-administration; and
(3) Reminding the resident when a prescription needs to be refilled.
(c) The licensee shall remind a resident to take medication if the licensee knows that the resident is required to
take medication and needs assistance with remembering to take the medication.
(d) The licensee shall store all residents' medication in a locked area. The licensee shall provide a central
locked storage area or individual locked storage areas at the boarding home facility for each resident's
medication.
(1) If the boarding home facility uses a central medication storage area, a boarding home employee
must be available to provide access at all times and each resident's medication must be stored
separately from other residents' medications within the storage area.
(2) If a resident's medication requires refrigeration, the licensee shall provide a refrigerator with a
designated and locked storage area or a refrigerator inside a locked medication room.
(3) The licensee shall store medications labeled for “external use only” separately within the
locked area.
(e) The licensee shall ensure that poisonous substances are labeled and safely stored within a locked area
separately from medications.
(f) If a boarding home facility stores controlled substances, the licensee shall adopt and enforce a written
policy for preventing the diversion of the controlled substances.
(g) After a resident ceases to reside in the boarding home facility, the licensee shall properly dispose of any of
the resident's remaining medication in accordance with applicable laws.
Sec. 8.18.036 Requirements for in-service education of boarding home facility staff
(a) Each licensee and employee of a boarding home facility must be trained on the following subjects prior to
contact with residents or within five days of beginning work, ownership, or management of the facility,
whichever is later:
(1) Employer rules and policies.
(2) Preventing, recognizing, and reporting abuse, neglect, and exploitation of residents.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/618
(3) Residents' rights, including all applicable rights from the following:
(A) Chapter 102 (rights of the elderly) of the Texas Human Resource Code, as amended.
(B) Chapter 112 (developmental disabilities) of the Texas Human Resource Code, as
amended.
(C) Chapter 301 (fair housing practices) of the Texas Property Code, as amended.
(D) Chapter 92 (residential tenancies) of the Texas Property Code, as amended.
(4) Policies and procedures for contacting emergency personnel when health or safety of a resident
or another individual is at risk.
(5) Complaint process specific to the city and the boarding home facility.
(6) Assisting residents with self-administration of medication.
(7) Prevention, recognition, and reporting of injuries, incidents, and unusual accidents to residents
and others in the boarding home facility.
(8) Emergency, evacuation, and disaster plans.
(9) Assisting residents with obtaining health and social services.
(10) Services provided by the boarding home facility, including:
(A) Nutrition, meal preparation, and dietary needs, if the boarding home facility provides
meal preparation;
(B) Sanitation;
(C) Laundry, if the boarding home facility provides laundry services; and
(D) House work, if the boarding home facility provides house work.
(b) Each licensee and employee of a boarding home facility must be trained on the following subjects:
(1) Updates and changes in any policies and procedures within 10 days after the licensee or
employee becomes aware of the change.
(2) Orientation specific to the needs of each new resident within three business days of the resident
moving into the facility.
(3) Orientation specific to the needs of a resident whose needs have changed due to injury, illness,
hospitalization, or other circumstances that effect the resident's needs within one day after licensee or
employee becoming aware of the change.
Sec. 8.18.037 Criminal history
(a) A person may not own or operate a boarding home facility or be employed in a position the duties of which
involve direct contact with a resident in a boarding home facility before the 10th anniversary of the date the
person is convicted of any of the following offenses:
(1) Sections 481.112, 481.1121, 481.1122, 481.113, 481.114, 481.122, Texas Health and Safety
Code (illegal manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance), as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/618
(2) Chapter 19, Texas Penal Code (criminal homicide), as amended.
(3) Chapter 20, Texas Penal Code (kidnapping and unlawful restraint), as amended.
(4) Section 21.02, Texas Penal Code (continuous sexual abuse of young child or children), as
amended, or section 21.11, Texas Penal Code (indecency with a child), as amended.
(5) Section 22.011, Texas Penal Code (sexual assault), as amended.
(6) Section 22.02, Texas Penal Code (aggravated assault), as amended.
(7) Section 22.04, Texas Penal Code (injury to a child, elderly individual, or disabled individual),
as amended.
(8) Section 22.041, Texas Penal Code (abandoning or endangering child), as amended.
(9) Section 22.08, Texas Penal Code (aiding suicide), as amended.
(10) Section 25.031, Texas Penal Code (agreement to abduct from custody), as amended.
(11) Section 25.08, Texas Penal Code (sale or purchase of a child), as amended.
(12) Section 28.02, Texas Penal Code (arson), as amended.
(13) Section 29.02, Texas Penal Code (robbery), as amended.
(14) Section 29.03, Texas Penal Code (aggravated robbery), as amended.
(15) Section 21.08, Texas Penal Code (indecent exposure), as amended.
(16) Section 21.12, Texas Penal Code (improper relationship between educator and student), as
amended.
(17) Section 21.15, Texas Penal Code (improper photography or visual recording), as amended.
(18) Section 22.05, Texas Penal Code (deadly conduct), as amended.
(19) Section 22.021, Texas Penal Code (aggravated sexual assault), as amended.
(20) Section 22.07, Texas Penal Code (terroristic threat), as amended.
(21) Section 33.021, Texas Penal Code (online solicitation of a minor), as amended.
(22) Section 34.02, Texas Penal Code (money laundering), as amended.
(23) Section 35A.02, Texas Penal Code (Medicaid fraud), as amended.
(24) Section 42.09, Texas Penal Code (cruelty to animals), as amended.
(25) Chapter 31, Texas Penal Code (theft), as amended, that is punishable as a felony.
(26) Section 30.02, Texas Penal Code (burglary), as amended.
(27) The laws of another state, federal law, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice for an offense
containing elements that are substantially similar to the elements of an offense listed in this
subsection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/618
(b) A person may not own or operate a boarding home facility or be employed in a position the duties of
which involve direct contact with a resident in a boarding home facility before the fifth anniversary of the date
the person is convicted of any felony offense not listed in subsection (a) or any of the following nonfelony
offenses:
(1) Section 22.01, Texas Penal Code (assault), as amended, that is punishable as a class A
misdemeanor.
(2) Section 32.45, Texas Penal Code (misapplication of fiduciary property or property of a
financial institution), as amended, that is punishable as a class A misdemeanor or a felony.
(3) Section 32.46, Texas Penal Code (securing execution of a document by deception), as amended,
that is punishable as a class A misdemeanor or a felony.
(4) Section 37.12, Texas Penal Code (false identification as peace officer), as amended.
(5) Section 42.01(a)(7), (8), or (9), Texas Penal Code (disorderly conduct involving a firearm), as
amended.
(6) The laws of another state, federal law, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice for an offense
containing elements that are substantially similar to the elements of an offense listed in this
subsection.
(c) The licensee shall ensure that all employees (including volunteers who are not residents) have had a
background check of conviction records, pending charges, and disciplinary board decisions completed within the
past two years, and is repeated every year thereafter, and that the individual is not disqualified under this section.
The owner or operator shall immediately discharge any employee or volunteer whose criminal history reveals
conviction of a crime that bars employment or volunteer service at a boarding home facility.
Sec. 8.18.038 Qualifications to own, operate or work in facilities with persons recovering from substance
or alcohol abuse
(a) If a boarding home facility allows an individual who has an impairment due to the illegal abuse of or
addiction to a controlled substance to be a resident, the licensee and all employees and volunteers (other than
residents) shall not have used a controlled substance within the previous year without a prescription from a
licensed professional.
(b) All operators, employees, and volunteers of a boarding home facility shall completely abstain from
illegally using controlled substances. The licensee shall immediately remove from the premises of the boarding
home facility any owner, operator, employee, or volunteer who illegally uses a controlled substance, whether on
or off the premises, and shall not allow that person to enter the premises of any boarding home facility under the
control of the owner or operator for a period of at least one year following the violation. However, nothing
contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit an operator, employee, or volunteer from taking a
prescription drug for which that person has a valid and current prescription.
(c) The licensee shall immediately remove from the premises of a boarding home facility any owner, operator,
employee, or volunteer who currently abuses alcohol, whether on or off the premises, such that the abuse of
alcohol prevents that person from performing his or her job duties, if any, at the boarding home facility or who,
by reason of such current alcohol abuse, constitutes a direct threat to the property or safety of others.
(d) If the licensee removes a person from the premises of a boarding home facility under subsection (c), the
licensee shall not allow that person to re-enter the premises of any boarding home facility under the control of
the owner or operator until that person is able to perform his or her job duties, if any, at a boarding home facility
and does not constitute a direct threat to the property or safety of others.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/618
Sec. 8.18.039 Assessment and periodic monitoring of residents
(a) The licensee, or a designee of the licensee, shall complete and document an annual assessment and conduct
periodic monitoring to ensure that each resident is capable of self-administering medication and completing
basic elements of personal care as listed in subsections (b) and (c). The assessment will be used as a tool to
determine if the needs of the resident can be provided by a boarding home facility or if the resident needs
personal care services or medication administration that cannot be provided by the boarding home facility. The
initial assessment of a resident must be completed within 30 days after the date the resident began residing at the
facility.
(b) Elements of the self-administration of medication to be assessed include the ability to perform each of the
following tasks with little assistance:
(1) Identifying the name of the medication.
(2) Providing a reason for the medication (the owner or operator cannot force the resident to
disclose a health condition that is the basis for the medication if the resident refuses).
(3) Distinguishing color or shape.
(4) Preparing the correct number of pills (dosage).
(5) Confirming the time to take medications.
(6) Reading labels.
(c) Elements of personal care to be assessed by the licensee include but are not limited to the resident's ability
to do the following:
(1) Eat independently.
(2) Bathe without assistance.
(3) Dress without assistance.
(4) Move and transfer independently.
(d) As a result of an assessment, if a licensee finds that a resident is in a state of possible self-neglect due to no
longer being able to perform basic elements of personal care as listed in subsection (c) and believes that a higher
level of care is needed, the owner or operator shall:
(1) Contact the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services by phoning the statewide
intake division at 1-800-252-5400;
(2) Notify the resident's guardian or legally authorized representative;
(3) Notify a family member designated by the resident, the legal guardian, or the legally authorized
representative; and
(4) Contact the appropriate health or human services authority to advise that the resident requires
services beyond what can be provided by the boarding home facility.
(e) A state of self-neglect does not exist if the resident receives outside professional services that meet the
resident's need for personal care or self-administration of medication. In these cases, the resident can remain in
the boarding home facility provided that all needs for personal care and self-administration of medication are
met.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/618
Sec. 8.18.040 Violations; penalty
(a) A person who violates any provision of this article, or who fails to perform a duty required by this article,
commits an offense.
(b) A licensee, employee, or other person in control of a boarding home facility commits an offense if he or
she knowingly operates an unsafe facility that represents an immediate threat to the health or safety of a resident,
including a situation that has caused, or is likely to cause, serious injury, harm, impairment, or death to a
resident.
(c) An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed:
(1) $2,000.00 if the provision violated governs fire safety, public health, or sanitation; or
(2) $500.00 for all other offenses.
(d) A separate offense occurs each day or part of a day that the violation is committed, continued, or
permitted.
(e) Emergency closing order.
(1) If the director finds a boarding home facility operating in violation of the standards prescribed
by this article and the violations create an immediate threat to the health and safety of a resident in
the facility, the director may order immediate closing of all or part of the facility.
(2) The order of immediate closure under subsection (1) above is effective immediately on
providing written notice of the order to the owner or operator by facsimile, e-mail, or hand delivery.
(3) The order of closure of all or part of a boarding home facility is valid for 10 days after its
effective date.
(4) If the licensee does not promptly relocate the residents of the boarding home facility upon
receiving the order of closure for that facility, the city shall provide for the relocation of those
residents. If possible, the city will relocate those residents to a boarding home facility in the city for
which there is a current valid license. The relocation may not be to a facility with a more restrictive
environment unless all other reasonable alternatives are exhausted. The director is authorized to seek
to recover the cost of relocating the residents from the owner and operator of the closed facility.
(5) The director and the appeals board shall expedite any hearing or decision involving an
emergency closing order issued under this section.
(f) The city attorney may petition a district court or a county court at law for civil penalties and for injunctive
relief to restrain a continuing violation of the standards or licensing requirements for a boarding home facility
under this article if the violation creates an immediate threat to the health or safety of the facility residents.
(g) The remedies and procedures in this section and in other laws are cumulative law, and the use of any
particular remedy or procedure does not prevent the enforcement of any other law.
(Ordinance 2014-06-11 adopted 6/23/14)
CHAPTER 10
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/618
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 10.01.001 Arson reward
(a) The city hereby authorizes the payment of the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the arrest and
conviction of any person or persons found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the city limits.
(b) Such reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. The sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) is hereby appropriated as a contingent appropriation, and authorized to be paid upon
approval of the city council.
(c) The following notice shall be imprinted upon placards of substantial material, at least eight (8) inches by
twelve (12) inches in size, placed in wooden frames under glass and posted in at least six (6) different public
buildings within the city, including the city hall, the post office and the community center:
ARSON REWARD
The City of Lancaster, Texas, hereby offers a reward of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the
arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of committing the crime of arson
within the corporate limits of said City of Lancaster, Texas. This reward is a standing offer and
shall be paid out of the general fund of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
(d) In determining eligibility for the reward here authorized, the city council shall be the sole and exclusive
judge and the decision of the city council shall be final.
(2002 Code, secs. 5.401–5.404)
State law reference–Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.02.
ARTICLE 10.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 10.02.001 Office created; appointment
There is hereby created the office of the city fire marshal. Such office shall be a division of the city fire
department reporting to the chief of the department in accordance with state law. The chief of the department
shall assign such duties as appropriate including, but not limited to, duties concerning inspections, arson and fire
code. Such person shall have such qualifications as required by law and as approved by the chief of the
department. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 10.03 FIRE DEPARTMENT AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 10.03.001–10.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Medical Service
Sec. 10.03.031 Established
The city, by and through its fire department, establishes an emergency medical service to be operated by the city
fire department. (2002 Code, sec. 5.601)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/618
Sec. 10.03.032 Definitions
The following words and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the following meanings:
Approved user fee. Those as established by the city council and resolution.
City council. The governing body of the city.
Emergency medical technician (EMT). An individual who is a “specially skilled emergency medical technician”
under chapter 773, Texas Health and Safety Code, or its successor.
Interlocal agreement. A mutual aid agreement between one or more municipalities of ambulance service
whereby the signing parties agree to provide backup ambulance service to one another under conditions and
pursuant to terms specified in the agreement.
Medical control. That direction given EMS and mobile intensive care unit personnel by a base station physician
through direct voice contact, with or without vital sign telemetry, as required by applicable medical protocols
promulgated by the medical control board and by chapter 773, Texas Health and Safety Code, or its successor.
Medical director. An emergency physician, expert in the pre-hospital practice of emergency medicine, appointed
by the ambulance service contractor.
Medical protocol. Any diagnosis-specific or problem-oriented written statement of standard procedures, or
algorithm, promulgated by the medical control board as the proper standard of pre-hospital care for a given
clinical condition.
Mobile intensive care unit. A vehicle which is specially constructed, equipped, staffed and employed in the interfacility
transport of patients whose requirements for en-route medical support are likely to exceed the clinical
capabilities of a paramedic level ambulance.
Paramedic. A person qualified as a certified “paramedic emergency medical technician” as defined by chapter
773, Texas Health and Safety Code, or its successor.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental entity or other group or
combination acting as a unit.
Service area. The geographic area encompassing the city limits or as provided by interlocal agreement.
System standard of care. The combined compilation of all priority dispatching protocols, pre-arrival instruction
protocols, medical protocols (i.e., for first responders and ambulance personnel), protocols for selecting
destination hospital, and standards for certification of pre-hospital care personnel (i.e., telephone call takers, first
responders, ambulance personnel and on-line medical control physicians), developed and adopted by the medical
control board, as well as standards governing requirements for on-board medical equipment and supplies.
(2002 Code, sec. 5.602)
Sec. 10.03.033 Operation; establishment of charges; failure to pay charges
(a) The fire department of the city shall hereby establish emergency medical services and operate such
services in conformity with the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(b) The department, by and through its fire chief, shall establish minimum standards and protocols which are
in conformance through Biotel or other appropriate medical control board. All persons operating a specialized
mobile intensive care unit shall be licensed and certified as a paramedic emergency medical technician as
defined by chapter 773, Texas Health and Safety Code, or its successor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/618
(c) The city shall provide for a basic and standard of care system as provided in its standards and protocols.
(d) The city shall establish by resolution a minimum service charge for service under this division.
(e) Failure by the person requesting or accepting the service of an ambulance to pay to the person furnishing
such service the customary charge thereof within ninety (90) days after demand for payment is made shall be
liable for the cost of collection, including interest, court costs and attorney fees. Demand for payment as used in
this division shall be written demand, sent by registered or certified mail, addressed to the person requesting or
accepting the service and to the address given by and on behalf of such service at the time such service is
requested or accepted.
(2002 Code, sec. 5.603)
Sec. 10.03.034 Compliance with state and federal regulations
All persons and entities regulated under this division shall comply with the laws of the state and [with] reference
to permits, licenses, minimum equipment and minimum qualifications of operators and attendants and all state
and federal laws and regulations applicable to ambulance operations. (2002 Code, sec. 5.604)
Secs. 10.03.035–10.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Cost Recovery
Sec. 10.03.071 Fees authorized; collection
(a) The city shall collect fees for specialized fire protection services. Such fees may include reimbursement for
all equipment, materials, maintenance and overhead expenses and costs which constitute full reimbursement to
the city for such services actually rendered.
(b) Within thirty (30) days of the date of providing specialized fire protection services, the chief of the fire
department or his designee shall submit an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to the
provision of such services, in the amount established by the city council, to the owner's designated agent,
representatives and insurance companies. All such bills are to be paid within sixty (60) days of the receipt
thereof; interest shall accumulate thereafter on any unpaid balances at the rate of ten percent (10%).
(c) In addition, any bills, fines or penalties, including but not limited to cleanup costs, fees or expenses that are
imposed upon the city, state or federal agencies and related to the same situation or occurrence, may be billed
separately within thirty (30) days of receipt and shall be paid as provided in subsection (b) above.
(2002 Code, sec. 5.701)
Sec. 10.03.072 Amount of fees
The fees established by the city council are hereby approved and authorized to be collected by virtue of this
division. (2002 Code, sec. 5.702)
Sec. 10.03.073 Enforcement
The city may enforce the provisions of this division by civil action in a court of contempt jurisdiction for the
collection of any amounts due hereunder, plus attorney fees, costs and expenses and any other relief that may be
appropriate. (2002 Code, sec. 5.703)
ARTICLE 10.04 FIRE CODE
Sec. 10.04.001 Adoption
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/618
There is hereby adopted for the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire or explosion that certain code and standards known as the International Fire Code,
2015 edition, including appendix chapters, as published by the International Code Council, and the same are
incorporated by reference herein as if fully copied. One copy of each volume of such code shall be at all times in
the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 10.04.002 Exceptions and amendments
The fire code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the International Fire
Code, 2015 edition, as follows:
To amend section 101.1; change to read as follows:
“Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of Lancaster, Texas
hereinafter referred to as ‘this code'”
To amend section 102.1; change #3 to read as follows:
“.....
3. Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required in chapter 11 or in specific sections
of this code.”
To amend section 105.3.3; change to read as follows:
“105.3.3 Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied
prior to the fire code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections
indicating the applicable provisions of this code have been met.”
To amend section 105.7; by adding section 105.7.19 to read as follows:
“105.7.19 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation
or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in chapter 10. A separate
construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be
connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not
considered a modification and does not require a permit.”
To amend section 202; by amending and adding definitions to read as follows:
“AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical,
surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered
incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to
the following:
- Dialysis centers
- Procedures involving sedation
- Sedation dentistry
- Surgery centers
- Colonic centers
- Psychiatric centers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/618
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories...
DEFEND IN PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages building components and
trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves
remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building.
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a
building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required
by the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early
signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department.
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, detonation, and/or activated by
ignition with a match or other heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or
1.3G fireworks as set forth herein. .....
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE: add a second paragraph to read as follows:
Any building classified as a group S occupancy or speculative building exceeding 12,000 sq. ft.
that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess of
12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product cannot be
identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be installed as for class IV
commodities, to the maximum pile height.
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor
vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and
servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or
replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of
renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing
personal property on a self-service basis.
STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the fire chief. When
utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the fire chief. Charges for utilization shall be as
normally calculated by the jurisdiction.
UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or
replaced includes, but is not limited to the following:
* Replacing one single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model
* Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one
* Conversion from a horn system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system
* Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement:
* Firmware updates
* Software updates
* Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer
firmware.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/618
To amend section 307.1.1 to read as follows:
“307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of
smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous
shall be prohibited.
Exception: .....”
To amend section 307.2 to read as follows:
“307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with
section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management
practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval
shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be
kindled.
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not
be limited to the following:
1. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) guidelines and/or restrictions.
2. State, county, or local temporary or permanent bans on open burning.
3. Local written policies as established by the fire code official.”
To amend section 307.3 to read as follows:
“307.3 Extinguishment authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment
by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning that creates or
adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.”
To amend section 307.4 to read as follows:
“307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet 91 440 mm) from any
structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet (91 440
mm) of any structure.
Exceptions: .....”
To amend section 307.4.3, by adding exception 2 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. .....
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler
system.”
To amend section 307.4.4 and 5 by adding section 307.4.4 and 307.4.5 to read as follows:
“307.4.4 Permanent outdoor firepit. Permanently installed outdoor firepits for recreational fire
purposes shall not be installed within 10 feet of a structure or combustible material.
Exception: Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the
International Building Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/618
307.4.5 Trench burns. Trench burns shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in accordance
with section 307.2.”
To amend section 307.5 to read as follows:
“307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, bonfires, recreational fires, and use of potable
outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the .....”
To amend section 308.1.4 to read as follows:
“308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills and other
similar devices used for cooking shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or
within 10 feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction.
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water
capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity]
with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs (5 containers).
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler
system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds
(22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas capacity
not to exceed 40 lbs (2 containers).
3. .....”
To amend section 308.1.6.2, exception 3 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. .....
.....
3. Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with section 308.1.3.”
To amend section 308.1.6.3 to read as follows:
“308.1.6.3 Sky lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released an untethered unmanned
free-floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not limited to a sky
lantern.”
To amend section 311.5 to read as follows:
311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned
buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to section 110 of this code relating to
structural or interior hazards, as required by section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5.”
To amend section 403.5 to read as follows:
“403.5 Group E occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with
section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for group E occupancies and for buildings containing
both a group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted
in a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall also comply with sections
403.5.1 through 403.5.3.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/618
To amend section 404.2.2 by adding number 4.10 to read as follows:
“.....
4.10 Fire extinguishing system controls.”
To amend section 501.4 to read as follows:
“501.4 Timing of installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection
is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and
approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation
of any structure.”
To amend section 503.1.1; add sentence to read as follows:
“Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a
ten feet (10') wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure.”
To amend section 503.2.1 to read as follows:
“503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than
24 feet (7315 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with
section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4267 mm).
Exception: Vertical clearance may be reduced; provided such reduction does not impair access by
fire apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical
clearance when approved.”
To amend section 503.2.2 to read as follows:
“503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an increase in the
minimum access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue
operations.”
To amend section 503.2.3; to read as follows:
“503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support imposed
loads of 80,000 Lbs for fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving
capabilities.”
To amend section 503.3 to read as follows:
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be
provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof.
Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times
and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.
(1) Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of
red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words “NO
PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” shall appear in four inch (4") white
letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a
curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb.
(2) Signs - Signs shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING”
and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters
and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/618
stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished
grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides of the fire lane.
Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the fire chief.
To amend section 503.4 to read as follows:
“503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be
obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances
established in section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in section 503.3 shall be
maintained at all times.”
To amend section 505.1 to read as follows:
“505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address
identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from
the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be
spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 6 inches (152.4 mm) high with a minimum stroke
width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be
provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means
of a private road, buildings do not immediately front a street, and/or the building cannot be viewed
from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign with approved 6 inch (152.4 mm) height
building numerals or addresses and 4 inch (101.6 mm) height suite/apartment numerals of a color
contrasting with the background of the building or other approved means shall be used to identify the
structure. Numerals or addresses shall be posted on a minimum 20 inch (508 mm) by 30 inch (762
mm) background on border. Address identification shall be maintained.
Exception: R-3 Single-family occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum 3 1/2 inches
(88.9 mm) in height and a color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible from the
street fronting the property and rear alleyway where such alleyway exists.”
To amend section 507.4 to read as follows:
“507.4 Water supply test date and information. The water supply test used for hydraulic
calculation of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291
“Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants” and within one year of
sprinkler plan submittal. The fire code official shall be notified prior to the water supply test. Water
supply tests shall be witnessed by the fire code official, as required. The exact location of the
static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire
protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the waterflow test report, or as
approved by the fire code official. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time
of the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable
water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based
on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference section
903.3.5 for additional design requirements.”
To amend section 507.5.4 to read as follows:
“507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts,
fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near
fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner
that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire
department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection
equipment or fire hydrants.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/618
To add new section 509.1.2 to read as follows:
“509.1.2 Sign requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required
by this section shall have a minimum height of 2 inches (50.8 mm) when located inside a building
and 4 inches (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved by the fire code official. The letters
shall be of a color that contrasts with the background.”
To amend exception in section 603.3.2.1 to read as follows:
“.....
Exception: The aggregate capacity limit shall be permitted to be increased to 3,000 gallons (11,356
L) in accordance with all requirements of chapter 57. ...... {Delete remainder of exception}”
To amend section 603.3.2.2 to read as follows:
“603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with section 603.3.2 shall
be used only to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with section
603.3.2.4. Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be made using
closed piping systems.”
To amend section 604 to read as follows:
[604.1]
“604.1.1 Stationary generators. Stationary emergency and standby power generators required
by this code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200.
604.1.2 Installation. Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in
accordance with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. Existing
installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in
chapter 11.
.....
604.1.9 Critical operations power systems (COPS). For critical operations power systems
necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require
continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security,
or business continuity, see NFPA 70.
604.2 Where required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by
sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.24 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other referenced code.
.....
604.2.4 Emergency voice/alarm communications systems. Emergency power shall be
provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or
as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in section 907.5.2.2.5. The system shall be
capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24 hours, as required in
NFPA 72.
Covered and open malls, section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3
Group A occupancies, sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4.
Special amusement buildings, section 907.2.12.3
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/618
High-rise buildings, section 907.2.13
Atriums, section 907.2.14
Deep underground buildings, section 907.2.19
604.2.5 .....
.....
604.2.12 Means of egress illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of
egress illumination in accordance with sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes)
604.2.13 Membrane structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in
temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.12.6.1. (90 minutes)
Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane
structures in accordance with section 2702 of the International Building Code. (4 hours)
Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated
membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.10.4.
.....
604.2.15 Smoke control systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems
in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in section
909.11:
Covered mall building, International Building Code, section 402.7
Atriums, International Building Code, section 404.7
Underground buildings, International Building Code, section 405.8
Group I-3, International Building Code, section 408.4.2
Stages, International Building Code, section 410.3.7.2
Special amusement buildings (as applicable to group A's), International Building Code,
section 411.1
Smoke protected seating, section 1029.6.2.1
604.2.17 Covered and open mall buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in accordance
with section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3.
604.2.18 Airport traffic-control towers. A standby power system shall be provided in airport
traffic-control towers more than 65 ft. in height. Power shall be provided to the following
equipment:
1. Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and lighting.
2. Elevator operating equipment.
3. Fire alarm and smoke detection systems.
604.2.19 Smokeproof enclosures and stair pressurization alternative. Standby power shall
be provided for smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/618
fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code, section 909.20.6.2.
604.2.20 elevator pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization
system as required by the International Building Code, section 909.21.5.
604.2.21 Elimination of smoke dampers in shaft penetrations. Standby power shall be
provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with
the International Building Code, section 717.5.3, exception 2.3.
604.2.22 Common exhaust systems for clothes dryers. Standby power shall be provided for
common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with
the International Mechanical Code, section 504.10, item 7.
604.2.23 Hydrogen cutoff rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation
and gas detection systems of hydrogen cutoff rooms in accordance with the International
Building Code, section 421.8.
604.2.24 Means of egress illumination in existing buildings. Emergency power shall be
provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with section 1104.5 when required by
the fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.)
604.3 .....
.....
604.8 Energy time duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter
or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby
power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour
full-demand operation of the system.
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is
approved.
To amend section 609.2 to read as follows:
“609.2 Where required. A type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking
appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease
vapors, including but not limited to cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary
concessions, such as trucks, buses, trailers, pavilions, or any form of roofed enclosure, as required by
the fire code official.
Exceptions:
1. Tents, as provided for in chapter 31.
2. ....
Additionally, fuel gas and power provided for such cooking appliances shall be interlocked with the
extinguishing system, as required by section 904.12.2. Fuel gas containers and piping/hose shall be
properly maintained in good working order and in accordance with all applicable regulations.”
To amend section 704.1; change to read as follows:
“704.1 Enclosure. Interior vertical shafts, including but not limited to stairways, elevator hoistways,
service and utility shafts, that connect two or more stories of a building shall be enclosed or protected
in accordance with the codes in effect at the time of construction but, regardless of when constructed,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/618
not less than as required in chapter 11. New floor openings in existing buildings shall comply with
the International Building Code.”
To amend section 807.3 to read as follows:
“807.3 Combustible decorative materials. In occupancies in groups A, E, I, and R-1, and
dormitories in group R-2, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and other similar combustible
decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with section 807.4 and shall not
exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which they are attached.”
To amend section 807.5.2.2 and 807.5.2.3 to read as follows:
“807.5.2.2 Artwork in corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of
corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from
floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative material
suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA
701 in accordance with section 807 or be noncombustible.
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area.
807.5.2.3 Artwork in classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of
classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains,
draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall
meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with section 807 or be
noncombustible.”
To amend section 807.5.5.2 and 807.5.5.3 to read as follows:
“807.5.5.2 Artwork in corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of
corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from
floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material
suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA
701 in accordance with section 807 or be noncombustible.
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area.
807.5.5.3 Artwork in classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of
classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains,
draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall
meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with section 807 or be
noncombustible.”
To amend section 901.6.1 by adding section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows:
“901.6.1.1 Standpipe testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems
as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing
that is required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the fire department connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be back
flushed when foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any
type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA
25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/618
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply
capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant
or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water
through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions
properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry
standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function
properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system.
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised.
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such
caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas
Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM)
Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as
“Fifth Year” for type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read “5 Year Standpipe
Test” at a minimum.
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to
Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required
notification of the local authority having jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if
applicable, as required by the state rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be
conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing
conditions.
9. Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from class II and III
standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting
equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved
cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official.”
To amend section 901.6 by adding section 901.6.3 to read as follows:
“901.6.3 False alarms and nuisance alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given,
signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner.”
To amend section 901.7 to read as follows:
“901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the
event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be
notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be
evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut
down until the fire protection system has been returned to service. .....”
To amend section 901.8.2 to read as follows:
“901.8.2 Removal of occupant-use hose lines. The fire code official is authorized to permit the
removal of occupant-use hose lines and hose valves where all of the following conditions exist:
1. The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire department.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/618
2. If the occupant-use hose lines are removed, but the hose valves are required to remain as
per the fire code official, such shall be compatible with local fire department fittings.”
To amend section 903.1.1 to read as follows:
“903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with
section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the
applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official.”
To amend section 903.2 by adding a paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and
elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip
requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine
room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating
‘ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED.'“
To delete exception in section 903.2.
To amend section 903.2.9 by adding section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows:
“903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
all self-service storage facilities.”
Section 903.2.11; change 903.2.11.3 and add 903.2.11.7 and 903.2.11.8, as follows:
903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 Feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings that have one or more stories with an occupant load of 30 or more, other than
penthouses in compliance with section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 55 feet (16
764 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished
floor.
Exceptions:
1. Open parking structures in compliance with section 406.5 of the International Building
Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage.
2. Occupancies in group F-2.
903.2.11.7 High-piled combustible storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet
(4572 mm), see chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply.
903.2.11.8 Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.
To amend section 903.3.1.1.1 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall
not be required in the following rooms or areas where such ..... because it is damp, of fire- resistancerated
construction or contains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or
fire hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/618
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of
the contents, when approved by the code official.
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated
from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having
a fire- resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
4. Elevator machine rooms, and machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such
sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances.”
To add section 903.3.1.2.3 to read as follows:
“Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics and attached garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of
such buildings two or more stories in height, in accordance with NFPA 13 and or NFPA 13R
requirements, and attached garages.”
To amend section 903.3.1.3 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and twofamily
dwellings; group R-3; group R-4 condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed
throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law.”
To add section 903.3.1.4 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be
in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler
systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic
spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to
allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the
rest of the building; and
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable
referenced NFPA standard; and
3. The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that
insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved
by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.”
To amend section 903.3.5 by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply
requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be
designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference section 507.4 for additional design requirements.”
To amend section 903.4 by adding a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/618
“.....
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.”
To amend section 903.4.2 by adding second paragraph to read as follows:
“The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe
notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to
the fire department connection.”
To amend section 905.2 to read as follows:
“905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section
and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a
maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm.”
To amend section 905.3 by adding section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows:
“905.3.9 Buildings exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per
story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) of travel,
vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, class I automatic
wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided.
Exceptions:
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14.
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.”
To amend section 905.4, item 1, 3, and 5, and add item 7 to read as follows:
1. In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and
below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories,
unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
2. ....
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit
stairway hose connection by a .....
4. ....
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent
slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way a hose connection shall be located to serve
the roof or at the highest landing of an interior exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in
accordance with section 1011.12.
6. ....
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/618
7. When required by this chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required
exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as
otherwise approved by the fire code official.”
To amend section 905.9 by adding a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
“.....
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.”
To amend section 907.1 by adding section 907.1.4 and 907.1.4.1 to read as follows:
“907.1.4 Design standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be
addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating
devices.”
To amend section 907.2.1 to read as follows:
“907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in
accordance with section 907.5 shall be installed in group A occupancies where the having an
occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of
exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with section
707.3. 10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the
purposes of applying this section. Portions of group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes
shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the group E occupancy.
Exception: .....
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux)
at the walking surface level; and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.”
To amend section 907.2.3 to read as follows:
“907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing
an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of section 907.5.2.2 and
installed in accordance with section 907.6 shall be installed in group E educational occupancies.
When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be
connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed
in group E day-care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings,
whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant
load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems.
Exceptions:
1. ....
1.1 Residential in-home day-care with not more than 12 children may use
interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/618
children 2-1/2 or less years of age, see section 907.2.6.)
2. ....”
To amend section 907.2.13 by amending exception 3 to read as follows:
“1. ....
3. Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in group A-5 in accordance with section 303.1
of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses
including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants, and similarly enclosed areas.”
To amend section 907.4.2 by adding section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows:
“907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.”
To amend section 907.6.1 by adding section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows:
“907.6.1.1 Wiring installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a
failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere
with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in
such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (class
A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements
for class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one-foot vertical
between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a signaling line
circuit interface device may be wired class B, provided the distance from the interface device to the
initiating device is ten feet or less.”
To delete all the exceptions in section 907.6.3.
To amend section 907.6.6 by adding a sentence at end of paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station.”
To add section 909.22 to read as follows:
“909.22 Stairway or ramp pressurization alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization
alternative is chosen for compliance with building code requirements for a smokeproof enclosure,
interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and
a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all
interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect
and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with section 909, including the installation of a separate
firefighter's smoke control panel as per section 909.16, and a smoke control permit shall be required
from the fire department as per section 105.7.”
909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp
pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved
location at the entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway
or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the
mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke
detectors shall be installed in accordance with section 907.3.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/618
909.22.1.1 Ventilation systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be
independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power
wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following:
1. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior
to the building and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to
the smokeproof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers
constructed in accordance with section 707 of the building code or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with section 711 of the building code, or both.
2. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within
the smokeproof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or
through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in
accordance with section 707 of the building code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 of the building code, or both.
3. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within
the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other
mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in
accordance with section 707 of the building code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 of the building code, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable
system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.
3. Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit
protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
909.21.1.2 Standby power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation
systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in
accordance with section 2702 of the building code.
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the
system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is
operating in compliance with these requirements.
To amend section 910.2 by changing exception 2. and 3.to read as follows:
“1. ....
2. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with early
suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
3. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with
control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less that are
listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat
removal is prohibited.”
To amend section 910.2 by adding subsections 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows:
“910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a group H occupancy as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/618
1. In occupancies classified as group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square
feet (1394 m2) in single floor area.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.
2. In areas of buildings in group H used for storing class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid
oxidizers, class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive)
materials, or class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity
classification.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.”
To amend section 910.3 by adding section 910.3.4 to read as follows:
“910.3.4 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved
automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the
provisions of sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3.
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically.
The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature
rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature
rating of the sprinklers installed.
Exception: Manual only systems per section 910.2.
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by
actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above
ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents.”
To amend section 910.4.3.1to read as follows:
“910.4.3.1 Makeup air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor
level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air
inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke
exhaust.”
To amend section 910.4.4 to read as follows:
“910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated only automatically by
the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls
shall also be provided.
Exception: Manual only systems per section 910.2.”
To amend section 912.2 by adding section 912.2.3 to read as follows:
“912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire
department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path.”
To amend section 913.2.1 by adding a second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/618
“.....
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an
exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height,
regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as
required by section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior
wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be
provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire
code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by section 506.1.”
To amend section 914.3.1.2 to read as follows:
“914.3.1.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 420 120 feet (128
m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two
water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each
connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the
connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to
operate.
Exception: .....”
By adding section 1006.2.2.6 to read as follows:
“1006.2.2.6 Electrical rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply.
Reference the electrical code as adopted.”
To add exception 4 in section 1009.1 to read as follows:
“.....
Exceptions:
1. ....
.....
4. Buildings regulated under state law and built in accordance with state registered plans,
including any variances or waivers granted by the state, shall be deemed to be in compliance
with the requirements of section 1009.”
To amend section 1010.1.9.4 by amending exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows:
“.....
Exceptions:
1. ....
.....
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a group B, F, M or
S occupancy. {Remainder unchanged}
4. Where a pair of doors serves a group A, B, F, M or S occupancy .....”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/618
To amend section 1015.8 by changing number 1 to read as follows:
“.....
1. Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 (16 764
mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall
prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006.
.....”
To amend section 1020.1 by adding exception 6 to read as follows:
“.....
1. .....
.....
6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction
within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection
within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all
areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm
system where such system is provided.”
By deleting section 1029.1.1.1 in its entirety.
To amend section 1031.2 to read as follows:
“1031.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall be continuously
maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other
emergency. An exit or exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means
of egress.”
To amend section 1103.3 by adding sentence to end of paragraph as follows:
“.....
Provide emergency signage as required by section 607.3.”
To amend section 1103.5 by adding section 1103.5.1 to read as follows:
“.....
1103.5.1 Group A-2. Spray booths and rooms. Existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with section 2404.”
To amend section 1103.7 by adding section 1103.7.8 and 1103.7.8.1 to read as follows:
“1103.7.8 Fire alarm system design standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or
replaced, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke and/or
heat detectors shall have analog initiating devices.
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system,
remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm
system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel installation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/618
exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must comply within 18
months of permit application.
1103.7.8.1 Communication requirements. Refer to section 907.6.6 for applicable
requirements.”
To amend section 2304.1 to read as follows:
“2304.1 Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall
be in accordance with the following:
1. Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or
2. Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or
3. Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with section 2304.3.
At any time the qualified attendant of item number 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall
be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with section 2304.3.”
To delete section 2401.2 in its entirety.
To amend footnote (j) under table 3206.2 to read as follows:
“.....
.....
j. Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinkler
systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m • s) 1/2 or
less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers, installed in
accordance with NFPA 13, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered
mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas.”
To amend section 3310.1 by adding sentence to end of paragraph to read as follows:
“.....
When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they
shall be approved prior to the time at which construction has progressed beyond completion of the
foundation of any structure.”
To amend section 5601.1.3 to read as follows:
“5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling, and use of fireworks are
prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage, and handling of fireworks as allowed
in section 5604 and 5608.
2. The use of fireworks for approved fireworks displays as allowed in section 5608.”
To amend section 5703.6 by adding a sentence to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/618
“5703.6 Piping systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible
liquids shall be in accordance with sections 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of
secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems.”
To amend section 5704.2.9.5 and by adding section 5704.2.9.5.3 to read as follows:
“5704.2.9.5 Above-ground tanks inside of buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall
comply with section 5704.2.9.5.1 and 5704.2.9.5.2 through 5704.2.9.5.3.
5704.2.9.5.1 .....
5704.2.9.5.2 .....
5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible liquid storage tanks inside of buildings. The maximum aggregate
allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11 356 L) of class II or III combustible liquid
for storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the
following conditions are met:
1. The entire 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground
tanks;
2. The 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank
or multiple smaller tanks;
3. The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system
complying with section 903.3.1.1; and
4. Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing
an approved closed piping system.
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be
counted towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks
shall not be required to be located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than
two stories below grade.”
To amend section 5704.2.11.4 by adding a sentence to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4 Leak prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with sections
5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.4.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be
provided for underground tank and piping systems.”
To amend section 5704.2.11.4.2 to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4.2 Leak detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an
approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed
in accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in section 5704.2.11.4.3.”
To amend section 5704.2.11.4 by adding section 5704.2.11.4.3 to read as follows:
“.....
5704.2.11.4.3 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4 inches in diameter shall
be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage
tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to
ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a
sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/618
placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet
routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required.”
To amend section 6103.2.1 by adding section 6103.2.1.8 to read as follows:
“.....
6103.2.1.8 Jewelry repair, dental labs and similar occupancies. Where natural gas service is not
available, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or
similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20-pound (9.0 kg) water capacity. Aggregate
capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2 kg) water capacity. Each device shall be separated from
other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet.”
To amend section 6104.2 by adding an exception 2 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. ....
2. Except as permitted in sections 308 and 6104.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in
residential areas.”
To amend section 6104.3 by adding section 6104.3.2 to read as follows:
“.....
6104.3.2 Spas, pool heaters, and other listed devices. Where natural gas service is not available, an
LP-gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such
container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See table 6104.3 for location of
containers.
Exception: Lots where LP-gas can be off-loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located
may install up to 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved containers.”
To amend section 6107.4 and 6109.13 to read as follows:
“6107.4 Protecting containers from vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to proximity
to alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in
accordance with section 312.
6109.13 Protection of containers. LP-gas containers shall be stored within a suitable enclosure or
otherwise protected against tampering. Vehicle impact protection shall be provided as required by
section 6107.4.”
(Ordinance 2017-04-15 adopted 4/10/17)
Sec. 10.04.003 Bureau of fire prevention
(a) The fire code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention department, as designated by the city
manager, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the city manager.
(b) The chief of the fire prevention bureau may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as
shall from time to time be necessary with the approval of the fire chief, provided they meet the state
qualifications and are certified. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city manager the
employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an
examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and non7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/618
members of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with
removal only for cause.
(2002 Code, sec. 5.102)
Sec. 10.04.004 Definitions
(a) Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the fire code, it is the City of Lancaster.
(b) Wherever the words “chief of the bureau of fire prevention” are used, they shall be held to mean “fire
marshal.”
(2002 Code, sec. 5.103)
Sec. 10.04.005 Limits in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above-ground
tanks is restricted
The limits referred to in section 79.501 of the Uniform Fire Code in which the storage of flammable or
combustible liquids is restricted are hereby established as follows:
(1) The city limits, except as authorized in subsection (2) below.
(2) The fire marshal may grant the above-ground storage of liquids with a flash point equal to or
greater than that of diesel fuel following a review by the fire marshal of building permit applications
for such storage and provided that such above-ground storage is located behind the front building line
in a location to be decided by the fire marshal and that the property be zoned LI (Light Industrial) or
HI (Heavy Industrial). Above-ground storage tanks shall be within a concrete dike withholding 1.5
total capacity of all tanks and comply with the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ)
requirements and the Uniform Fire Code maximum storage of the same. Outside LI or HI shall be no
greater than 250 gallons and shall also comply with the TCEQ and the Uniform Fire Code, and be
within a diked area.
(3) All other liquids that have a flash point less than that of diesel shall be placed underground;
however, in the event they desire to go above ground, they will comply with the Uniform Fire Code
and the TCEQ. The tanks shall be diked and be able to contain 1.5 total capacity of all tanks and will
be provided with a foam fire suppression system capability, suppressing any type of fire. The aboveground
tanks shall be located behind the front building line in a location to be decided by the fire
marshal and the property be zoned LI (Light Industrial) or HI (Heavy Industrial). All other tanks shall
not exceed 250 gallons other than residential and shall be diked, made of concrete, and be provided
with a foam fire suppression system. Tanks shall not be allowed at a residence located within the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 5.104)
Sec. 10.04.006 Limits in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted
The limits referred to in section 8202.1 of the Uniform Fire Code in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted are hereby established as follows: the city limits. Each application for permit will be reviewed by the
fire marshal and, if approved, will comply with the Uniform Fire Code and state railroad commission guidelines.
(2002 Code, sec. 5.105)
Sec. 10.04.007 Limits in which storage of explosive materials is prohibited
The limits referred to in section 7701.1 of The Uniform Fire Code in which storage of explosive materials is
prohibited are hereby established as follows: the city limits. (2002 Code, sec. 5.106)
Sec. 10.04.008 Modifications
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/618
The fire chief and chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the
fire code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code
shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when
granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon, shall be entered upon
the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (2002 Code, sec. 5.107)
Sec. 10.04.009 Appeals
Whenever the chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that
the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief to the city manager within thirty
(30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (2002 Code, sec. 5.108)
Sec. 10.04.010 New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits
The city manager, the chief and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine
and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The chief of the
bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to
interested persons. (2002 Code, sec. 5.109)
Sec. 10.04.011 Violations; penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code or standards hereby adopted or fail to
comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply
with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief or his designated representative or by a court of
competent jurisdiction within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city
shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
The imposition of one (1) fine for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When
not otherwise specified, each and every day any such violation or failure to comply shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions by means otherwise authorized by law.
(2002 Code, sec. 5.110)
ARTICLE 10.05 FIREWORKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.05.001 Definitions
As used this article:
Fireworks. Any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire
balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for
use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display, and such term shall include all articles or substances
within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks, whether herein specially designated and defined or not.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/618
Person. Any natural person, association of persons, partnership, corporation, or agent or officer of a corporation,
and shall also include all warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors and
administrators.
(2002 Code, sec. 5.301)
Sec. 10.05.002 General prohibition
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture,
assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer or have in his possession with intent to sell, use, discharge,
cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description. (2002
Code, sec. 5.302)
Sec. 10.05.003 Permitted transportation
It shall be lawful to transport Interstate Commerce Commission class C common fireworks, as defined in
V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 2154, by motor vehicles which meet the Interstate Commerce Commission
requirement for transporting Interstate Commerce Commission class C common fireworks and equipped with at
least one (1) ten-pound fire extinguisher for extinguishing type B fires, along and upon state and federally
numbered highways within the city. It shall further be lawful for bona fide fireworks dealers to transport
Interstate Commerce Commission class C common fireworks, as defined in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter
2154, along and upon state and federally numbered highways within the city. (2002 Code, sec. 5.303)
Sec. 10.05.004 Exemption of signal flares and starter's pistols
This article shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroads,
which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any railroad for use in railroad
operation; nor shall this article apply to any marine signal flare or rocket of the type and kind commonly carried
by a vessel at sea for its own use and which signal flare or rocket is transported or received or stored for use only
as ship's stores; nor shall this article apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use; nor shall this
article apply to starter's blanks and pistols used in athletic events. (2002 Code, sec. 5.304)
Sec. 10.05.005 Exemption of toy pistol caps
Toy paper pistol caps which contain less than twenty-five one-hundredths (25/100) grain of explosive
compounds shall not be affected by this article, and the sale and use is permitted at all times. (2002 Code, sec.
5.305)
Sec. 10.05.006 Seizure and destruction of illegal fireworks
The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city in violation of this article is hereby declared to
be a common and public nuisance. The fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated representatives
are directed and required to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found in violation of this
article, and any member of the fire prevention division of the fire department or any police officer of the city or
any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks
found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally until the
fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated representatives can be notified in order that such
fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section. Notwithstanding any penal
provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city or the fire chief, fire
marshal, police chief or their designated representatives for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent
unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city, and to aid the fire
chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated representatives in the discharge of their duties, and to
particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and destruction of such fireworks, but it shall
not be necessary to obtain any such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction. (2002
Code, sec. 5.306)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/618
Sec. 10.05.007 Applicability outside city limits
This article shall also be applicable and in force within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city
limits and extending for a distance outside of the city limits for a total of five thousand (5,000) feet, and it shall
be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this article within such area of five thousand (5,000) feet
outside the city limits; provided that this article shall not apply within any portion of such five-thousand-foot
area which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation. (2002 Code, sec. 5.307)
Sec. 10.05.008 Right of entry
The fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated representatives are hereby authorized to enter any
building where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected in order to inspect the same for the presence of
such fireworks, but such authority does not include the right to enter a private dwelling or apartment. (2002
Code, sec. 5.308)
Secs. 10.05.009–10.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Public Displays
Sec. 10.05.031 Generally
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a public display of fireworks made under the terms and
conditions of this article, and such a display shall be permitted upon compliance with the provisions of this
article. (2002 Code, sec. 5.309)
Sec. 10.05.032 Application for permit
Any adult person or any firm, co-partnership, corporation or association planning to make a public display of
fireworks shall first make written application for a permit to the fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their
designated representatives at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the date of the proposed display. No city
permit shall be issued until a permit issued for said purposes has been issued by the state. (2002 Code, sec.
5.310)
Sec. 10.05.033 Issuance or denial of permit; term; transfer
It shall be the duty of the fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated representatives to make an
investigation as to whether the display as proposed by the applicant for a permit under this article shall be of
such a character that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person; and he shall, in the exercise of
reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application subject to the conditions prescribed in this article. In the
event the application is approved, a permit shall be issued for the public display by the fire chief, fire marshal,
police chief or their designated representatives. Such permit shall be for a period of time designated on the
permit, but shall not exceed fourteen (14) days, and the permit shall not be transferable. In the event that the
application is denied by the fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated representatives, they shall
notify the applicant of the denial in writing. (2002 Code, sec. 5.311)
Sec. 10.05.034 Insurance or bond
The applicant for a display permit under this article shall, at the time of making application, furnish proof that he
carries compensation insurance for his employees as provided by the laws of the state, and he shall file with the
city secretary a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of public liability insurance in an amount not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business
in the state, for the benefit of the person named therein as assured, as evidence of ability to respond in damages
in at least the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), such policy to be approved by the fire
chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated representatives. In lieu of insurance, the applicant may file
with the city secretary a bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) issued by an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/618
authorized surety company approved by the fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated
representatives, conditioned upon the applicant's payment of all damages to persons or property which shall or
may result from or be caused by such public display of fireworks or any negligence on the part of the applicant
or his agents, servants, employees or subcontractors in the presentation of the public display. The city shall also
be designated as an insured by the insurance policy and bonded by the bond. (2002 Code, sec. 5.312; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 10.05.035 Type of display
Any fireworks display authorized under this article shall be limited to an aerial display. (2002 Code, sec. 5.313)
Sec. 10.05.036 Storage of material
The material to be used for a public display authorized by this article shall not be stored within the city limits,
but shall be brought in on the day of the public display and then shall be taken immediately to the place of
display for further handling and storage. (2002 Code, sec. 5.314)
Sec. 10.05.037 Hazardous conditions prohibited
No public display of fireworks shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as to be hazardous
or dangerous to persons or property, and this determination shall be within the sound discretion of the fire chief,
fire marshal, police chief or their designated representatives. (2002 Code, sec. 5.315)
Sec. 10.05.038 Qualifications of operators
The persons handling the display of fireworks under this article shall be competent, adult persons and
experienced pyrotechnic operators approved by the fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated
representatives, and no person not approved by the fire chief, fire marshal, police chief or their designated
representatives shall handle fireworks at the public display. The names of the experienced pyrotechnic operators
shall be designated on the permit issued. (2002 Code, sec. 5.316)
Sec. 10.05.039 Firemen to be present at display
For each public display of fireworks under this article, not less than two (2) firemen of the city shall be in
attendance during the display. The expense of such firemen at the display shall be borne by the applicant for the
permit, and shall be paid in advance at the time of the application for the permit. (2002 Code, sec. 5.317)
ARTICLE 10.06 MOBILE SERVICE UNITS*
Sec. 10.06.001 Definition
Mobile service units. Vehicles, tank trucks or other mobile devices from which flammable liquids used as motor
fuels may, as an act of retail sale, be dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. (2002 Code, sec. 12.2301)
Sec. 10.06.002 Operation prohibited
The operation of any such mobile service unit or units is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the city,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to dispense fuel from a mobile service unit in the city. (2002 Code, sec.
12.2302)
Sec. 10.06.003 Exceptions
The provisions of this article do not apply to the delivery of liquefied petroleum gas to lawful recipients having
proper containers other than motor vehicles, or to the emergency delivery of motor fuel to a stalled vehicle.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2303)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/618
CHAPTER 12
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 12.02 FOOD SERVICE SANITATION†
Sec. 12.02.001 Adoption of state rules
The Texas Food Establishment Rules adopted by the department of state health services as 25 Tex. Admin. Code
sections 229.161 through 229.171 and 229.173 through 229.175, as amended herein, are hereby adopted as the
city rules for food service sanitation, a copy of which is attached as exhibit A to the adoptive ordinance that
amends this article [Ordinance 2008-12-51], and which shall be maintained together with the adoptive ordinance
in a separate file in the office of the city secretary. All references contained herein to sections within this article
are in the Texas Administrative Code. The city amends the Texas Food Establishment Rules as follows.
Sec. 12.02.002 General amendments to state rules
(a) Definitions. Section 229.162 is amended to include the following:
Catering operation means a food establishment that pursuant to a contract or agreement
prepares food in an approved facility and transports food in an approved manner to another
location for final cooking or service. A catering operation is classified as a food establishment.
Concession stand means a food establishment operated on a seasonal basis for the purpose of
providing food at sporting and special events.
Food establishment. Section 229.162(40)(C)(viii) shall be added to read:
Provided that the operations do not expose the public to a substantial and imminent health
hazard as determined by the regulatory authority, a food establishment does not include the sale,
distribution or service of food at an event, party or other special event that is not open to
persons other than the members or invited guests of the sponsor, provided that there is no public
advertisement of the event, public solicitation of funds at or for the event, or participation by the
general public in the event.
Pushcart means a non-self-propelled mobile food unit limited to serving only prepackaged,
non-potentially hazardous food. A pushcart is classified as a mobile food unit. A pushcart does
not include non-self-propelled units owned and operated within a retail food store.
Seasonal food establishment means a food service establishment that operates at a fixed
location for a period greater than 14 consecutive days, but less than 365 days, and is restricted
to limited food preparation, unless approved by the regulatory authority.
(b) Equipment, utensils and linens. Section 226.165(f)(24) is amended to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/618
Equipment in new or extensively remodeled establishments shall meet National Sanitation
Foundation or equivalent approval. Any other equipment is subject to approval by the
regulatory authority.
(c) Grease trap. Section 229.166(j)(3) is amended to read as follows:
A grease trap or grease interceptor is required unless approved by the regulatory authority. If
used, a grease trap or grease interceptor shall be located outside the facility. It shall be sized
according to the plumbing code as currently adopted by the city.
(d) Floors, walls, and ceilings. Section 229.167(c) is amended as follows:
(1) Wall and ceiling coverings and coatings. Section 229.167(c)(6)(a) is amended to read:
The walls and ceilings of walk-in refrigerating units, food preparation areas, dry storage
areas, food storage areas, equipment washing and utensil washing areas, toilet rooms and
vestibules shall be light colored, smooth, nonabsorbent, and easily cleanable.
(2) Wall and ceiling coverings and coatings. Section 229.167(c)(6)(b) is amended to read:
Concession stands may use concrete, porous blocks, or bricks for indoor wall construction
if finished and sealed to provide a smooth, easily cleanable, non-absorbent surface.
(3) Floor construction. Section 229.167(c)(9) shall be added to read:
Floors and floor coverings of all food preparation, food service, food storage, and utensil
washing areas, and the floors of all walk-in refrigerating units, dressing rooms, locker
rooms, toilet rooms and vestibules, shall be constructed of smooth, durable material such
as terrazzo, ceramic tile, quarry tile or the equivalent as approved by the regulatory
authority and shall be maintained in good repair. Sealed concrete is not acceptable as a
floor surface for areas mentioned above.
(e) Competency and access. Section 229.171(i)(1) is amended to read as follows:
An individual conducting inspection of retail food establishments shall be a registered
professional sanitarian or a sanitarian-in-training in Texas.
Sec. 12.02.003 Seasonal food establishments
(a) General standards. The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements to protect against health
hazards related to the conduct of the seasonal food establishments, may prohibit the sale of some or all
potentially hazardous food, and, when no health hazards will result, may waive or modify requirements of this
article. Seasonal food establishments shall comply with the requirements of this article.
(b) Concession stands. Concession facilities are seasonal food service establishments generally associated
with athletic and recreational facilities. The degree of regulation of a concession facility shall depend upon the
type and volume of foods conveyed, and the status of the facility.
(c) Farmers' markets. The following does not apply to non-potentially-hazardous uncut produce.
(1) All foods must be commercially produced prepackaged items from a licensed facility or
commissary. Product sampling is prohibited. This prohibition does not apply to food that has been
prepared or packaged under conditions meeting the requirements of this article and served within
facilities meeting the requirements of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/618
(2) A manufacturing permit from the department of state health services and copies of product
labels shall be provided to the regulatory authority.
(3) All refrigerated foods must be maintained below 41 degrees using mechanical refrigeration.
Sec. 12.02.004 Temporary food establishments
Section 229.170 is amended as follows:
(1) Food temperatures. Section 229.170(b) is amended to read:
All food temperature requirements shall be met as contained in 229.164(k)–(o) of this title
(relating to food). Ice shall not be used as a coolant for potentially hazardous foods at a
temporary food establishment operating for more than four hours.
(2) Limited food preparation. Section 229.170(l) shall be added to read:
[Only] Those potentially hazardous foods requiring limited preparation, such as preformed
hamburgers and hot dogs, shall be prepared and served unless otherwise approved
by the regulatory authority. No slicing, dicing, or cutting of food products on-site. This
prohibition does not apply to potentially hazardous food that has been prepared or
packaged under conditions meeting the requirements of this article, is obtained in
individual servings, in facilities that meet the requirements of this article, and is served
directly in the unopened container in which it was packaged. The preparation or service of
meat sandwiches, smoked or barbecued meats and eggs is prohibited unless the facility is
a fully equipped enclosed building with sinks, refrigeration, and hot and cold running
water. The sale or conveyance of fish, raw poultry, or shellfish products (except certain
prepackaged frozen products) is prohibited.
Sec. 12.02.005 Mobile units
Section 229.169 is amended as follows:
(1) Permits. Section 226.169(a)(10) shall be added to read:
A schedule of all stops in the city, including locations and exact times, shall be submitted
at the time of the application. Any changes in the schedule shall be reported to the
regulatory authority within three days of such change. Failure to maintain a current
schedule of these stops may result in suspension of the permit to operate.
Sec. 12.02.006 Permit required; issuance; approval of plans; inspections
(a) General provisions.
(1) Regulatory authority. Any reference to “regulatory authority” in the rules shall mean the city
environmental health department.
(2) Separate permit required for each operation. In cases where a person or firm conducts, in a
single building or at the same address, more than one food operation, whether such operations
constitute a food establishment or temporary food establishment, then a separate permit shall be
required for each separate operation.
(3) Storage of potentially hazardous foods. Mechanical refrigeration or effectively insulated
facilities are required for the storage of potentially hazardous foods. Using ice as the sole coolant for
potentially hazardous foods is not acceptable; however, ice can be used as a coolant for potentially
hazardous foods at a temporary food establishment operating for less than four hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/618
(b) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment within the limits of the
city without having been issued a valid food permit. Only a person who complies with the requirements in this
article shall be entitled to receive or retain a permit, and notwithstanding the fact that all inspections necessary
for obtaining a food permit have been completed, such permit shall not be issued until after the building in which
the establishment is to be located has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the city. Permits are not
transferable from one person to another person or place. A valid permit shall be posted in or on a conspicuous
place of every food establishment regulated by this article. Permits shall remain in effect for 12 months from the
date of issuance unless sooner revoked for cause. Mobile food establishment permits are valid for six months. If
the permit is granted to a temporary food establishment, the permit shall be in effect for a period of time not
exceeding 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
(c) Issuance of permit.
(1) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a permit
on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application shall include the name and address of
each applicant, the location and type of food establishment and the signature of the applicant. An
application for a temporary food establishment shall include the inclusive dates of the proposed
operation. For temporary and seasonal events, applications and fees shall be submitted at least four
working days prior to the start date.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee established by resolution
of the city council from time to time. Failure to pay the annual fee shall cause the permit to be
automatically revoked.
(3) Establishments that provide only non-potentially hazardous foods, sold or served in original
packaging and/or in single use containers, may be exempt from permitting requirements upon
approval of the regulatory authority. Full compliance with this article, including permit requirements
and associated fees and inspections, may be required of establishments if judged to be capable of
causing food-borne illness or increased public health risk.
(d) Submission and review of plans.
(1) Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an
existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory
authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is commenced. The
plans and specifications shall include a proposed menu, proposed layout, equipment arrangement,
mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed
equipment and facilities. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or
converted except in accordance with said approved plans and specifications.
(2) Deviation from the approved plans and specifications shall result in a food establishment
permit denial, suspension, or revocation.
(e) Inspections.
(1) The regulatory authority shall inspect the food establishment prior to the issuance of the food
establishment permit to determine compliance with any approved plans and specifications and
compliance with other requirements of this article, and shall determine that a certificate of occupancy
has been issued for the building in which the establishment is to be located.
(2) The regulatory authority shall conduct periodic routine inspections to determine if a food
establishment is in compliance with the rules. If, during a routine inspection, immediate correction of
a critical item is not achieved, the regulatory authority shall verify correction of the violation within
ten calendar days. If a critical item is not corrected during the initial inspection, a reinspection fee,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/618
established by resolution of the city council from time to time, shall be assessed at the follow-up
inspection.
(3) When the total cumulative demerit value of an establishment exceeds 30 demerits, the
establishment shall immediately cease operations. The establishment shall remain closed until
corrective action on all identified critical violations is complete. Corrective action on all other
violations must be initiated within 48 hours. The establishment shall remain closed until reopened by
the regulatory authority. In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall be corrected
immediately.
(4) Denial of access to the regulatory authority shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the
food service permit.
State law reference–Authority to require permit for food service establishment, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 437.004.
Sec. 12.02.007 Certified food manager
Section 229.163 is amended as follows:
(1) Responsibility; assignment. Section 229.163(a):
The permit holder shall be the person in charge or shall designate a person in charge and
shall ensure that a person in charge is present at the food establishment during all hours of
operation. The person in charge shall have successfully completed a certified food
manager's program accredited by the department.
a. Food establishments that serve, sell or distribute only prepackaged foods and nonpotentially
hazardous beverages as well as seasonal establishments and temporary
establishments are exempt from the certified food manager's program requirements.
b. A certified food manager is required for each separately permitted section of each food
establishment. The regulatory authority may require additional certified operators in sufficient
number to insure that all areas of food preparation and food service, during times of operation,
are under the direction of certified supervisory personnel.
c. Compliance may be required of establishments having exemption if they have repeated or
serious critical food code violations, or if the establishment is judged by the regulatory authority
to be capable of causing food-borne illness.
d. If a food establishment cannot meet the requirements of this section because of the
termination or transfer of certified personnel, the food establishment shall employ another
certified food manager within 30 days after such termination or transfer.
(2) Knowledge; demonstration. Section 229.163(b)(2) is amended to read:
... being a certified food protection manager who has shown proficiency of required information
through passing a department approved examination;
State law references–Certification of food managers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 438.101 et seq.; authority to require
employment of certified food managers in certain establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 437.0076.
Sec. 12.02.008 Suspension of permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food
establishment if the holder of such permit does not comply with the requirements of this article, or the operation
of its establishment does not comply with the requirements set forth herein, or if the operation of the food
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/618
establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of
the notice. When a permit is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is
suspended the holder thereof shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days after receipt of a
written request for hearing.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder thereof or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that
an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory
authority within ten days after receipt of notice. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the
suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may terminate the suspension at any time if reasons for
suspension no longer exist.
Sec. 12.02.009 Revocation of permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke a permit for serious or
repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the regulatory authority in
the performance of its duties.
(b) Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit, or the person
in charge, of the specific reason(s) for which the permit is to be revoked and that the permit shall be revoked at
the end of the ten days after service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed within the ten-day
period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. A
permit may be suspended pending its permanent revocation or a hearing relative thereto.
(c) The holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit.
Sec. 12.02.010 Hold order
(a) The regulatory authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to a hold order. No food
subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority's hold
order shall permit storage of the food under the conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not
possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and
accomplished.
(b) A hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten days after issuance thereof and
that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the
hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to
denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 12.02.011 Hearings
The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the city manager at a time and place designated by
him. Testimony given at a hearing shall be recorded verbatim. The city manager shall make a final finding based
upon the complete record, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The
regulatory authority shall furnish a written report of the hearing decision to the holder of the permit.
Sec. 12.02.012 Service of notices
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the
person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of the permit.
(Ordinance 2008-12-51 adopted 12/8/08)
ARTICLE 12.03 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/618
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 False statement of emergency
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to willfully and knowingly inform the fire alarm dispatcher,
police dispatcher or other fire or police official of the city that an ambulance or more than one (1) ambulance is
needed at a location or address when such statement is false. (2002 Code, sec. 4.1305)
Secs. 12.03.002–12.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Private Ambulance Services†
Sec. 12.03.031 Definitions
For purposes of this division regulating the operation of private transfer ambulances in the city, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, to wit:
Attendant/driver. A person who is qualified to care for a patient transported by a transfer ambulance and who is
also qualified to drive a transfer ambulance.
City. The City of Lancaster or its duly authorized representative(s).
Emergency. Any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting
the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Such
circumstances include but are not limited to accidents generally, traffic accidents and acts of violence resulting in
personal injury and sudden illness.
Emergency ambulance. Any motor vehicle especially designed, constructed, equipped and used for transporting
the injured or sick in answer to an emergency call.
Emergency call. Any request for ambulance service that is made by telephone or other means of communication
and requiring immediate ambulance service.
Emergency run. The emergency ambulance trip to the place where the emergency exists, or from the place of
such emergency to a hospital, medical clinic or medical office or other appropriate destination for the patient.
Fire department. The fire department of the city.
Permittee. Any individual, firm or corporation engaged in the business of transporting the injured, wounded, sick
or dead and using the streets of the city for such purposes.
Street. Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive or highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the
corporate limits of the city.
Transfer ambulance. Any motor vehicle constructed, equipped and used for transferring the injured or sick under
circumstances which do not constitute an emergency and which have not been represented as an emergency.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1302)
Sec. 12.03.032 Emergency service prohibited; exceptions
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, or any corporation
or firm, other than a member of the city fire department or an agency of the state or the United States, to furnish,
operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the operation of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/618
emergency ambulance service upon any street, alley or other public way or place within the city for the purpose
of picking up or transporting persons within the city, except in the following circumstances:
(1) A licensed transfer ambulance may be operated in the city while responding to a direct call for
non-emergency transfer ambulance service only and may operate such ambulance under emergency
conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the fire alarm dispatcher of the emergency
run, provided that a determination has been made by the transfer ambulance attendant that an
emergency exists requiring that the sick or injured person be transported with all practical speed to a
hospital.
(2) A licensed transfer ambulance may be operated in the city while performing the service of
maintaining an ambulance at a particular location for a sporting event, provided that such ambulance
may be used under emergency conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the fire alarm
dispatcher and determining that an emergency exists requiring a sick or injured person to be
transported with all practical speed to a hospital.
(3) A licensed transfer ambulance may be operated in the city on an emergency run, using
emergency equipment, when the fire alarm dispatcher has determined that fire department
ambulances are not available for the run and requests the operator of such licensed transfer
ambulance to furnish backup emergency ambulance service for the fire department.
(b) Any person operating a licensed transfer ambulance in the city who makes an emergency run under the
provisions of this section shall, within ten (10) days of each such emergency run, submit to the city a report on a
form furnished by the fire chief, which shall describe the circumstances requiring the emergency run.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1301)
Sec. 12.03.033 Ambulance permit
(a) Required. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any transfer ambulance for patient pickup in the
city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city.
(b) Application; criteria for approval. Application for a transfer ambulance permit shall be made upon a form
to be furnished by the fire chief, who shall issue such a permit to an applicant only upon proof by the applicant
that he has met the following requirements:
(1) The ambulance to be used in such transfer service shall be certified by the state department of
health and shall at all times be maintained in accordance with state department of health standards.
(2) Each transfer ambulance shall be accompanied by two (2) attendants or drivers who are
currently certified and who are registered by the state department of health as emergency medical
technicians.
(3) Safety mechanisms of the transfer ambulance must be operative and in good repair, including,
but not limited to, headlights, taillights, turn signals, brakes, brake lights, emergency lights, sirens,
windshield wipers, wiper blades, handles opening doors and windows, tires and spare tire.
(c) Fee. Each applicant shall pay to the city, upon submission of his application, a nonrefundable permit fee as
established by the city council. Such fee shall be for a permit for the period January 1 through December 31 of
each year, provided that any permit secured during the year shall be valid through December 31 of that year, and
such fee shall not be prorated.
(d) Renewal; posting. Annual permits must be renewed on or before January 1 of each year. Each permit shall
be numbered and must be posted in the interior of the transfer ambulance in a conspicuous place.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/618
(e) Additional vehicles; replacement of vehicles. Any permit holder who shall desire to add an additional
transfer ambulance or ambulances to his operation shall obtain an additional permit for such additional vehicle
from the city. There shall be no additional permit fee for such additional transfer ambulance or for the
replacement of an ambulance already permitted, provided that each such additional ambulance or replacement
ambulance shall meet the requirements of this section. Each ambulance for which a permit is sought shall be
inspected to determine that it meets the requirements of this section, and no permit shall be issued therefor until
all the requirements hereof have been complied with in full.
(f) Emergency runs. No person shall operate or permit the operation of a transfer ambulance on any
emergency run or in response to any emergency call nor with the use of emergency lights and siren, except as
provided in section 12.03.032 above.
(g) Inspection of ambulances. All transfer ambulances permitted under the provisions of this section shall be
inspected and approved by the fire chief or his designated representative on a quarterly basis and any other time
as may be deemed necessary by the fire chief or his designated representative. The fire chief or his designated
representative shall direct each permit holder to produce such transfer ambulance at a location convenient to the
fire chief or his designated representative for such inspection.
(h) Correction of deficiencies. Upon application, the fire chief or his designated representative shall cause an
inspection to be made of each transfer ambulance for which a permit is sought to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this section and other applicable law. Any transfer ambulance not meeting the requirements hereof
or any other law or standards required for the use of ambulances or motor vehicles shall be cited by the fire chief
or his designated representative and not used for any ambulance purposes until the deficiencies noted have been
corrected. Any use of any transfer ambulance after the same has been cited for deficiencies by the fire chief or
his designated representative shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1303)
Sec. 12.03.034 Attendant/driver's permit
(a) Required. No person shall operate a transfer ambulance or act as an attendant on a transfer ambulance
without first having obtained an attendant/driver's permit from the city.
(b) Application; qualifications. Application for a permit shall be made upon a form to be furnished by the fire
chief or his designated representative. A permit shall be issued to an applicant only upon proof that the applicant
has met the following requirements:
(1) An applicant shall hold a valid Texas class B or C operator's license.
(2) An applicant shall hold a valid certificate of completion and registration by the state department
of health as an emergency medical technician.
(3) An applicant shall have no record of final conviction of a felony or a crime involving the use or
possession of narcotics or operating a vehicle under the influence of drugs or intoxicating liquor, or
driving while license has been suspended, within the five-year period immediately preceding
application.
(4) An applicant shall not have been convicted of more than three (3) moving violations within the
preceding twelve-month period, shall not have been convicted of more than ten (10) moving
violations within the preceding five year-period, and shall not have been adjudged an habitual
violator of the traffic laws pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 521.292, as amended,
within the preceding three-year period.
(c) Appeal to city manager. An applicant denied a permit or any permittee whose permit is suspended or
revoked shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. Such appeal shall be submitted to the city manager in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/618
writing within ten (10) days of the action being appealed. The city manager shall, within ten (10) days after the
appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the ruling appealed from and shall render a
decision in writing to the applicant either sustaining, reversing or modifying the determination of the fire chief or
his designated representative.
(d) Appeal to city council. If the city manager's decision is not acceptable to the applicant or permittee, he
may, within ten (10) days of that decision, file an appeal in writing with the city secretary to the city council.
Such written appeal shall set forth the specific grounds therefor. The city secretary shall notify the appellant
within ten (10) days after receipt of the appeal as to the time and place of the hearing by the city council. The
city council shall hear such appeal within thirty (30) days of the receipt thereof by the city secretary. The
determination of the city council on any such appeal shall be final.
(e) Denial, suspension or revocation. A permit granted under the provisions of this division shall be denied,
suspended or revoked by the fire chief or his designated representative if any applicant makes any false
statement on his application or if any permittee is found guilty of any violation of this division or fails to
maintain any qualification required by law for the operation of an ambulance or as an emergency medical
technician.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1304)
Sec. 12.03.035 Operational requirements; insurance
(a) Each permittee under the provisions of this division shall have and maintain the transfer ambulance and
crew on a twenty-four-hour daily basis for non-emergency transfers.
(b) Each permittee under the provisions of this division shall be required to maintain an office in the city with
a Lancaster telephone number answered twenty-four (24) hours daily.
(c) The schedule of rates and charges applicable in the Lancaster emergency service area shall be uniform and
equal for all persons for all services rendered and shall be subject to approval by the fire chief or his designated
representative as a condition to the permit granted hereunder.
(d) During the term of each permit, the permittee shall keep in full force and effect public liability and medical
malpractice insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
(e) A permittee under the provisions of this division is not an officer, agent, employee or servant of the city
and is engaged in a private business being regulated by the provisions of this division and shall be solely
responsible for such operations.
(f) Each permittee shall maintain at its office a record of driver's licenses, ambulance attendant's certificates of
qualification and business licenses required by law, including the license or certificate numbers and expiration
dates for all ambulance personnel answering calls within the city. Such records shall be available at all regular
business hours to the fire chief or his designated representative. The permittee shall maintain a complete record
of all service calls, listing patients, points of origin, destination, charges and special conditions.
(g) If a patient dies while being transported by a permittee, the driver of the transfer ambulance shall deliver
the body of such deceased person to a hospital until such time as a medical examiner or licensed medical doctor
formally pronounces the patient to be deceased.
(2002 Code, sec. 4.1306)
ARTICLE 12.04 DISPOSAL OF LIQUID WASTE
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/618
Sec. 12.04.001 Definitions
In this article:
Approved. Accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the
city.
City. The City of Lancaster, the director or any other official designated by the city manager of any city party to
this article, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Director. The director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article.
Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semi-solid
grease trap waste, grit trap waste and/or septage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any
constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
groundwaters.
Disposal site. A permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage is processed,
treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which said waste will remain after closure.
Disposer. A person who receives, stores, retains, processes or disposes of liquid waste.
Generator. A person who causes, creates, generates or otherwise produces liquid waste.
Grease trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy,
fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the sanitary sewer
system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.
Grease trap waste. Greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by
a grease trap.
Grit trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleumbased
oil, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly
connected.
Grit trap waste. Petroleum-based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery
repair and/or washing facilities.
Hazardous waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes) which, because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
(1) Have any of the following characteristics: toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer,
flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or
illness;
(2) Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported or disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as a
hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the administrator, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, and as may be amended in the
future.
Liquid waste. Waterborne solids, liquids and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap,
chemical/portable toilet, septic tank and/or other approved catchbasins and described as grease trap waste, grit
trap waste, septage and/or other approved basin waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/618
Manager. The person conducting, supervising, managing or representing the activities of a generator, transporter
or disposer.
Manifest system. A system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation
and disposal of liquid waste.
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Permit. The formal written document issued to a person by the city authorizing collection of grease trap waste,
grit trap waste and septage.
Permittee. A person granted a permit under this article.
Person. An individual, corporation (including a government corporation), organization, government,
governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or
body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission or
any other legal entity.
POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not normally
admitted.
Septage. Wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic tank.
Shall. The word “shall” will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; “may” is permissive.
Special wastes. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration,
physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, requires special handling and disposal to protect the
human health or the environment.
Spill. The accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and
septage.
Tank. A device designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage which is
constructed primarily of non-earthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the
containment.
TDSHS. The department of state health services.
TCEQ. The state commission on environmental quality.
Toxic waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste material which has the ability to chemically produce injury
once it reaches a susceptible site in or on the body.
Transporter. A person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste.
Trip ticket. The shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information
required by the city.
Vehicle. A mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.201)
Sec. 12.04.002 Maintenance of vehicles
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/618
(a) A liquid waste transporter shall:
(1) Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections and other
appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks;
(2) Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank;
(3) Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle odor-free at the beginning of each work
day.
(b) The city may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this article, and may
authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The city may also revoke the permit for the
improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked, an appeal may be filed by the
transporter pursuant to section 12.04.035.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.204)
Sec. 12.04.003 Inspection of vehicles
A liquid waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the city prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit, with
qualifications as follows:
(1) Use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of the vehicle to transport liquid wastes;
portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in vehicles are prohibited;
(2) Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to the tank and/or vehicle;
(3) Tank to be liquid-tight;
(4) Tank to be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned;
(5) Piping, valves and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean;
(6) Inlet or opening of the tank to be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling
or transfer or during transport;
(7) Outlet connections to be constructed so that no liquid waste will leak, run or spill out from the
vehicle;
(8) Outlets to be of a design and type suitable for the liquid waste handled and capable of
controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate
surroundings while in use;
(9) Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances to be of a design and type
suitable for the type of waste handled, capable of operation without spillage, spray or leakage, and
capable of being easily disassembled for cleaning.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.205)
Sec. 12.04.004 Responsibilities of transporter; trip tickets
(a) Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid waste transporter shall determine the
nature of the material to be transported and that his equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without
spillage, leaks, or release of toxic or harmful gases, fumes, liquids or other substances. Upon delivery of the
waste to the disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/618
(b) A transporter with a city liquid waste transporter permit shall not transport materials that are hazardous in
vehicles permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste.
(c) A transporter holding a city permit must use a disposal site permitted and approved by the city, state or
federal government.
(d) A manifest system, consisting of a four-part trip ticket, is used to document the generation, transportation
and disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated in the city and shall be used as follows:
(1) The trip ticket books are purchased by the transporter from the city department of code
enforcement for an established fee;
(2) A transporter will complete one trip ticket for each location serviced, with the exception of
chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units. Chemical/portable toilet companies
servicing their own units shall be required to complete one (1) trip ticket for each vehicle load
transported;
(3) White copy of the trip ticket signed by the transporter and generator at the time of waste
collection and yellow copy maintained by the generator;
(4) White copy of the trip ticket signed by the disposer at the time of disposal and pink copy
maintained by the disposer;
(5) Green copy of the trip ticket maintained by the transporter;
(6) All completed trip ticket books containing the white copy of the trip ticket will be delivered at
least monthly by the transporter to the city department of code enforcement;
(7) A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained for a period of two (2) years.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.206)
Sec. 12.04.005 Unlawful accumulation of waste
A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or
injurious to public health to accumulate upon property under his control. (2002 Code, sec. 6.207)
Sec. 12.04.006 Unlawful disposal of waste
(a) A person commits an offense if he unloads or offers for sale or exchange liquid waste except at a place
permitted by the city, state or federal government.
(b) A person commits an offense if he deposits or discharges liquid waste onto a street or into a storm or
sanitary sewer or an area that drains into the storm sewer system.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.208)
Sec. 12.04.007 Responsibilities of generator
(a) A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked up from his premises by a liquid
waste transporter who holds a valid permit from the city, and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved
site for disposal.
(b) A generator of liquid waste shall not have hazardous wastes or liquid waste in combination with hazardous
waste removed from his premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/618
(c) A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter when a load is picked up by the transporter and
shall keep a copy of all trip tickets for a period of two (2) years. The city may inspect these records during
normal business hours.
(d) A generator shall:
(1) Install or provide collection devices of size and type specified by the city;
(2) Maintain collection devices in continuous, proper operation;
(3) Supervise proper cleaning of collection devices;
(4) Report spills and accidents involving collection devices to the approving authority within
twenty-four (24) hours;
(5) Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material disposed of by a permitted
transporter by proper means.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.209)
Sec. 12.04.008 Responsibilities of disposer
(a) A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he allows accumulation of liquid waste on his premises so
that rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or health
hazard.
(b) A liquid waste disposer shall:
(1) Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits required by local, state or
federal law;
(2) Accept waste only from a permitted transporter;
(3) Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two (2) years;
(4) Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by license or permit;
(5) Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the city during normal business
hours.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.210)
Sec. 12.04.009 Additional rules and regulations; authority of city
The city may promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article and
protect the public from health and safety hazards. The city may undertake immediate actions as may be
necessary to protect the public from health and safety hazards. The city may amend any permit issued hereunder
to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. (2002 Code, sec. 6.211)
Sec. 12.04.010 Responsibility for acts of agents; liability for cleanup costs
(a) In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a
corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a
corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/618
(b) Any person found to be guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for
any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate cleanup and proper disposal of said
waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed cleanup costs shall be levied by
the city against the guilty person.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.214)
Secs. 12.04.011–12.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 12.04.031 Required; application; conditions
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a vehicle for the purpose of
transporting liquid waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of liquid waste
and the city shall designate on the permit the liquid waste authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A separate
vehicle permit number is issued for each vehicle operated.
(b) A person who desires to obtain a permit must make application on a form provided by the city.
(c) A person who desires to obtain a permit must submit to the city at the time of application a photocopy of
the manager's driver's license. The city shall be notified of manager employment changes during the permit
period and shall be provided a photocopy of the new manager's driver's license.
(d) The city shall not issue a permit unless the applicant submits for inspection by the city the vehicle the
applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste and the vehicle is found by the city to be constructed and
equipped in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(e) A permit is not transferable.
(f) A permit issued by the city excludes the hauling of materials that are hazardous in nature.
(g) Transporters transporting hazardous wastes must have the applicable state commission on environmental
quality and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) registration number and use the appropriate EPA
manifest system.
(h) Each applicant must specify the disposal site or sites to be used for the authorized disposal of liquid
wastes. The city shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit period.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.202)
Sec. 12.04.032 Fee
The city shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate fee is paid as established by the city
council. (2002 Code, sec. 6.203(a))
Sec. 12.04.033 Display of permit number on vehicles
The city shall number permits consecutively, and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of
each vehicle, in a color contrasting with the background, in three-inch letters or larger, the business name, the
TCEQ registration number and the following:
(LAN) ______
The first three letters (LAN) shall represent the city issuing the permit. The blank space shall contain the permit
number. The permit holder shall keep the permit receipt or a copy in the vehicle at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/618
(2002 Code, sec. 6.203(b))
Sec. 12.04.034 Denial, suspension or revocation
(a) The city may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under section 12.04.031 of
this article and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee:
(1) Is not qualified under section 12.04.031 of this article;
(2) Has violated a provision of this article;
(3) Has failed to pay a required fee;
(4) Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements;
(5) Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the city.
(b) After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. When
the city determines that the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions have
been taken to prevent future violations and all required fees have been paid, it shall reinstate the permit.
(c) The city may revoke for a period of one (1) year or less all permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the
transporter or an employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this article, any rule or regulation
promulgated by the city, or applicable provisions of the city code or state law.
(d) A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport or dispose of any waste
materials within the jurisdiction of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 6.212)
Sec. 12.04.035 Appeals
If the city denies the issuance of a permit or revokes a permit, it shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. The applicant or
permit holder may appeal the decision of the code enforcement department to the city council. (2002 Code, sec.
6.213)
CHAPTER 14
OFFENSES AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 14.01.001 Loitering
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as hereinafter defined, in, on, or about any place,
public or private, when such loitering is accompanied by activity or is under circumstances that afford probable
cause for alarm or concern for the safety and well-being of persons or for the security of property in the
surrounding area.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/618
Any place, public or private. Shall include, but not be limited to, the following: all places commonly known as
being distinctively public, such as public streets, public restrooms, sidewalks, parks, municipal airports, alleys
and buildings; all places privately owned but open to the public generally, such as shopping centers,
transportation terminals, retail stores, movie theaters, office buildings, and restaurants; and all places
distinctively private, such as homes or private residences and apartment houses.
Loiter. Shall include the following activities: walking about aimlessly without apparent purpose, lingering,
hanging around, lagging behind, and moving slowly about, where such conduct is not due to physical defects or
conditions, which such action shall impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise pose a safety or health
hazard to persons using such premises.
Surrounding area. That area easily and immediately accessible to the person under observation.
(Ordinance 2008-11-46, secs. 8.1201–8.1202, adopted 11/10/08)
ARTICLE 14.02 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.02.001 Display of sexually explicit material to minors
(a) Prohibited. The owner, or agent acting for the owner, commits an offense if in a business establishment
open to persons under the age of seventeen (17) years he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper or magazine the
cover of which depicts:
(1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts;
(3) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the
female breast below the top of the areola; or
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered;
in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion
for commercial gain.
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in municipal court shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, art. 8.300)
Secs. 14.02.002–14.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 14.02.031 Definitions
Curfew hours.
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day;
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/618
(3) 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday; provided,
however, the hours defined in this subsection shall not be considered as curfew hours for minors not
subject to compulsory school attendance pursuant to section 25.085, Texas Education Code, nor shall
the hours defined in this subsection be considered as curfew hours on days or during periods in which
the school where the minor is enrolled is closed or classes for which the minor is enrolled have been
canceled under the order and direction of officials authorized to issue such orders and directives.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person ten (10) years of age to sixteen (16) years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of
a minor.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or
other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Sec. 14.02.032 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control
allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/618
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
Sec. 14.02.033 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 14.02.032 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with chapter
31 of the Texas Family Code, as amended.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 14.02.032(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 14.02.034 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this division, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age
and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
division unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, no defense under section 14.02.033 is present.
Sec. 14.02.035 Review of ordinance
In accordance with section 370.002 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, the city council shall
review this division and the conditions the division was intended to remedy three (3) years from its date of
passage and every third year thereafter. Upon review, public hearings shall be conducted on the need to continue,
modify or abolish the division.
Sec. 14.02.036 Penalty
(a) A person who violates a provision of this division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a
day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/618
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 14.02.032(a) of this division and shall refer the minor to
juvenile court.
(Ordinance 2017-09-47 adopted 9/25/17)
ARTICLE 14.03 WEAPONS*
Sec. 14.03.001 Discharge of firearms or other weapons
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to discharge a firearm, rifle, shotgun,
automatic rifle, revolver, pistol or other weapon designed for the purpose of firing or discharging a shell or
cartridge in the city limits. (2002 Code, art. 8.400)
(b) Defenses. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section if:
(1) The person was a law enforcement officer or peace officer acting in the performance of his
official duties at the time of discharge of such weapon;
(2) The person was at a shooting range operated by a public agency or one privately operated under
the appropriate provisions of law;
(3) The person was using blank cartridges for a show or theatrical production, for signal or
ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or by a military organization;
(4) The person was a duly appointed and acting animal control officer of the city acting in the
performance of his official duties, or the person was acting in lawful defense of life and/or property;
(5) The person was a federal, state or municipal employee acting in the performance of his official
duties for the purpose of wildlife management;
(6) The person was discharging a shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun, or bow and arrow on a tract
of land that is ten (10) acres or more that was annexed by the city after September 1, 1981, and the
discharge was more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a residence or occupied building located
on another property and was in a manner not reasonably expected to cause the projectile to cross the
boundary of the tract;
(7) The person was discharging a center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber on a tract of
land of fifty (50) acres or more that was annexed by the city after September 1, 1981, and the
discharge was more than three hundred (300) feet from a residence or occupied building located on
another property and was in a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the
boundary of the tract; or
(8) The person was discharging a firearm in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(Ordinance 2010-12-29 adopted 12/13/10)
(c) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction in the municipal court shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, art. 8.400)
State law references–Authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 229.001;
limitation of authority to prohibit discharge of firearms or other weapons in extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 229.002.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/618
ARTICLE 14.04 NOISE*
Sec. 14.04.001 Penalty
An offense under this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine
in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall
continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate punishable offense.
Sec. 14.04.002 Prohibited acts
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made any unreasonably loud or raucous
noise within the city which may be offensive to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity within the area of
audibility.
(b) The following acts are deemed to create an unreasonably loud or raucous noise and shall be deemed a
violation of this article, but such enumerated acts are merely an aid and amplification of the general prohibition
of unreasonably loud or raucous noises in the city and are in no way an exclusive list of the types of sounds or
noises prohibited by this article:
(1) The playing of any horn, radio, musical instrument, or other loud-speaking or noise-making
device or attachment, or vocal shouting or outcry for purposes of selling anything, in a public or
private place, in such a manner or volume as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of a reasonable
person of normal sensitivity.
(2) The playing of any horn, radio, musical instrument, or other loud-speaking or noise-making
device or attachment on any premises under the ownership, management or control of a person or
business operation, in such a manner or volume as to disturb the peace or to be unreasonably
offensive to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity or occupants of other premises in
the vicinity.
(3) To create, make, cause or allow to be made any means of any loud and disturbing noise which
may disturb a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity of any public or private place
after 10:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m.
(4) To be operating or in control of a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the
city while playing any sound amplifier which is a part of, or connected to, the vehicle stereo system
or any other similar device in the motor vehicle, in such a manner that, when operated, it is audible at
a distance of thirty (30) feet from the source or causes a reasonable person of normal sensitivity to be
aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the source.
(5) The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or continuing noise shall disturb
the comfort and repose of any person of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility.
(6) Any noise or sound of such a character, intensity and duration which shall disturb the comfort
and repose of any person of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility.
Sec. 14.04.003 Allowable events, acts or activities
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sounds produced by or emanating from the following types of
events, acts or activities:
(1) The lawful operation of aircraft, trains or legally registered motor vehicles operating on public
roadways, provided that such vehicles are equipped with all noise-suppression devices required by
state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/618
(2) Equipment used exclusively in the maintenance of or repairs of buildings or grounds, provided
that such equipment is rated at not more than fifteen (15) horsepower.
(3) Construction equipment operating between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(4) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or
the emission of sound and [in] the performance of emergency work.
(5) The operation of farm equipment.
(6) Parades, fairs or similar outdoor entertainment, provided that a permit for such activity has
been granted by the city for not more than ten (10) days.
(7) Lawfully operating athletic events on public property or on the grounds of private schools,
religious institutions or similar nonprofit institutions.
(8) Reasonable or ordinary noise of children at play in parks and other public places.
(9) The reasonable use of automobile signals or horns in accordance with state law as set forth in
the Texas Transportation Code and as amended from time to time.
(10) The reasonable ringing of church bells.
(Ordinance 2008-06-23 adopted 6/23/08)
ARTICLE 14.05 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT*
Sec. 14.05.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, whenever used m this article, shall be construed as defined in this section:
Administrative. The area of an establishment not generally accessible to the public, including but not limited to
individual offices, stockrooms, employee lounges, or meeting rooms.
Bar. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the
premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including
but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets.
Business. A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit
or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and
other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are
delivered; and private clubs.
Cigar bar. An establishment that derives more than fifty-one percent (51% ) of its quarterly gross revenue from
the sale of only cigars for consumption on the premises by customers and the rental of on-site humidors. A cigar
bar does not allow individuals under the age of eighteen (18) to enter the premises and does not have a permit or
license to sell alcoholic beverages, but may serve food and nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises by customers.
City. The City of Lancaster, Texas.
Electronic or digital smoking device. Any electronic or battery operated device delivering nicotine or any other
substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation
of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or
descriptor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/618
Employee. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or
profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
Employer. A person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or
nonprofit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
Enclosed area. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded on at least two sides by walls, doorways,
or windows, whether open or closed. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical
barrier, whether temporary or permanent and whether or not containing openings of any kind.
Food establishment. An operation that stores, prepares, manufactures, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise
provides food for human consumption such as restaurants, mobile vendors, and concession stands.
Health-care facility. An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or
emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals,
rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists,
physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all
waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health-care facilities.
Hookah. A water pipe and any associated products and devices which are used to produce fumes, smoke, and/or
vapor from the burning of material including, but not limited to tobacco, shisha, or other plant matter.
Hookah bar. An establishment that derives more than fifty-one (51%) of its quarterly gross revenue from the
sale of shisa for consumption on the premises by customers and the sale of accessories used for smoking shisa. A
hookah bar does not allow individuals under the age of eighteen (18) to enter the premises, and does not have a
permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, but may serve food and nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises by customers.
Patio. An improved and defined unenclosed outside area associated with a food service establishment or bar
used for purposes of dining or entertainment, provided that walkways are not to be considered patios; and further
provided such establishment has a defined entrance at least ten feet from the designated smoking area.
Physical barrier. A barrier that will form an effective membrane continuous from outside wall to outside wall,
from a smoke barrier to a smoke barrier, from floor to floor, or roof above, or combination thereof, including
continuity through all concealed spaces, such as above suspended ceiling, interstitial structural and mechanical
spaces. Transfer grilles, louvers and similar openings shall not be used in these partitions. Self-closing, tightfitting
doors are permitted in such barriers.
Place of employment. An area under the control of a public or private employer, including, but not limited to,
work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms,
employee cafeterias, hallways, and temporary offices. A private residence is not a “place of employment” unless
it issued as a child-care, adult day-care, or health-care facility.
Playground. Any park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports
equipment installed or that has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility
located on public or private school grounds or on city grounds.
Private club. An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building
or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational,
fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only
sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation, and which does not have employees, but instead has only
volunteer or organization member-provided labor for its on-site operations. The affairs and management of the
organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members
at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/618
organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C.
section 501.
Private function. The rental of a ballroom, private club, or other facility for the sole purpose of entertaining,
private parties, events or other social functions other than a city facility that the general public is not able to
attend.
Public event. An event which is open to and may be attended by the general public, including but not limited to,
such events as concerts, fairs, fanners' markets, festivals, parades, performances, and other exhibitions,
regardless of any fee or age requirement.
Public place or common area. An area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted,
including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, gambling facilities, health-care facilities, hotels
and motels, laundromats, parking structures, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception areas,
restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores,
shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a “public place” unless it is
used as a child-care, adult day-care, or health-care facility.
Recreational area. Any public or private area open to the public for recreational purposes, whether or not any fee
for admission is charged, including but not limited to amusement parks, athletic fields, fairgrounds, gardens, golf
courses, parks, plazas, skate parks, swimming pools, trails, and zoos.
Restaurant. An eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and
private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as
well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term
‘‘restaurant” shall include a bar area within the restaurant.
Retail and service establishment. Any establishment that sells goods or services to the general public.
Retail electronic smoking device store. A store used primarily for the sale of electronic or digital cigarettes or
substances used in those or similar devices to produce inhalable vapors and in which the sale of other products is
incidental and where eighty percent (80%) of quarterly sales are from the sale of these devices and/or
substances.
Retail tobacco store or tobacco store. A retail store where seventy-five percent (75%) of quarterly sales are from
the sale of tobacco products and accessories, to include electronic or digital cigarettes, and in which the sale of
other products is merely incidental.
Second-hand smoke. Ambient smoke resulting from the act of smoking.
Service line. An indoor or outdoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of
any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to, ATM lines,
concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines.
Shopping mall. An enclosed or unenclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or
professional establishments.
Smoke or smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any
other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana,
whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. “Smoking” also includes the use of an electronic
smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking
device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this article.
Smoking lounge. A business establishment that is dedicated, in whole or in part to the selling or smoking of
tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or other substances, including but not limited to establishments known
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/618
variously as cigar lounge, hookah lounge, or tobacco bars.
Sports arena. A place where people assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition,
or witness sports or other events, including sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas,
swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and bowling alleys.
Tobacco product. Any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, water pipe, flavored tobacco, smokeless tobacco,
snuff or any other form of tobacco, or any substance containing a detectably amount of nicotine which may be
utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion or absorption.
Sec. 14.05.002 Application of article to the city
All enclosed areas, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city, as well as all outdoor
property adjacent to such buildings and under the control of the city, shall be subject to the provisions of this
article.
Sec. 14.05.003 Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places
(a) Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of places of employment, except as expressly noted in
section 14.05.007 herein. This includes, without limitation, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms,
conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee
lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities.
(b) This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this
article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment.
(c) Smoking shall be prohibited in all public places within the city, including but not limited to, the following
places:
(1) Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums.
(2) Areas available to the general public in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the
public, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail service
establishments.
(3) Bars.
(4) Bingo facilities.
(5) Child-care and adult day-care facilities.
(6) Convention facilities.
(7) Educational facilities, both public and private.
(8) Elevators.
(9) Gaming facilities.
(10) Health-care facilities.
(11) Hotels and motels.
(12) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer
parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/618
(13) Parking structures.
(14) Polling places.
(15) Restaurants.
(16) Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas.
(17) Retail store.
(18) Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the
control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city.
(19) Service lines.
(20) Shopping malls.
(21) Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.
(22) Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas,
lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances.
Sec. 14.05.004 Prohibition of smoking in enclosed places of employment
(a) Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of places of employment except as expressly noted in
section 14.05.007 herein. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting
rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms,
vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities.
(b) This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this
article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment.
Sec. 14.05.005 Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public access institutional residential facilities
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential facilities:
(1) All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes.
(2) At least ninety percent (90%) of hotel and motel guest rooms rented.
Sec. 14.05.006 Prohibition of smoking in outdoor areas
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places:
(1) Within a reasonable distance of fifteen feet (15') outside the primary entrance, operable
windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, so as to prevent
tobacco smoke from entering those areas.
(2) In all outdoor areas of stadiums, and amphitheaters. Smoking shall also be prohibited in, and
within fifteen feet (15') of, bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other
public events.
(3) In all outdoor service lines, whether or not within the fifteen feet (15') from any outside
entrances, operable windows or ventilations systems.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/618
(4) In outdoor common areas of apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement
facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities, except in designated smoking
areas, not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total outdoor common areas, which must be
located at least fifteen feet (15') outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of
enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited.
(5) In and within twenty-five feet (25') of outdoor playgrounds.
Sec. 14.05.007 Exemptions
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the
provisions of sections 14.05.004 and 14.05.006:
(1) Private residences, unless used as a childcare, adult day-care, or health-care facility licensed by
the state;
(2) Not more than ten percent (10%) of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests and designated as
smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous. Smoke from these rooms
must not infiltrate into areas where smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add
additional nonsmoking rooms;
(3) Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the provisions of section
14.05.006;
(4) Retail tobacco stores in freestanding physical facilities or with physical barriers between the
retail tobacco store and any adjoining tenant or occupancy;
(5) Personal automobiles or motor vehicles;
(6) A hookah bar or cigar bar;
(7) Those portions of a patio area of a restaurant or bar that meet the distance requirements of
section 14.05.006(1); or
(8) Private clubs.
Sec. 14.05.008 Declaration of establishment or outdoor area as nonsmoking
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an
establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a
nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of
section 14.05.009 is posted.
Sec. 14.05.009 Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays
The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a place of employment, public place, private club, or
residential facility where smoking is prohibited by this article shall:
(1) Clearly and conspicuously post ‘“no smoking” signs or the international “no smoking” symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it) in that place.
(2) Clearly and conspicuously post at every entrance to that place a sign stating that smoking is
prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/618
(3) Clearly and conspicuously post on every vehicle that constitutes a place of employment under
this article at least one (1) sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, stating that smoking is
prohibited.
(4) Remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article, except for
ashtrays displayed for sale and not for use on the premises.
Sec. 14.05.010 Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights
(a) No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee,
applicant for employment, customer, or resident of a multiple-unit residential facility because that employee,
applicant, customer, or resident exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a
violation of this article. Notwithstanding section 14.05.015, violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation.
(b) An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise
surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party.
Sec. 14.05.011 Possession, purchase, consumption or receipt of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes
and/or liquid nicotine by minors prohibited
(a) A person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age commits an offense if the individual:
(1) Possesses, purchases, consumes or accepts an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine;
or
(2) Falsely represents himself or herself to be eighteen (18) years of age or older by displaying
proof of age that is false, fraudulent or not actually proof of the individual's own age in order to
obtain possession of, purchase or receive an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if the individual younger than eighteen
(18) years of age possessed the electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine in the presence of:
(1) An adult parent, a guardian or a spouse of the individual; or
(2) An employer of the individual, if possession or receipt of the electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or
liquid nicotine is required in the performance of the employee's duties as an employee.
(c) It shall also be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that the individual younger than
eighteen (18) years of age is participating in an inspection or test of compliance in accordance with section
161.088, Health and Safety Code.
Sec. 14.05.012 Sale of electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to persons younger than
eighteen (18) years of age prohibited; proof of age required
(a) A person or retailer commits an offense if the person or retailer with criminal negligence:
(1) Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to
someone who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age; or sells, gives or causes to be sold or given
an electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to another person who intends to deliver it to
someone who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age.
(b) If an offense under this section occurs in connection with a sale by an employee of the owner of a store in
which electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine is/are sold at retail, the employee is criminally
responsible for the offense and is subject to prosecution.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/618
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(1) that the person to whom the electronic cigarette, ecigarette
or liquid nicotine was sold, given or presented to the defendant apparently valid proof of identification.
(d) A proof of identification satisfies the requirements of subsection if it contains a physical description and
photograph consistent with the person's appearance, purports to establish that the person is eighteen (18) years of
age or older and was issued by a governmental agency. The proof of identification may include a driver's license
issued by this state or another state, a passport or an identification card issued by a state or the federal
government.
Sec. 14.05.013 Vendor assisted sales required; self-service merchandising prohibited
(a) Except as provided by subsection (b), a retailer or other person may not:
(1) Offer electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine for sale in a manner that permits a
customer direct access to the electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine;
(2) Offer for sale or display for sale electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine by means
of self-service merchandising; or
(3) Install or maintain an open display unit containing electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid
nicotine.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a), if:
(1) A facility or business is not open to persons younger than eighteen (18) years of age at any
time;
(2) A facility or business is a premises for which a person holds a package store permit issued
under the Alcoholic Beverage Code; or
(3) An open display is located in an area that is inaccessible to customers.
Sec. 14.05.014 Enforcement
(a) This article shall be enforced by the city's police department.
(b) Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a certificate of occupancy in the
city.
(c) Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the fire
department, fire marshal's office.
(d) The health department (Dallas County Health and Human Services), fire department, or their designee
shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this
article.
(e) An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall direct a
person who is smoking in violation of this article to extinguish the product being smoked. If the person does not
stop smoking, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall refuse service and shall immediately ask the
person to leave the premises. If the person in violation refuses to leave the premises, the owner, manager,
operator, or employee shall contact a law enforcement agency.
(f) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action
to enforce this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/618
(g) In addition to the remedies provided by the provision of this section, the police department, a certified
code official or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of
a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive
relief to enforce those provision in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 14.05.015 Violations and penalties
(a) A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(b) Except as otherwise provided in section 14.05.013(a), a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise
controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(c) In addition to the fines established by this, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages,
operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation
of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred.
(d) Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.
Sec. 14.05.016 Other applicable laws
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other
applicable laws.
Sec. 14.05.017 Liberal construction
This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes.
(Ordinance 2017-06-22 adopted 6/26/17)
ARTICLE 14.06 ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS*
Sec. 14.06.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking
products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits.
Sec. 14.06.002 Definitions
Illegal smoking product. Any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend
thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any
one or more of the following chemicals:
(1) Salvia divinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as
Salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant,
and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
(2) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylocatan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497)
and homologues;
(3) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(4) 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/618
(5) Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073).
Ingestion device. Equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen,
permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
(2) A water pipe;
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
(9) A chillum;
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business.
Sec. 14.06.003 Sale, display or possession
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale
any illegal smoking product.
Sec. 14.06.004 Use or possession of ingestion device
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale
or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product.
Sec. 14.06.005 Defenses
It shall be a defense to a violation of this article that any act described in this article is under and pursuant to the
direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act, or such
product is used as part of a recognized religious ceremony or worship service.
(Ordinance 2010-09-20 adopted 9/27/10)
ARTICLE 14.07 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS*
Sec. 14.07.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, phrases and the derivations thereof shall have the
meanings given herein:
Minor. A person younger than seventeen (17) years of age.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/618
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive
days.
Premises where minors commonly gather. A public park, private or public school, or day care center as such
terms are defined in the development code of the city, or any public or nonprofit recreational facility, including
any homeowners' association recreational facility. For the purposes of this article, planted street medians are not
public parks.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more
days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where
a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days
in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence.
(Ordinance 2008-06-22 adopted 6/23/08)
Sec. 14.07.002 Offenses
Each person required by law to register as a sex offender because of an offense involving a minor as defined
herein, including an offense under section 43.26 of the Texas Penal Code, shall be required to register with the
police department and it shall be unlawful for such person to establish a permanent residence or temporary
residence within 1,000 feet of any “premises where children commonly gather.” It shall be a separate offense
each and every day that a person violates the provisions of this section. (Ordinance 2013-09-31 adopted 9/16/13)
Sec. 14.07.003 Evidentiary matters; measurements
(a) It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if that person's record appears on
the database and the database indicates the offense is an offense involving a minor as defined herein. (Ordinance
2013-09-31 adopted 9/16/13)
(b) For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by
following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest
property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described hereinabove, or, in the case of
multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest
property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein.
(c) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the city. The city shall review the map at least
annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public through the city police department.
Sec. 14.07.004 Culpable mental state not required
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this
article.
Sec. 14.07.005 Defenses
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply:
(1) The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary
residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date
of the adoption of this article.
(2) The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the
offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person required to register on the database is a minor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/618
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the
permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after
the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender
registration laws of the state.
(5) The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to
the person who was erroneously listed on the database.
Sec. 14.07.006 Penalty
An offense under this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine
in accordance with section 1.01.009 for each offense.
(Ordinance 2008-06-22 adopted 6/23/08)
ARTICLE 14.08 LITTERING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.08.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Container. A city-approved receptacle used for the disposal of waste.
Litter. Any wastepaper, used beverage or food container, rubbish, trash, or garbage not placed in a container.
Littering or to litter. The act of placing, throwing, depositing, disposing or dropping of litter.
Pedestrian litter container. A container provided on public or private property for the disposal of litter by
pedestrians.
Person. A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, lessee,
agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
Private property. Includes, but is not limited to, yards, grounds, driveways, entrances, passageways, parking
areas, working areas, storage areas, vacant lots, and recreation facilities owned by private individuals, firms,
corporations, institutions and organizations.
Public property. Includes, but is not limited to, streets, medians, roads, road medians, catchbasins, sidewalks,
strips between streets and sidewalks, alleys, lanes, public rights-of-way, public parking lots, school grounds,
parks, publicly owned recreation facilities, and municipal bodies of water and waterways.
Sec. 14.08.002 Deposit of litter prohibited
A person commits an offense if said person causes, permits, suffers, or allows litter to be thrown or deposited on
any public or private property, except in a container or a pedestrian litter container.
Sec. 14.08.003 Duty to keep property free of litter
(a) It shall be the duty of the person who owns, occupies, or leases or is engaged in construction on any
private or public property to keep the exterior property free of litter.
(b) Persons who are owners, occupants or lessees of private property which abuts city sidewalks, streets,
parkways, drainage ditches, or curb and gutter shall keep those sidewalks, streets, parkways, curb and gutter, and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/618
drainage ditches free of litter by removing litter and placing it in a container.
Sec. 14.08.004 Container closure and maintenance
(a) All residential and commercial containers may be open for ease of use, but shall be designed in such a way
as to reasonably prevent their contents from becoming litter.
(b) All persons placing containers for collection and removing them after collection shall take the necessary
precautions to prevent the contents thereof from becoming litter.
Sec. 14.08.005 Pedestrian litter container use restrictions
A person commits an offense if the person causes, permits, suffers, or allows any household or commercial
garbage, refuse, trash, debris, rubbish, solid waste or junk to be deposited in a pedestrian litter container.
(Ordinance 2011-06-14 adopted 6/27/11)
Secs. 14.08.006–14.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Litter Abatement Enforcement
Sec. 14.08.031 Enforcement of state law; penalties
The city supports a zero tolerance of litter and authorizes the city police officers and code enforcement officials
to strictly enforce chapter 365 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, which applies the following penalties under
the Texas Litter Abatement Act:
(1) Class C misdemeanor: 15 pounds or less or a volume of 13 gallons or less.
(2) Class B misdemeanor: More than 15 pounds but less than 500 pounds, or a volume of more
than 13 gallons but less than 100 cubic feet.
(3) Class A misdemeanor: 500 pounds or more or a volume of 100 cubic feet, or litter from a
commercial entity weighing more than 5 pounds or has a volume of more than 13 gallons.
(2002 Code, art. 6.300)
ARTICLE 14.09 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE*
Sec. 14.09.001 Title
These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the city, hereinafter referred to as “this
code.”
Sec. 14.09.002 Scope
The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and/or properties
and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety,
safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators
and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises; and for administration, enforcement and
penalties.
Sec. 14.09.003 Intent
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/618
This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare
insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing
structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a
minimum level of health and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of
occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with codes of the city, as amended.
Sec. 14.09.004 Definitions and rules of construction
(a) Generally. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have
the meanings shown in this section.
(b) Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine
gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
(c) Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International
Building Code, as amended, the International Fire Code, as amended, the International Plumbing Code, as
amended, the International Mechanical Code, as amended, or the ICC Electrical Code, as amended, as adopted
by the Code of Ordinances of the city, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes, as
provided in the Code of Ordinances of the city.
(d) Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such
terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
(e) Parts of building or premises. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,” “building,”
“rooming house,” “rooming unit” “housekeeping unit” or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be construed
as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
(f) Conflicting definitions. Where a conflict may exist between a definition and other definitions of the same
activity or item that appear elsewhere in adopted ordinances of the city, the most restrictive shall apply.
(g) Terms defined.
Agricultural. The planting, cultivating, harvesting, and storage of grains, hay or plants, or vineyards commonly
grown in the county; the raising and feeding of livestock and poultry shall be considered an agricultural venture
if the area in which the livestock or poultry is kept is three (3) acres or more in area, and if such raising of
livestock and poultry is incidental or supplemental to the raising of crops and is not primarily for the raising or
fattening of livestock; a feed lot exclusively for the fattening of livestock is not considered an agricultural use.
Approved. Approved by the code official.
Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
Bedroom. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes.
Code official. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly
authorized representative.
Condemn. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Easement. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than
the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/618
or lots.
Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or
operators of such premises.
Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places;
by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, or
trapping; or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
Garbage. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
Guard. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated
walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
Habitable space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets,
halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
Housekeeping unit. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and
bathtub or shower.
Imminent danger. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.
Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises, of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
Inoperable motor vehicle. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including but not
limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its
own power.
Labeled. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other
identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned
with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by
whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
Let for occupancy or let. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement
or contract for the sale of land.
Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.
Openable area. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and
which opens directly to the outdoors.
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for
occupancy.
Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property, or
recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property, or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/618
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.
Public way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which
is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
Rooming house. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation, and not
occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied
for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.
Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue
from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and
dust and other similar materials.
Strict liability offense. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove
criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was
prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
Structure. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
Tenant. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a
building or portion thereof as a unit.
Toilet room. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.
Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing
such air from, any space.
Weeds. All grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees and shrubs; provided, however, this term shall
not include cultivated flowers, gardens and native plants.
Workmanlike. Executed in a skilled manner, e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without
marring adjacent work.
Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
Sec. 14.09.005 Applicability
(a) The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set
forth herein. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.
(b) Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under
which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such
temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are
not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in
existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
(c) Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with
the procedures and provisions of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/618
(d) The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction
or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and
unsanitary.
(e) Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the
enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(f) The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as
historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public
interest of health, safety and welfare.
(g) The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in the International Code, as
set forth herein, and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such
reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code, the referenced standards or with other
adopted codes or ordinances of the city, the stricter provision shall apply.
(h) Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or
equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be
determined by the code official.
Sec. 14.09.006 Powers and duties of code official
(a) The city manager or designee shall designate the official or officials responsible for enforcement of
provisions of this code based upon the organizational structure of the city and responsibilities thereof.
(b) The code official shall have authority, as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general
welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and procedures, to interpret and implement the provisions of this code, to
secure the intent thereof, and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions.
Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided
for in this code, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety, or to conflict with
development codes.
(c) The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by
approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a
responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the
approval of the appointing authority.
(d) The code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to
constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code
official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law.
(e) The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under this code.
(f) The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.
(g) The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities specified in the provisions of this
code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such
records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations.
(h) Whenever, in the enforcement of this code or another code or ordinance, the responsibility of more than
one code official of the jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the code officials involved to coordinate
their inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and occupants of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/618
structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an
inspector from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision of some
law, ordinance or code not within the inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to
the code official having jurisdiction.
Sec. 14.09.007 Alternative materials or methods of construction; modification of standards
(a) Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code
official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the code official shall first
find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and
fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the
department files.
(b) The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any
method of construction not specifically prescribed by codes of the city, provided that any such alternative has
been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds
that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this
code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
(c) Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a
material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for
alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence
of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.
(1) Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the
absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve
appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
(2) Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of
public records.
(d) Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved.
Sec. 14.09.008 Violations; enforcement
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this code and [such violation is] declared to be a public nuisance.
(b) The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with section 14.09.009.
(c) Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with section
14.09.009 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If
the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or
in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises under this code shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
(d) To obtain a lien against the property, the city manager or designee officer must file a statement of expenses
with the county clerk, including the name of the property owner, if known, and the legal description of the
property. The actual cost of abatement shall include an administrative fee as established by the city council. In
the event there are obstructions such as trees, shrubs, bushes, brush, excavations, foundations, demolished
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/618
structures or any other similar obstructions, an additional charge shall be levied, assessed and collected against
such premises. The lien obtained is security for the expenses, as provided for above, and interest accrues thereon
at the rate of ten (10) percent on the total amount from the date of payment by the city. The city many bring suit
for foreclosure of the lien to recover the expenses and interest due. The statement of expenses or a certified copy
of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the
improvements. This remedy is cumulative of the fine authorized for violation hereof by section 1.01.009 of the
city code.
(e) Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(f) The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the officer from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises, as
provided by state law.
(Ordinance 2006-07-24, ex. A, adopted 7/24/06)
Sec. 14.09.009 Notices and orders
(a) Notice requirements. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or
has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in
subsections (b) and (c) herein to the person responsible for the violation as specified in the code. In the notice
herein provided for, the city shall have the right to inform the property owner that, if he or she commits another
violation of the same kind or nature any time within one year from original notice, the city many institute the
appropriate proceedings at law or to correct or abate such violation without further notice, at the owner's
expense, and assess the expense against the property. An abatement assessment statement shall be provided to
the owner no later than the tenth day after the city causes work to be done. The city shall give notice to the
property owner in the manner required by this section, with the following exceptions: (1) notices for
condemnation procedures shall also comply with section 14.09.010; (2) weeds in excess of forty-eight (48)
inches in height that are deemed by the city to present a danger to the public or the health, life, or safety of any
person may be immediately abated without notice; (3) notices for brush and bulk waste collection, disposal, or
accumulation violations shall include a correction order allowing a minimum of three (3) days to correct the
condition; after which the condition may be abated by the city as provided herein. Nothing herein shall be
deemed to limit or constrain the city from issuing citations for any property maintenance or condition violation.
(Ordinance 2017-12-58 adopted 12/4/17)
(b) Contents of notice. Such notice prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall be in accordance with all
of the following:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include the address or other description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
(3) Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.
(Ordinance 2006-07-24, ex. A, adopted 7/24/06)
(4) Unless otherwise required under section 14.09.012 or specified herein in subsection (a) of this
section, include a correction order allowing a minimum of ten (10) days to make the repairs and
improvements required to bring the dwelling unit, structure, or property into compliance with the
provisions of this code or to present a plan to the city within the above-referenced ten (10) days as to
what repairs or improvements will be made within a period not to exceed ninety (90) days from the
acceptance of the plans by the official. Acceptance of the plans by the official shall be contingent
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/618
upon said plans addressing all issues, conditions or actions needed to bring the structure or property
into compliance with city codes. (Ordinance 2017-12-58 adopted 12/4/17)
(5) Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
(6) Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with section 14.09.008(d).
(c) Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
(1) Delivered personally;
(2) Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or
(3) If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
(d) Penalties for noncompliance. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in
section 14.09.008(c).
(e) Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has
received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease
or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or
notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and
shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
Sec. 14.09.010 Condemnation of unsafe or unlawful structures and equipment
(a) Authorized. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure
is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the
provisions of this code.
(1) Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health,
property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum
safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of faulty construction or
unstable foundation, as determined by the official, that partial or complete collapse is possible.
(2) Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving
stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises
or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life,
health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
(3) Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the
code official finds that such structure is unsafe or unlawful or, because of the degree to which the
structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin- or rat-infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential
equipment required by this code, or constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the
public.
(4) Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by
more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/618
(b) Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is
not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the
premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to
close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be
closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons, and
the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien
upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
(c) Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this
section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with section
14.09.009(c). If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice
shall be in the form prescribed in section 14.09.009(b).
(d) Placarding.
(1) Posting of placard. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice
provisions within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective
equipment a placard bearing the word “Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for
occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
(2) Placard removal. The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect
or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any
person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official
shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
(e) Occupancy of placarded premises or operation of placarded equipment. Any occupied structure
condemned and placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who
shall occupy placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible
for the premises who shall let anyone occupy placarded premises or operate placarded equipment, shall be liable
for the penalties provided by this code.
Sec. 14.09.011 Emergency measures
(a) When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or
structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by
the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in
the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes,
gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and
empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to
be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its
Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the City of Lancaster.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or demolishing the same.
(b) Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is
imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done,
including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe, whether or not the legal
procedure herein described has been instituted, and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official
deems necessary to meet such emergency.
(c) When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the
authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures,
and prohibit the same from being utilized.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/618
(d) For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to
perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
(e) Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel
of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure
is or was located for the recovery of such costs, or the official shall cause a lien to be placed against the property
and/or structure.
(f) Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected
person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this
code.
Sec. 14.09.012 Demolition of structure
(a) The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure which, in the
code official's judgment, is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the
structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or, if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or, where there has been a
cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than one year, to demolish and remove
such structure and all material associated therewith.
(b) Should the official declare a structure subject to demolition and/or the owner decides to demolish a
structure with or without requirement by the official, the owner shall secure the premises to prevent trespass and
shall have the demolition complete and all materials removed within 30 days. If at any time during the
demolition the official determines that the structure poses an imminent threat to public health and safety, the
official shall cause the remaining structure and materials to be removed. Removal shall be charged against the
real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. Should the owner not
have completed the demolition and removal of material within 30 days of commencement of the demolition or
notice by the official, the official shall cause the remaining structure and materials to be removed. Removal shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
(c) The demolition and removal of a structure and materials shall comply with all applicable local, state and
federal laws. All cost associated with environmental assessments, handling, removal and disposal of hazardous
materials shall be borne by the property owner or the city shall abate the environmental concerns and shall cause
a lien to be placed against the property to cover all such costs.
(d) All notices and orders shall comply with section 14.09.009.
(e) If the owner of the premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code
official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by
contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
(f) When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated
officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials
at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition
and removal, shall be promptly remitted, with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense
and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus
does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
Sec. 14.09.013 Appeal procedure; property standards and appeals board
(a) Right of appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued
under this code shall have the right to appeal to the property standards and appeals board, hereinafter referred to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/618
as the “board,” provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision,
notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or
the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
(b) Property standards and appeals board. Membership, rules and procedures of the board shall be those as
determined by the governing body and state law unless otherwise so stated herein.
(1) Membership. The board shall consist of five (5) regular members and one (1) alternate member
who are qualified by experience, common knowledge, and/or training to pass upon matters of
construction and this code. Members shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by the city
council for a term of two years. Alternates appointed shall serve a one-year term. Vacancies shall be
filled by appointment for unexpired terms. Any member may be removed from the board by the city
council at will.
(2) Postponed hearing. When a quorum of the board is not present to hear an appeal, the hearing
will be postponed. A majority of the members (three) shall constitute a quorum of the board. The act
of a majority of the members at which a quorum is in attendance shall constitute the act of the board
unless the act of a greater number is required by law.
(3) Chairman. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairman.
(4) Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a
personal, professional or financial interest.
(c) Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the code official within 20 days of the filing of
an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. Notice of any meeting shall be given to the public in accordance with
the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas
Open Meetings Act.
(d) Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's
representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
(e) Board decision. The board shall, only by a concurring vote of a majority of those present, either modify the
order of the official by granting an extension of time to make all repairs and improvements necessary to meet
code requirements, enforce the recommendation of the official, or reverse the decision of the code official,
(1) Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to
the appellant and to the code official upon request.
(2) Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision
of the board.
(f) Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the
appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the
manner [provided by law] and within 30 days following the decision of the board.
(g) Stay of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the
enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the board.
Sec. 14.09.014 General maintenance requirements
(a) Scope. Provisions herein shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for
maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/618
(b) Responsibility for compliance. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior
property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe
condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this article. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the
dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.
(c) Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in
a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely
affect the public health or safety.
Sec. 14.09.015 Exterior property areas
(a) Generally. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
(b) Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary conditions. Unless authorized within a zoning district and under
conditions thereof, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to
allow, permit, conduct or maintain objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary conditions, items, situations or events
on any portion of a lot or tract, outside of an enclosed structure, visible from a public street or adjacent property,
or under a carport or covered patio or other projecting overhang that includes, but is not limited to:
(1) Furniture, appliances and other items left outside that were or are not intended for outdoor use
that includes broken or damaged lawn furniture, outdoor structure(s), lawn and garden accessories
and sculpture;
(2) Building materials or any item by itself used in construction that is not serving its intended
purpose where there is not an active building permit;
(3) Clothing, papers, broken glass, scrap materials, pipe, barrels, piles or stacks of unused brick or
stone, uninstalled fence and/or fence materials;
(4) Containers intended for chemicals, including gas tanks and cylinders, unless being currently
used and not for a period longer than 48 hours;
(5) Brush, trash, wood piles, fallen trees or large parts of trees such as the trunk or main branches,
dead trees or other dead vegetation;
(6) Lawn equipment in whole or in part where such is kept outside and unprotected from the
elements;
(7) Unlicensed and/or inoperable trailers;
(8) Boats not on trailers for longer than 30 days;
(9) Any condition, situation, event or action as described herein where item(s) are covered by
tarpaulin(s) or other such cover including the tarpaulin(s) or other such cover;
(10) Parts typically associated with trucks, cars, motorcycles, boats, farm equipment, construction
equipment or other vehicles that includes, but is not limited to, body parts, tires, wheels, batteries,
upholstered items, engines, drive train components, plows, disks, rakes and other such items;
(Ordinance 2006-07-24, ex. A, adopted 7/24/06)
(11) A boat, personal watercraft, truck, trailer, vehicles with axle(s), other titled vehicles, or
vehicles regulated in accordance with article 14.10 of the Code of Ordinances; (Ordinance 2009-03-
07 adopted 3/23/09)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/618
(12) Any vehicle or part thereof elevated or raised off the ground for maintenance or repair for a
period longer than 72 hours;
(13) Storage containers of any type, with the exception of approved type and location of waste
containers, where used for personal items, inventory or other storage exceeding 72 hours;
(14) Semi trucks and/or trailers or parts thereof on a property or in front of a property used as or
zoned for residential use, [or] located on property used or zoned for nonresidential use, other than
where permitted within the approved zoning district and subject to terms and conditions thereof,
where such is not conducting business or has not conducted business for more than 24 hours;
(15) Commercial vehicles, as that term is used and under conditions and/or terms established under
article 22.06, division 4, parked on a property or in front of a property used as or zoned for residential
use or where located anywhere where such vehicle is not conducting work at that time related to the
vehicle other than where permitted within the approved zoning district and subject to terms and
conditions thereof;
(16) Construction equipment in whole or in part where the equipment is not being used for its
intended purpose on the property where parked or stored unless otherwise allowed within that zoning
district subject to terms and conditions thereof;
(17) Farm equipment or appurtenances on property other than zoned for agricultural use unless
permitted within the appropriate zoning district subject to terms thereof;
(18) Where outdoor storage and/or display is allowed, accumulation of trash and debris and items
or material that is not orderly stacked;
(Ordinance 2006-07-24, ex. A, adopted 7/24/06)
(19) A boat, personal watercraft, truck, tractor, trailer, motorcycle, a vehicle regulated in
accordance with article 14.10 of the Code of Ordinances, or any other vehicle as defined in chapter
541 of the Texas Transportation Code, located upon an unimproved or improved surface, other than
an improved surface built in accordance with the city's standards and currently maintained in
compliance with the city's standards and the Code of Ordinances; (Ordinance 2009-06-15 adopted
6/8/09)
(20) Signs of all types, with exception of a fence installer's sign, placed on any fence or wall;
(21) A vehicle parked at a location found not to be doing business at that location where such is
determined by the city to be used for off-premises advertising;
(22) The placing or accumulation of any material or item in any area of a property that does or
could provide nesting, harborage or feeding for vermin or pests, or that could negatively affect the
environment's ecological system from runoff, areas emitting an odor or odors for longer than 24
hours that a person of reasonable sensibilities may distinguish from ambient odors, seepage of fuels,
oils, chemicals or non-organic compounds into the soils, and similar such events;
(23) The accumulation of materials that emit any gases, noxious fumes, or odors to such extent that
the same or any of them shall, by reason of such offensive odors, become a source of endangerment
to the health, safety and welfare to immediate surrounding property or to persons living or passing in
the vicinity within the city; and
(24) Other situations as determined by the director of community development or designee.
(c) Grading and drainage. With the exception of an area designed for and intended as temporary storage of
stormwater runoff, where such is otherwise maintained and kept as an approved dry-bottom detention facility,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/618
retention area, reservoir, state- or federal-designated conservation area, floodplains, wetlands and marsh areas,
unless approved by the responsible jurisdiction, all premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the
erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located
thereon.
(d) Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas
shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions that would cause damage
to property or threaten the safety of the public.
(e) Weeds.
(1) All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds and non-ornamental
grasses in excess of 12 inches, including rights-of-way areas between property lines and a defined
paved surface under the control of a governmental entity. Where an alley or right-of-way exists that
has not been paved, maintenance responsibility shall be considered to be to the centerline of the alley.
All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds in excess of 48 inches in height are a danger to the
health, life or safety of any person and may be immediately abated without notice. Notice shall be no
later than the tenth day after the date the city causes the work to be done under this section. The city
shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required herein.
(2) Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and/or destroy weeds
after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with section
14.09.008(c) and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the
notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the
jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut or destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be placed against the property.
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
(f) Trees, shrubs or other vegetation overhanging street or sidewalk. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or
unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to permit bushes, trees, shrubs, vegetation or plant
substance(s) or any part(s) thereof, whether living or not, that has its roots on said real property, to hang,
overhang, grow into or grow over any street or alleyway within the city, if said growth is overhanging below 14
feet from a point on a vertical line with the starting point on a horizontal plane of the street or alleyway.
Sidewalks shall have a clearance of seven feet from a point on a vertical line with a starting point at the
horizontal plane of the sidewalk. When such prohibited conduct occurs, such growth and premises shall be
deemed a nuisance and as a danger to public safety. It shall be the duty of the person(s) named above to abate the
nuisance so that the overhang is not below the 14-foot point for streets and alleyways and the seven-foot point
for sidewalks. It likewise shall be unlawful for the person(s) named above to leave said growth on such public
place after they have cut or trimmed such growth. The city shall have the right to abate such above-described
nuisance by the code official of the city sending notice to such above-described person in accordance with
section 14.09.009 of this article. Upon failure of the owner or person in control to comply with the notice as set
forth herein, the code official shall proceed to abate the nuisance in accordance with section 14.09.008(d) and
(e).
(g) Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and
infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not
be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent
harborage and prevent re-infestation.
(h) Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air,
grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/618
(i) Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be
maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
(Ordinance 2006-07-24, ex. A, adopted 7/24/06)
(j) Motor vehicles.
(1) No vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises in violation of article 14.10 of the
Code of Ordinances.
(2) No vehicle shall at any time be stored outside in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in
the process of being stripped or dismantled, except at a location which has been zoned special use
permit for such.
(3) Painting, sanding or finishing of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside a spray or
painting booth approved by the building official and/or fire marshal.
(Ordinance 2009-03-07 adopted 3/23/09)
(k) Defacement of property; graffiti.
(1) No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any
structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or
graffiti.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of
maintenance and repair.
(Ordinance 2006-07-24, ex. A, adopted 7/24/06)
State law reference–Graffiti, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.08.
(l) Residential minimum paving standards.
(1) Within AO, Agriculture Use, and the Historic District, the minimum paving standards for
maintenance and new driveway/parking pad installations shall be gravel or crushed rock a minimum
thickness of four (4) inches, concrete or HMAC. With gravel or crushed rock for any paving
expansion the materials shall be bordered with weather-resistant material to maintain the thickness of
paving materials. All driveway approaches shall be a minimum of concrete or HMAC within public
rights-of-way. Alternate materials within AO and the Historic District would be considered by the
building official along with proposed material installation standards of design.
(2) Within all other residential districts or residential occupancies within other districts, the
minimum paving standards for maintenance or new driveway/parking pad installations shall be
concrete or HMAC. The minimum thickness of concrete shall be four (4) inches thick and for HMAC
with a four (4) inch crushed rock base and two (2) inches of asphalt.
(Ordinance 2009-07-19 adopted 7/27/09)
Sec. 14.09.016 Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs
(a) Maintenance. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair.
(b) Fencing. Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract,
lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall at all times maintain upon
the lot or premises on which a swimming pool, spa or hot tub is located, and completely surrounding the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/618
swimming pool, spa or hot tub, lot or premises, a fence, wall, solid structure or cover designed to prevent small
children from inadvertently wandering into the swimming pool, spa or hot tub. Such fence or other solid
structure shall not be less than 72 inches in height, with no openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches
measured in any direction, except that the measurement for a picket fence (one composed primarily of vertical
members) shall be measured in horizontal direction between such members. Horizontal members shall not be
constructed in such a manner to create a ladder effect. All such doors opening directly into such enclosure shall
be equipped with self-closing and latching devices designed to keep and capable of keeping such doors or gates
securely closed at all times when not actually in use, such latching device to be attached to the upper quarter of
the gate or door; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any
part of the enclosure required by this section need not be so equipped. In cases where only a spa or hot tub is
located on the property, the owner may have the option of providing a sturdy cover with latching devices
designed to keep the cover intact when not in use. This option, if chosen, would replace the fence requirements.
It shall be unlawful to maintain any swimming pool, spa or hot tub in the corporate limits of the city which is not
fenced in accordance with requirements of this section. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or
changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
State law references–Swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.101 et seq.; pool yard enclosure for
multiunit rental complex, property owners' association, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 757.
Sec. 14.09.017 Exterior structure
(a) General standards. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and
sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
(b) Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to doors, door and window frames,
cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other
protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted.
All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows,
doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather-resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or
corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be
stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
(c) Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly
legible and visible from a street fronting the property and an alley backing or siding to a property. These
numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
(d) Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be
capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
(e) Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks
and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
(f) Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials, and
maintained weatherproof and properly surface-coated where required to prevent deterioration.
(g) Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water
shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
(h) Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra-cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative
features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/618
(i) Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts, shall be maintained in good repair and be properly
anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such
as paint or similar surface treatment.
(j) Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all
appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage,
and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
(k) Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances shall be
maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such
as paint or similar surface treatment.
(l) Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
(m) Windows, skylights and doors generally. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair and weather-tight.
(1) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
(2) Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and
capable of being held in position by window hardware.
(n) Insect screens. Insect screens shall be required year-round for every door, window and other outside
opening. Insect screens shall be approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per
25 mm). Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect
repellent fans, are employed.
(o) Door assemblies and hardware. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in
good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the
door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with section 14.09.039(1)(C).
(p) Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents,
rain and surface drainage water.
(q) Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent
shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.
(r) Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall
be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.
(1) Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is
rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein.
Such deadbolt locks shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall have a lock
throw of not less than 1 inch. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an
acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to manufacturer's
specifications and maintained in good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall
be designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special
knowledge or effort.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/618
(2) Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground
level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping
unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.
(3) Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit
or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units
from unauthorized entry.
Sec. 14.09.018 Interior structure
(a) General standards. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy
or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house,
housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies
shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
(b) Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of
supporting the imposed loads.
(c) Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean
and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered.
Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
(d) Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall
be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
(e) Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
(f) Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being
opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the
manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
Sec. 14.09.019 Handrails and guardrails
(a) General standards. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a
handrail on one side of the stair, and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other
walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards.
Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1067 mm) high measured
vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards
shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or
other walking surface.
(b) Exception. Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.
Sec. 14.09.020 Rubbish and garbage; abandoned refrigerators and other appliances
(a) Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure,
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
(b) Removal of doors from refrigerators and other household appliances. Refrigerators and other household
equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the
doors.
State law reference–Regulation of abandoned refrigerators, freezers, and similar containers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
756.011 et seq.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/618
Sec. 14.09.021 Extermination of insects and rodents
(a) All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or
rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
(b) The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or
leasing the structure.
(c) The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible
for extermination on the premises.
(d) The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or
a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and
exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent infestation in the area occupied, the
occupant shall be responsible for extermination.
(e) (1) The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent- and pest-free
condition of the structure.
(2) Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be
responsible for extermination.
Sec. 14.09.022 General requirements for light, ventilation and occupancy
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space
for occupying a structure.
(1) Responsibility for compliance. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light,
ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this article.
(2) Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International Building Code, 2003
edition, as amended, shall be permitted.
Sec. 14.09.023 Light
(a) Habitable spaces.
(1) Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the
outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of
the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any
room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a
level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.
(2) Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided
through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent
of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior
glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/618
(b) Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in
one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light
bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area, or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between
lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress,
including exterior means of egress stairways, shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the
means of egress is occupied with a minimum of 1 footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.
(c) Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the
maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.
Sec. 14.09.024 Ventilation
(a) Habitable spaces.
(1) Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the
window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in
section 14.09.023(a).
(2) Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an
adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor
area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings
to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
(b) Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation
requirements for habitable spaces as required by subsection (a) of this section, except that a window shall not be
required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
(c) Cooking facilities.
(1) Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any
rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be
present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit.
(2) Exception: Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
(d) Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated,
a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
(e) Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be
exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
Sec. 14.09.025 Space and size limitations
(a) Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be
arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
(b) Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in
any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between counter
fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls.
(c) Minimum ceiling heights.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/618
(1) Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable
basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).
(2) Exceptions:
(A) In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than 4 feet (1219
mm) on center and projecting not more than 6 inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling
height.
(B) Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry,
study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm)
with not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and
similar obstructions.
(C) Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped
ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7 feet (2134 mm) over
not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such
rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524 mm) or
more shall be included.
(d) Bedroom requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements of subsections (1) through (5)
below.
(1) Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at least 70
square feet (6.5 m2) of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain
at least 50 square feet (4.6 m2) of floor area for each occupant thereof.
(2) Access through bedrooms. For units with two or more bedrooms, the bedroom(s) shall not
constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the
only means of egress from other habitable spaces.
(3) Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one
lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have
access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
(4) Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping
purposes.
(5) Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code,
including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width
requirements of this article, the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of
section 14.09.026, the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of section
14.09.036(b), the smoke detector requirements of section 14.09.039(4), and the emergency escape
requirements of section 14.09.039(2).
(e) Overcrowding.
(1) Minimum area requirements. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than
permitted by the minimum area requirements as follows:
Table of Minimum Area Requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/618
Space Minimum Area in Square Feet
1-2
Occupants
3-5
Occupants
6 or more
Occupants
Living
rooma,b
No 120 150
Dining
rooma,b
No 80 100
Bedrooms Shall comply with section 14.09.025(d)(1)
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m2.
a. See subsection (e)(3) of this section for combined living room/dining room spaces.
b. See subsection (d) of this section for limitations on determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes.
(2) Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by the table above shall not be included
as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping
areas shall comply with subsection (d) of this section.
(3) Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of the table of minimum area requirements herein if the total area is equal to that
required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living
room/dining room.
(f) Efficiency units. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following
requirements:
(1) A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than
220 square feet (20.4 m2). A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less
than 320 square feet (29.7 m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by
subsections (2) and (3).
(2) The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities,
each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation
conforming to this code shall be provided.
(3) The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and
bathtub or shower.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/618
(4) The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
(g) Food preparation facilities. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable
space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities
and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.
Sec. 14.09.026 General requirements for plumbing facilities and fixtures
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be
provided. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures
in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to
occupy any structure or premises which do not comply with the requirements of this article.
(1) Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water
closet and kitchen sink, which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory
shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading
directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a
substitute for the required lavatory.
(2) Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for
each four rooming units.
(3) Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet,
one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for
each ten occupants.
(4) Employee facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility
shall be available to employees. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled
water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be
located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
(5) Location of employee toilet facilities.
(A) Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area. The required
toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees' working
area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m).
Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public
facilities.
(B) Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks which
are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control shall not exceed a
travel distance of 500 feet (152m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities.
(6) Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a
smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
Sec. 14.09.027 Installation and maintenance of plumbing fixtures
(a) General standards. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and
shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such
plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional
condition.
(b) Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/618
(c) Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to
the occupants of the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross-connection,
backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
Sec. 14.09.028 Toilet rooms
(a) Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to
a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or
shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
(b) Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or
housekeeping units shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a
common hall or passageway.
Sec. 14.09.029 Water system
(a) General standards. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other
plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water
system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or
tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code.
(b) Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for
plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink
faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place shall be protected by an
approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum
breaker.
(c) Supply of water. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to
plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the
fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
(d) Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of
providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry
facility at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any
bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is
provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall
be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
Sec. 14.09.030 Sanitary drainage system
(a) General standards. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to
an approved private sewage disposal system.
(b) Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free
from obstructions, leaks and defects.
Sec. 14.09.031 Storm drainage
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
Sec. 14.09.032 General requirements for mechanical and electrical facilities
(a) The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment
to be provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/618
(b) The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in
compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to
occupy any premises which do not comply with the requirements of this article.
Sec. 14.09.033 Heating facilities
(a) Required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.
(b) Residential occupancies.
(1) Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature
of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality indicated in appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Cooking
appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.
(2) Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum
temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
(c) Heat supply.
(1) Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units,
rooming units, dormitories or guestrooms on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from November 1st through April 30th to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet
rooms.
(2) Exceptions:
(A) When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the
heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature
for the locality shall be as indicated in appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
(B) In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum
temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
(d) Occupiable work spaces.
(1) Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from November
1st through April 30th to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the
spaces are occupied.
(2) Exceptions:
(A) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature
conditions.
(B) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
(e) Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914 mm)
above the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.
Sec. 14.09.034 Mechanical equipment
(a) Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel burning appliances, cooking
appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/618
and shall be capable of performing the intended function.
(b) Removal of combustion products.
(1) All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.
(2) Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.
(c) Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
(d) Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.
(e) Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space
containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
(f) Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning
appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom shall not be installed
unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
Sec. 14.09.035 Electrical system
(a) Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with
the requirements of this section and section 14.09.036.
(b) Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for
additional facilities in accordance with the ICC Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire,
120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.
(c) Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to
the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and
lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official
shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
Sec. 14.09.036 Electrical equipment
(a) Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a
safe and approved manner.
(b) Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle
outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault
circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet
shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
(c) Lighting fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler
room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric lighting fixture.
Sec. 14.09.037 Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters
(a) General standards. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to sustain safely all imposed
loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical and fire hazards. The most current certificate of
inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, or the
certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator.
(b) Elevators.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/618
(1) In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in
operation at all times when the building is occupied.
(2) Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator
temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.
Sec. 14.09.038 Duct systems
Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.
Sec. 14.09.039 Fire safety requirements
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to
structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. The owner of the
premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises
that do not comply with the requirements of this article.
(1) Means of egress.
(A) A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a
building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire
Code.
(B) The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be
unobstructed.
(C) All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to
be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware
conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code, 2003 edition, as amended.
(2) Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in
accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency
escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys
or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and
rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in
effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside
without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the
escape and rescue opening.
(3) Resistance ratings.
(A) Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistancerated
walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
(B) Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative
condition. All fire and smoke-stop doors shall be maintained in operable condition.
(C) Fire doors and smoke barrier doors. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be
blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
(4) Fire protection systems.
(A) Maintenance. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or
suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable
condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/618
(B) Smoke alarms in residential occupancies. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall
be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R
occupancies, regardless of occupant load, at all of the following locations:
(i) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate
vicinity of bedrooms.
(ii) In each room used for sleeping purposes.
(iii) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split
levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm
installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the
lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.
(C) Smoke alarms in other occupancies. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code.
(D) Power source for smoke alarms.
(i) In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies,
single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring
provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with
a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring
shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for
overcurrent protection.
(ii) Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings
where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial
power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do
not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
(E) Interconnection of smoke alarms.
(i) Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual
dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R
occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the
activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm
shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening
doors closed.
(ii) Exceptions:
a. Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing
alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind.
b. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where
alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available
which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior
finishes.
(Ordinance 2006-07-24, ex. A, adopted 7/24/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/618
State law reference–Smoke detectors in rental homes, apartments, dwellings, etc., V.T.C.A., Property Code, sec. 92.251 et seq.
ARTICLE 14.10 ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.10.001 Definitions
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Abandoned motor vehicle. A motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than five years old and left unattended on
public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a
period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of
more than 48 hours [sic], or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the
owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the
right-of-way of a designated county, state or federal highway within this state for more than 48 hours or for more
than 12 hours on a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the state turnpike authority.
Antique auto. A passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925 or before, or a passenger car or truck that
is at least thirty-five (35) years old.
Collector. The owner of one (1) or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires,
trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore,
preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Demolisher. A person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to
otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle.
Garagekeeper. An owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility or
establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of a motor vehicle.
(2002 Code, sec. 8.201)
Junked vehicle. Any vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(2) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(A) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(B) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance 2015-04-02, sec. 2, adopted 4/13/15)
Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, chapter 501), except that, for purposes of this article, it shall also mean a motorboat, outboard motor or
vessel subject to registration under chapter 31, Texas Parks and Wildlife Code.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and because of its historic interest is being preserved by hobbyists.
Storage facility. A garage, parking lot or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing, storing
or parking of motor vehicles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/618
(2002 Code, sec. 8.201)
Sec. 14.10.002 Right of entry; court orders
A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures of this article may enter private property for the
purposes specified herein to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle
and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance as defined herein. The judge of the
municipal court of the city may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures of this article. (2002 Code, sec.
8.210)
Sec. 14.10.003 Immediate removal of vehicles obstructing traffic
No provision of this article shall affect a law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a
vehicle left on public property. (2002 Code, sec. 8.211)
Sec. 14.10.004 Non-applicability of state law regarding vehicle storage facilities
The city council hereby determines and provides by this section that the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, chapter 683, and the rules adopted under such chapter by the state department of licensing and regulation
shall not apply inside the limits of the city. (2002 Code, sec. 8.212)
State law reference–Vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 2303.
Secs. 14.10.005–14.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Abandoned Vehicles
Sec. 14.10.031 Authority to take into custody
The police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private property.
The police department may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities to remove, preserve and store an
abandoned motor vehicle it takes into custody. (2002 Code, sec. 8.202)
Sec. 14.10.032 Notice to owner and lienholders
(a) Upon the impoundment of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall notify within ten (10)
days thereof, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lienholders of record
that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle
identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the motor
vehicle is being held, and inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle not
later than the twentieth day after the date of the notice, on payment of all towing, preservation and storage
charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner or
lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by the
owner and lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned
motor vehicle at a public auction.
(b) If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration contains no address for
the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all
lienholders, notice by one (1) publication in one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the city is sufficient
notice under this article. The notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles, shall be
published within the time requirements prescribed [for a notice] by certified mail and shall have the same
contents required for a notice by certified mail.
(c) The police department, or in the event the police department hires as its agent persons, equipment and
facilities to remove, preserve and store an abandoned motor vehicle it takes into custody, is entitled to reasonable
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/618
storage fees for a period of not more than ten (10) days beginning on the date the department takes custody and
continuing through the day the department mails notice as provided by this section, and a period beginning on
the day after the day the department mails notice and continuing through the day any accrued charges are paid
and the vehicle is removed.
(2002 Code, sec. 8.203)
Sec. 14.10.033 Sale at auction; disposition of proceeds of sale
If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided above, the police department shall sell the
abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given. The purchaser of
the motor vehicle takes title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, shall receive
a sales receipt from the police department and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and receive a
certificate of title. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall
reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle that
resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred, if
any. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholders
for ninety (90) days and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain available for the payment of
auction, towing, preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs that result from placing another
abandoned vehicle in custody, if the proceeds from a sale of another abandoned motor vehicle are insufficient to
meet these expenses and costs. (2002 Code, sec. 8.204)
Sec. 14.10.034 Vehicles abandoned at storage facility
A motor vehicle left for more than ten (10) days in a storage facility operated for commercial purposes after
notice is given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and to any lienholders of
record to pick up the vehicle, or under any of the other circumstances as set forth in V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, chapter 683, shall be subject to the provisions of said chapter. (2002 Code, sec. 8.205)
Sec. 14.10.035 Disposal to demolisher
Any person, firm, corporation or unit of government on whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, and a person who is the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost
or destroyed, may apply to the state department of transportation for authority to sell, give away or dispose of the
vehicle to a demolisher. The application shall be governed by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 683. (2002
Code, sec. 8.206)
Secs. 14.10.036–14.10.060 Reserved
Division 3. Junked Vehicles
Sec. 14.10.061 Declaration of nuisance; penalty
A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or a public right-of-way is
detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites
vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of
minors and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is a public nuisance. Any person, firm, or corporation
maintaining a public nuisance as defined above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction subject to
a fine not to exceed the amount as set forth in the general penalty in section 1.01.009 of this code for each
offense, and each and every day the maintenance of such public nuisance shall continue shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, the court shall order removal
and abatement of such public nuisance. (2002 Code, sec. 8.207)
Sec. 14.10.062 Abatement
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/618
(a) Upon complaint or upon its own initiative, the police department may initiate appropriate official action to
remove and abate a public nuisance in the nature of a junked vehicle. Upon initiation of the action, the owner or
occupant of the private premises (or the owner or occupant of the public premises or the owner or the occupant
of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way) whereupon the public nuisance exists, together with the last
known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle and any lienholders of record, shall be notified by a
regularly salaried, full-time employee of the city, by certified mail with a five-day return receipt requested, that
the nuisance exists, and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days of the receipt of such notice or
that a request for hearing must be made by said owner or occupant before the expiration of the ten-day period
from the receipt of notice. If the notice is returned undelivered by the post office, further official action to abate
the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return.
(b) Upon request by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or the owner or occupant adjacent
to the public right-of-way, a public hearing shall be held before the municipal court of the city for determination
of the existence of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance and for the purpose of entering an order requiring the
removal of the same if found to be so. The judge of the municipal court shall be the designated official to make
such determination, and upon the finding that the vehicle is a junked vehicle and constitutes a public nuisance,
he shall enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or a part thereof. Said order must include a
description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the
information is available at the site.
(c) When the junked vehicle is declared a public nuisance by the municipal judge and is ordered to be
removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
(d) Notice shall be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of
removal. The notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part which was removed.
(e) The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or a part thereof which is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, a
vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the
business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an unlicensed operable or inoperable antique or special
interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are
maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view
by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means.
(f) The procedures of this article shall be carried out and enforced by regularly salaried, full-time employees
of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be done by any other duly
authorized person, including persons with whom the city may at the time of the passage of this article or
hereafter have a valid contract for the removal of such vehicles.
(2002 Code, sec. 8.208)
Sec. 14.10.063 Disposal
A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher or any suitable site
operated by the city or county for processing as scrap or salvage. (2002 Code, sec. 8.209)
CHAPTER 16
PLANNING AND MISCELLANEOUS DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/618
ARTICLE 16.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 16.01.001 Development code and subdivision regulations saved from repeal
The development code and subdivision regulations of the city, as amended, are not included in the code, but they
are hereby specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 16.01.002 Manual for design of storm drainage systems adopted
The Manual for the Design of Storm Drainage Systems is not included herein, but shall be maintained on file in
the office of the city secretary, and is incorporated herein by reference as if included in full herein. (2002 Code,
art. 10.1000)
ARTICLE 16.02 IMPACT FEES†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 16.02.001–16.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Roadway Facilities
Sec. 16.02.031 Land use assumptions and thoroughfare impact fee improvement program
The currently adopted land use assumptions and the thoroughfare impact fee improvement program shall be
maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 16.02.032 Credits
Any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of off-site roadway facilities agreed to or required by the
city as a condition of development approval shall be credited against roadway facilities impact fees otherwise
due from the development. (Ordinance 2006-03-10, sec. 5, adopted 3/27/06)
Sec. 16.02.033 Waiver for school districts
The provisions of this division do not apply to independent school districts, and all fees provided for herein shall
hereby be waived. (Ordinance 2006-03-10, sec. 6, adopted 3/27/06)
Sec. 16.02.034 Compliance statement
The city secretary shall submit a written certification, signed by the mayor, verifying compliance with chapter
395, to the attorney general each year, not later than the 30th day of September. The certification shall include
the statement: “This statement certifies compliance with Chapter 395, Texas Local Government Code.”
(Ordinance 2006-03-10, sec. 7, adopted 3/27/06)
Sec. 16.02.035 Records of hearings
A record must be made and kept of the public hearings conducted as provided by this division and maintained
and made available for public inspection for at least ten (10) years after the date of the hearing. (Ordinance
2006-03-10, sec. 8, adopted 3/27/06)
Sec. 16.02.036 Additional powers of city
This division is adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code, chapter 395. The provisions of
this division shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized under state
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/618
law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in
conjunction with this division. Guidelines may be developed by city council resolution or otherwise to
implement and administer this division. (Ordinance 2006-03-10, sec. 9, adopted 3/27/06)
Sec. 16.02.037 Applicability
The provisions of this division apply to all new development within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(Ordinance 2006-03-10, sec. 10, adopted 3/27/06)
Sec. 16.02.038 Assessment and payment
No application for new development shall be approved within the city without assessment of an impact fee
pursuant to this division, and no building permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the roadway
facilities impact fee imposed by and calculated hereunder. (Ordinance 2006-03-10, sec. 11, adopted 3/27/06)
Sec. 16.02.039 New assessment upon approval of new plat
Following the lapse or expiration of approval for a plat, a new assessment shall occur at the time of final
approval of a new plat. (Ordinance 2006-03-10, sec. 12, adopted 3/27/06)
Sec. 16.02.040 Amending plats not subject to reassessment
An application for an amending plat made pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 212.016, and the
subdivision regulations, is not subject to reassessment for an impact fee. (Ordinance 2006-03-10, sec. 13,
adopted 3/27/06)
Secs. 16.02.041–16.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Water and Wastewater Facilities
Sec. 16.02.101 General provisions; definitions
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the water and wastewater impact fees is to generate revenue for funding or
recouping the cost of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by and attributable to new
development.
(b) Applicability. This division shall be applicable uniformly to new development which occurs within the
water and wastewater service areas. For new development which occurs within the boundaries of the city's
wholesale customers or other political subdivisions, the applicability and terms for the assessment and collection
of the impact fees shall be defined by agreement.
(c) Authority. This division is adopted pursuant to the authority of the Texas Local Government Code
Annotated, chapter 395 (Vernon 1988), hereinafter to be known as the Texas Impact Fee Act. The provisions of
this division shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to adopt impact fees or other appropriate
development fees pursuant to any other source of local authority nor to limit the utilization of any other methods
or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein.
(d) Development approval. No application for new development shall be approved by the city without
assessment of impact fees pursuant to this division, and no application for building permit shall be approved
until the applicant has paid the impact fees imposed by and calculated hereunder.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1201)
(e) Exemption of public school districts. The provisions of this division shall not be imposed on and applied to
any public school district located within the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 2006-07-23 adopted 7/10/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/618
(f) Definitions. As utilized in this division, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them
hereinbelow:
Assessment. A determination of the amount of the impact fees per service unit in effect on the date of occurrence
established for same in this division, and is the maximum amount that can be charged per service unit of
development.
Building permit. The filing with the city of a written application for the building of an eligible structure and the
acceptance of any applicable fees therefor by the city.
Capital improvement. Water storage, pumping, and transmission facilities and wastewater pumping and
interceptors owned and operated by or on behalf of the city having a life expectancy of three or more years.
Director. The director of the city community-owned utilities or his designee.
Economic development project. A new development project which has been designated an economic
development project by the city council and which has received any one of the following:
(1) Federal funds in the form of loans or grants;
(2) City funds in the form of fee waivers, tax incentives, discounted costs or rates for city services;
or
(3) Any discount or cost reduction not available without specific action of the city council.
Existing development. The expansion of the capacity of an existing facility that serves the same function as an
otherwise necessary new capital improvement in order that the existing facility may serve new development. The
term does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing facility to better serve
existing development.
Final plat. The map, drawing or chart on which is provided a subdivider's plan of a subdivision which has
received final approval by the planning commission or city council and which is recorded with the county map
records department. This term also includes replats, minor plats, and amended plats when such plats result in a
new or increased demand on the water system. The term does not include any approved preliminary plat, site
plan, or concept plan.
Growth-related costs. Capital construction cost of service related to providing additional water and wastewater
capacity to new development, either from excess capacity in existing facilities, from facility expansions or from
new capital facilities. Growth-related costs do not include:
(1) Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities or assets other than capital
improvements or facilities expansions identified in the capital improvements plan;
(2) Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facilities
expansions;
(3) Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing
development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
(4) Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing capital improvements to provide better
service to existing development;
(5) Administrative and operating costs of the city; and
(6) Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other indebtedness except
for such payments made with respect to growth-related facilities identified in the impact fee capital
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/618
improvements plans.
Impact fee. The water and/or wastewater fees imposed upon new development in order to generate revenue for
funding or recouping the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by or attributable to
new development. The term does not include dedication of site-related water distribution or wastewater
collection facilities required by other ordinances or the city code.
Impact fee capital improvements plan. The plan that identifies the water and/or wastewater capital improvements
or facilities expansions and the associated costs for which impact fees may be assessed.
Land use assumptions. A description of the service area and projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities and population in the service area over at least a ten-year period as adopted and amended from time to
time by the city.
New development. The subdivision of land; the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land, any
of which increases the number of service units for water and wastewater service. “New development” also
includes the sale of water or wastewater connections resulting from the conversion of an individual well or septic
or other individual waste disposal system to the city's water or wastewater utility.
Service area. An area(s) within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city to be served by the
water and wastewater capital improvements or facilities expansions specified in the impact fee capital
improvements plans adopted herein.
Service unit. A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual
living unit equivalent (LUE) of development calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering or
planning standards for a particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions. For water and
wastewater facilities, the service unit shall constitute the basis for establishing equivalency within various
customer classes based upon the relationship of the continuous duty maximum flow rate in gallons per minute
for a water meter of a given size and type compared to the continuous duty maximum flow rate in gallons per
minute for a three-fourth-inch diameter, full-bore simple water meter using American Water Works Association
C700-C703 standards.
Site-related facility. An improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development
and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of water and wastewater facilities to
serve the new development and which is not included in the impact fee capital improvements plans and for
which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under subdivision and other applicable regulations.
Tap excavation permit. The filing with the city of a written application for the excavation for a water or
wastewater tap and the acceptance of any applicable fees therefor by the city.
Wastewater facility. A capital improvement or facility expansion for providing wastewater service, including but
not limited to land or easements, lift stations, and interceptor mains. The term “wastewater facilities” does not
include dedication of easements or rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site
wastewater collection facilities required by valid ordinances of the city and necessitated by and attributable to
new development.
Water facility. Improvements for providing water service, including but not limited to land or easements, water
supply facilities, treatment facilities, pumping facilities, storage facilities or transmission mains. The term “water
facilities” does not include dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site
water distribution facilities required by valid ordinances of the city and necessitated by and attributable to new
development.
Wholesale customers. Water or wastewater customers of the city's water and/or wastewater utilities which
purchase such utility service at wholesale for resale to their retail customers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/618
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1201)
Sec. 16.02.102 Land use assumptions
(a) The currently adopted land use assumptions shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The land use assumptions as adopted herein shall henceforth be updated at least every five years in
accordance with applicable law.
(c) Amendments to the land use assumptions shall incorporate projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities and population for the service area over at least a ten-year period.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1202)
Sec. 16.02.103 Service areas
(a) There are established water and wastewater impact fee service areas, the boundaries of which are depicted
on the maps on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The boundaries of the water and wastewater impact fee service areas may be amended from time to time in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the Texas Impact Fee Act. (2002 Code, sec. 10.1203)
Sec. 16.02.104 Capital improvements plans
(a) The currently adopted capital improvements plans shall be maintained on file in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The impact fee capital improvements plans for water and wastewater facilities may be amended from time
to time pursuant to the procedures set forth in state law. (2002 Code, sec. 10.1204)
Sec. 16.02.105 Computation
(a) The impact fees due for the new development shall be collected at the time of building permit.
(b) Following the filing and acceptance of a written application for building permit, the city shall compute the
impact fees due in the following manner:
(1) The size of water meter shall be determined by the number of service units as per the meter
conversion table on file in the office of the city secretary;
(2) Service units shall be summed for all meters required for the development;
(3) The meter size shall be assessed the corresponding fees as per the schedules on file in the office
of the city secretary;
(4) All applicable offsets, credits or discounts per service unit allowable under this division for
water or wastewater service shall be subtracted from the product derived under subsection (b)(3) of
this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1208; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) The amount of impact fees due for new development shall not exceed the amount computed by multiplying
the assessed fees for water or wastewater service by the total number of service units generated by the
development.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/618
(d) Whenever the property owner increases the number of service units for a development, the additional
impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined based on the assessed fees and applicable
credits then in effect and such additional fees shall be collected at the time the building permit is issued.
(e) In the event the property owner decreases the number of service units for a development, the property
owner shall be entitled to a refund of the impact fees for impact fees actually paid, but only for the amounts
represented by the decrease in service units based on the assessed fees and offsets, credits or discounts applicable
at the time the fees were paid.
(f) If the building permit for the property on which impact fees are paid has expired and a new application is
thereafter filed for the identical property and the same number of service units, the impact fees previously paid
satisfy the requirements of this division. In the event the building permit expires for a property and must be
reissued for a revised number of service units, the previous payment of impact fees related to this property shall
entitle the payer to receive a credit towards the impact fee amount now due or partial refund for overpayment of
the revised impact fee amount now due. If the building permit is not reissued, impact fees are not refundable.
(g) The impact fees shall attach to the property for which the impact fees were paid and shall not be
transferable to other properties or service units.
(h) No request to connect to the water and wastewater system shall be granted and no building permit shall be
issued if the applicant cannot verify payment of the appropriate impact fees and other applicable fees or if
existing facilities do not have actual capacity to provide service to the new connection(s).
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1208)
Sec. 16.02.106 Collection
(a) For platted properties, the impact fees per service unit to be collected within the service area at the time of
building permit shall be those assessed fees established by this division by the city council and calculated
according to the schedules on file in the office of the city secretary, as adjusted by any applicable credits
provided herein.
(b) For service established by contracts with political subdivisions or other wholesale customers, the impact
fees per service unit to be collected at the time of building permit shall be those fees as established by city
council and calculated according to the schedules on file in the office of the city secretary, as adjusted by any
applicable credits provided herein.
(Ordinance 2006-07-23, secs. (a)–(b), adopted 7/10/06; Ordinance 2007-11-54, secs. (a)–(b), adopted 11/12/07;
Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) Impact fees for utility service to properties for which no building permit is required shall be collected at
time of application for a tap excavation permit.
(d) Except as otherwise provided by contracts with wholesale customers or other political subdivisions, no
building permit shall be issued until all impact fees have been paid to the city.
(e) For a development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations
subsequent to the effective date of this division (ordinance adopted September 27, 2004), impact fees shall be
collected at the time of building permit application.
(f) For a development which has received final plat approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this division (ordinance adopted September 27, 2004) and for which no replatting is necessary,
impact fees shall be collected at the time of the building permit application.
(g) The city is authorized, pursuant to state law, to enter into an agreement with the owner of a tract of land for
which the plat has been recorded providing for the timing and method of payment of the impact fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/618
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1209)
Sec. 16.02.107 Credits
In the event that the city requires as a condition of development approval, or otherwise enters into an agreement
with a developer, to have the developer construct, fund or otherwise contribute toward the cost of a water or
wastewater capital improvement or facility expansion, the city may provide for reimbursement in the form of
credits against impact fees that would otherwise be due from the development. (2002 Code, sec. 10.1210)
(1) For the capacity share of the project related to the developer's own service need and property
benefited therefrom, the city shall provide a credit against payment of the full impact fees due at time
of collection. The credit amount shall be equal to the facility's pro-rata capacity cost per service unit,
but in no case shall the unit credit exceed the assessed amount allowed for that facility type as
established by city council. Such credits shall only be applicable against the impact fees for the type
of facility (water or wastewater) for which the capital improvement is made. (2002 Code, sec.
10.1210; Ordinance 2006-07-23 adopted 7/10/06; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) For any oversizing of the facility funded by the developer, the city shall reimburse the
developer according to terms set forth in a separate development agreement.
(3) The city's impact fee credit and oversizing reimbursement policy in this section only applies to
facilities that are included in the 10-year capital improvements plan underlying the maximum fee
calculations. This section does not apply for reimbursement of other facilities, dedication of siterelated
water distribution or wastewater collection facilities required by other ordinances of the city
code, or fees placed in trust funds that may be used for the purpose of reimbursing developers for
oversizing or constructing water or sewer mains or lines.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1210)
Sec. 16.02.108 Exceptions and exemptions
(a) Approval of modifications. Except as provided in this division or by contract in existence on the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this division (ordinance adopted September 27, 2004), any reduction, change or
modification in the amount or time of payment of the impact fees must be approved by a duly enacted ordinance
of the city council.
(b) Service from private system connected to city's system. Impact fees shall not be assessed on any property
that receives service from a central water supply system owned by a person or an entity other than the city or a
wastewater treatment plant owned by a person or entity other than the city and which water transmission system
or wastewater interceptor system is to be tied into the city's water and wastewater system.
(c) Water not entering wastewater system. The owner of a meter used to monitor water that is utilized
exclusively for consumptive purposes and/or that cannot enter the city wastewater system will not be charged the
wastewater impact fee. A customer requesting this exemption to the wastewater impact fee must submit
information to the city manager or his or her designee that verifies one of these conditions.
(d) Meters used for fire protection capacity. No water or wastewater fees shall be collected for a meter that is
utilized to provide only fire protection capacity.
(e) Economic development projects. Pursuant to chapter 395, Texas Local Government Code (Vernon 1999),
as amended, the city council reserves the right to waive impact fees for new development projects for the
purpose of promoting economic development, providing that such exemption is stipulated in a separate
development agreement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/618
(f) School districts. Impact fees shall not be assessed for new or expanded service established in support of
elementary or secondary school sites operated by a public school district.
(g) Limitation. Nothing hereinabove stated shall be construed to alter the terms of a contract with a wholesale
customer of the city regarding the payment of impact fees and shall not be construed to authorize the payment of
impact fees in installments in areas encompassed by such a contract for wholesale service.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1211)
State law reference–Impact fee for development of property receiving economic development tax incentives, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
313.006.
Sec. 16.02.109 Establishment of accounts
(a) The city's division of finance and administration shall establish separate interest-bearing accounts clearly
identifying the category of capital improvement (i.e., water facilities and wastewater facilities) within the service
area for which the impact fees are collected.
(b) Interest earned by each account shall be credited to the account on which it is earned and shall be used
solely for the purposes specified for impact fees as authorized herein.
(c) The city's division of finance and administration shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls
to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in this
division. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry
out the purposes and intent of this division; provided, however, that any fees paid shall be expended within a
reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years from the date the fees are deposited into the account.
(d) The city's division of finance and administration shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for
each such account, which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all
moneys received, and the number of service units for which the moneys are received, and which shall ensure that
the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects
specified in the impact fee capital improvements plans as system-related capital projects. The city's division of
finance and administration shall also maintain such records as are necessary to ensure that refunds are
appropriately made in accordance with this division.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1212)
Sec. 16.02.110 Use of proceeds
(a) The impact fees collected pursuant to this division may be used to finance or to recoup capital construction
costs for water and wastewater facilities identified in the impact fee capital improvements plans within the
service area from which it is assessed. Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and
other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital
improvements or facilities expansions.
(b) Impact fees collected pursuant to this division shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses:
(1) Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those
identified for the water and wastewater utility in the impact fee capital improvements plans;
(2) Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facilities
expansions;
(3) Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing
development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/618
(4) Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing
development; provided, however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading,
expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital
improvements generated by new development; or
(5) Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1213)
Sec. 16.02.111 Refunds
(a) Any impact fees or portions thereof collected pursuant to this division which have not been expended
within ten years from the date of payment shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the
property at the time the refund is paid, or, if the impact fees were paid by another governmental entity, to such
governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the
statutory rate as set forth in V.T.C.A., Finance Code, section 302.002, or any successor statute.
(b) If a refund is due pursuant to this section, the refund of unexpended fee payments, including interest from
the date of payment, shall be made to the current record owner or governmental entity.
(c) Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facilities expansions identified in the capital
improvements plan upon which the fees were based, the city shall recalculate the maximum impact fees per
service unit using the actual costs for the improvements or expansions. If the maximum impact fees per service
unit based on actual cost is less than the impact fees per service unit paid, the city shall refund the difference if
such difference exceeds the impact fees paid by more than ten percent. The refund to the record owner or
governmental entity shall be calculated by multiplying such difference by the number of service units for the
development for which the fees were paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
(d) Upon the request of an owner of the property on which impact fees have been paid, the city shall refund
such fees if:
(1) Existing service is available and service is denied;
(2) Service was not available when the fees were collected and the city has failed to commence
construction of facilities to provide service within two years of fee payments; or
(3) Service was not available when the fees were collected and has not subsequently been made
available within a reasonable period of time considering the type of capital improvement or facility
expansion to be constructed, but in any event no later than five years from the date of the payment.
(e) A refund pursuant to this section shall also result in cancellation of the tap excavation and building permit
and the refund of all building and/or tap excavation permit fees previously collected.
(f) If the holder of a building permit for property for which a building permit has been obtained relinquishes
the building permit for a refund, a canceled building permit must be presented before the refund can be made.
(g) The city shall refund an appropriate proportion of impact fee payments in the event that a previously
purchased but uninstalled water meter for which the impact fees have been paid is replaced with a smaller meter,
based on the per service unit differential of the two meter sizes and the fees per service unit at the time of the
original fee payments.
(h) A petition for refund under this section shall be submitted to the city manager or his or her designee on a
form provided by the city for such purpose. Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the
city manager or his or her designee must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request,
including the reasons for the decision. If a refund is due to the petitioner, the city manager or his or her designee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/618
shall notify the city division of finance and administration and request that a refund payment be made to the
petitioner.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1214)
Sec. 16.02.112 Updates to plans and revision of fees
The city shall review the land use assumptions and impact fee capital improvements plans for water and
wastewater facilities at least every five years, with the five-year period to commence from the date of adoption
of the impact fee capital improvements plans referenced in this section. The city council shall accordingly make
a determination of whether changes to the land use assumptions, impact fee capital improvements plans or
impact fees are needed and shall, in accordance with the procedures set forth, either update the fees or make a
determination that no update is necessary. (2002 Code, sec. 10.1215)
Sec. 16.02.113 Use of other financing mechanisms
(a) In addition to the use of impact fees, the city may finance water and wastewater capital improvements or
facilities expansions designated in the impact fee capital improvements plans through the issuance of bonds,
through the formation of public improvements districts or other assessment districts, or through any other
authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law.
(b) Except as otherwise provided herein, the assessment and collection of impact fees shall be additional and
supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on
and due against the property.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1216)
Sec. 16.02.114 Fees additional and supplemental; applicability of other regulations
(a) Impact fees established by this division are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any
other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or the sale
of water or wastewater connections or the issuance of certificates of occupancy. Such fees are intended to be
consistent with and to further the policies of the city's land use plan, impact fee capital improvements plans,
development code and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the
provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land.
(b) This division shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development,
design and improvement standards and requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision
of public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other regulations of the city, which
shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1217)
Sec. 16.02.115 Relief procedures
(a) Any person who has paid impact fees or an owner of land upon which impact fees have been paid may
make petition the council through the city manager or his or her designee to determine whether any duty
required by this division has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing
and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and the request that the act be performed within 60 days of the
request. If the council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this division and is late in being
performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within 60 days of the date of the request and to continue until
completion.
(b) Any person who has been assessed impact fees under this division may appeal that assessment by written
application to the city manager or his or her designee. The city council may then enforce, reduce or modify the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/618
assessment, after providing a public hearing with due notice and opportunity to be heard, if it determines that the
assessment is unwarranted or in error.
(c) For existing developments that are extended municipal water and wastewater service, new customers will
be assessed the applicable impact fees at the time of meter purchase. Though a written appeal submitted to the
city manager or his or her designee, the council may consider whether the new customer shall have the option of
either immediate full payment of the assessed fees or an extended payment plan of 1/12 of the assessed fee
amounts each month for 12 months, starting with the meter purchase. If such partial payments by the customer
are more than 30 days overdue, this shall serve as grounds for termination of water and/or wastewater service.
(d) The council may grant a variance or waiver from any requirement of this division, upon written request
made to the city manager or his or her designee by a developer or owner of property subject to this division,
following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement would, when
regarded as a whole, result in extreme hardship to the applicant and that the grant of the waiver or variance is in
the best interest of the city.
(e) If the council grants a variance or waiver to the amount of the impact fees due for new development under
this section, it shall cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the impact fees
to the amount in which the fees would have been deposited.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.1218)
Sec. 16.02.116 Compliance statement
Not later than September 30 of each year, the city secretary shall submit a written certification signed by the
mayor, verifying compliance with chapter 395 of the Local Government Code, to the attorney general.
(Ordinance 2006-07-23 adopted 7/10/06)
ARTICLE 16.03 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Sec. 16.03.001 Title
This article is hereby adopted and shall be known as the erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.901)
Sec. 16.03.002 Purpose
This article establishes the minimum performance standards necessary to protect against erosion and
sedimentation accumulation within the city and to establish public and private responsibilities for providing this
protection. It is the intent of this article to set forth performance standards which all erosion and sedimentation
controls must, at a minimum, meet. It shall be the duty and responsibility of all persons, firms or corporations
under this article to design and implement erosion and sedimentation control measures which meet the
performance standards contained in this article. Further, it is the purpose of this article to:
(1) Protect human life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public money for cleaning sediment out of streets, sidewalks, storm
drains and watercourses;
(3) Ensure that those who expose soil to possible erosion losses are minimizing those soil losses;
(4) Preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community;
(5) Establish a reasonable standard of performance by which erosion and sediment control
measures may be judged; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/618
(6) Prevent the pollution of streams, ponds, and other watercourses by sediment.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.902)
Sec. 16.03.003 Scope
The provisions of this article apply to:
(1) Any person, firm, corporation, business or entity currently or proposing to develop land or
improve property within the city or who owns, possesses, is in custody of or exercises control of
property within the city;
(2) Any land development, construction to individual building structures, subdivisions, excavations
and fill operations, all development and all other similar development activities; and
(3) All real property within the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.903)
Sec. 16.03.004 Responsibilities
(a) Responsibilities of director of public works. The director of public works is hereby appointed to administer
and implement this article. The duties of the director of public works or his/her designee shall include but not be
limited to:
(1) Inspecting sites to determine compliance with this article.
(2) Determining if a stop work order shall be issued and, if so, when the stop work order shall be
removed from the project or construction and work allowed to commence or recommence.
(3) Determine if abatement by the city is necessary and cause same to be executed.
(b) Responsibilities of owners. The owner, builder, developer, tenant or any other person, firm, corporation or
business who owns, possesses, is in custody of or exercises control of property shall be responsible for any silt,
mud, sand or similar debris transported from the property by drainage. The intent of this article is that owners,
builders, and developers make provisions for preventing erosion and sedimentation problems at such time as
their property is proposed for development, use or modification and continue such preventive measures during
the construction and development of the property. Additionally, all persons, firms, corporations or businesses
who, after construction and development, own, possess, are in custody of or exercise control of the property are
responsible for preventing the erosion and sedimentation problems addressed by this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.904)
Sec. 16.03.005 General requirements; control plan
(a) General requirements.
(1) In addition to other requirements of city ordinances or design standards of the city, all
applicants for subdivision of land, site development or construction of any improvement or structure
shall comply with the following requirements:
(A) Submit to the director of public works an erosion and sedimentation control plan for
approval prior to the commencement of construction.
(B) Earthen slopes shall be no steeper than 3:1 (horizontal/vertical).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/618
(C) Any slope steeper than 3:1 shall be stabilized by appropriate means such as erosion
control mat, rock, or concrete rip-rap, retaining walls, etc., subject to approval by the director of
public works. All slope stabilization requirements shall be made part of the construction plans.
(D) The flow line of all new or disturbed drainage ditches or swales shall be, at a minimum,
lined with erosion control mat. Velocity or quantity of flow may necessitate additional
protective measures.
(E) All new or disturbed public properties, including parkways, drainage ditches and rightsof-
way, shall be vegetated by seed, hydro-mulch, sod or other means. These public areas shall
be watered and maintained as necessary to establish permanent vegetative growth of
approximately two (2) inches in height over seventy percent (70%) of the area.
(2) Within twenty-four (24) hours of a rainfall event, the party responsible for maintenance of
erosion control devices will inspect the project site to determine the condition and effectiveness of
control devices. If necessary, sediment will be removed and control devices repaired as soon as
possible. Any control devices ineffective shall be replaced with more suitable devices.
(b) Plan requirements. All erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be required to contain the following:
(1) The size of erosion or sediment areas to the greatest extent possible and to reduce or minimize
such disturbed area.
(2) Stabilize any areas as soon as possible.
(3) For construction activities in waterways, the following additional requirements must be met:
(A) At the end of each workday, the contractor shall remove all loose excavated material
from all channels.
(B) No construction or fill materials can be stored within the limits of the channel. All
equipment and materials storage and staging areas must have erosion controls. Flooding
potential should be considered when locating the control measures.
(C) Suitable erosion controls shall be placed to prevent channel erosion or sediment from
entering the channel.
(D) Temporary channel crossings may be installed to facilitate construction. Such crossings
must accommodate flow of the channel and provide for erosion control measures.
(4) Controls are required to intercept silt from all disturbed areas.
(5) Keep the velocities of stormwater runoff below the erosion level.
(6) Protect steep areas and areas disturbed by development activity from upstream runoff.
(7) Filter or detain stormwater runoff.
(8) Reduce the concentration of stormwater runoff and promote sheet flow to the greatest extent
possible.
(9) Re-vegetate all disturbed areas with a rapid, vigorous growth of long-term vegetation as soon
as possible.
(10) Provide sedimentation and/or filtration ponds to maintain and improve water quality.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/618
(11) Erosion control plans should be phased to accommodate changes in drainage patterns that
occur during development.
(12) Reduce the silt leaving a construction site on the wheels of construction vehicles by providing
vehicle washing areas and/or stabilized construction entrances and exits.
(13) Preserve and protect existing vegetation to the greatest extent possible.
(14) Planning should consider the natural topography and soil conditions in an attempt to limit the
erosion potential.
(15) Install temporary filtration measures at storm drain inlets.
(c) Effect of approval of plan.
(1) It is to be understood that the approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan by the
department of public works does not constitute recognition by the city that the erosion and
sedimentation control plan will prevent any or all public erosion nuisances. By approval of the
erosion and sedimentation control plan, the city does not warrant that the measures required by the
plan will be sufficient to prevent future public erosion nuisance, and the city waives no rights to
pursue any legal remedies, both under this article and all other applicable ordinances and laws.
(2) If for any reason, after an erosion and sedimentation control plan is approved by the department
of public works, a public erosion nuisance occurs on property addressed by said plan, the approval of
said plan shall not be a defense or bar to prosecution under this article.
(d) Construction or building activity on single lot or tract. Any construction or building activity occurring on
single lots or tracts, including home construction, home additions, commercial construction or any excavation or
fill operations which will disturb lands and expose soils to possible erosion onto public properties or rights-ofway,
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) At a minimum, erosion control devices such as silt fences, hay bales, dikes, etc., must be
installed at the perimeter of properties where erosion onto public lands or waterways is possible.
Additional measures may be required depending on the character of the property. Any control
measures must be shown on a site layout as part of construction plans or on the required building
permit application.
(2) Within 24 hours of a rainfall event, the party responsible for maintenance of erosion control
devices will inspect the project site to determine the condition and effectiveness of control devices. If
necessary, sediment will be removed and control devices repaired as soon as possible. Any control
devices deemed ineffective shall be replaced with more suitable devices.
(3) Where property adjacent to public land slopes toward said public lands on a steeper grade than
3:1 (horizontal/vertical), permanent slope stabilization measures shall be taken, [such as] retaining
walls, rock or concrete rip-rap, etc.
The approval of construction plans or a building permit does not constitute a recognition by the city that any or
all erosion nuisances will be prevented. Failure to address erosion control on any construction plans or building
permit does not relieve the applicant of responsibility to comply with the requirements of this article.
Additionally, approval of plans or a permit by the city shall not be a defense to or bar to prosecution under this
article.
(e) Disclaimer of liability. The planning considerations given in this article for erosion controls rely on a
degree of erosion and sedimentation control and flood protection that is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and that is based on scientific, engineering and economic considerations. This article does not imply
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/618
that erosion and sedimentation controls will survive inundation by runoff from storms or that land below such
controls will be absolutely free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part
of the city, or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages or erosion or sedimentation damages,
whether to persons or property, that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder. This article is not sought to be a substitute to other federal, state and local laws and regulations
concerning drainage and flood control.
(f) Stop work orders. All development, improvement and construction on any land which is in violation of the
provisions of this article may be halted and stopped by order of the director of public works. No stop work order
may be issued until the notice provisions of this article are fully complied with by the city and the owner or
agent of the premises is given a reasonable time period to correct the public erosion nuisance and to clean up and
remove the offending burdensome sedimentation.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.905)
Sec. 16.03.006 Public erosion nuisances
(a) Prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or business which owns, possesses, is in
custody of or exercises control of property to fail to prevent a public erosion nuisance from
originating on said property.
(2) A public erosion nuisance is a situation in which erosion of or sediment from one (1) location is
causing a bothersome or unsightly condition on public property and/or public rights-of-way.
(3) A bothersome or unsightly condition or burden includes silt, mud or similar debris originating
on one (1) property but being deposited onto a second off-site property which is public property or a
public right-of-way from which the city may have to remove or clean up the deposit due to liability,
statutory, aesthetic, drainage or property concerns. Examples include but are not limited to:
(A) Excessive sedimentation in storm drains, drainage easements and watercourses caused by
erosion; and
(B) Excessive sedimentation on public streets, gutters, sidewalks, alleys, easements and other
rights-of-way caused by erosion.
(b) Notice. It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his/her designee to give forty-eight (48)
hours' notice in writing to the owner or agent in charge of any premises believed to be in violation of this article
to correct the public erosion nuisance and to clean up and remove the offending and burdensome sedimentation.
However, in the event that the director of public works decides that the situation believed to be in violation of
this article poses a substantial and immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the city, the
director of public works may give such notice as he/she deems is necessary and appropriate, given the existing
circumstances and conditions, even though said notice is less than forty-eight (48) hours.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.906)
Sec. 16.03.007 Penalty
(a) Any person, firm, corporation or business violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a penalty or fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense. Each and every day such
offense is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense. In addition, the violator shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, and the city shall have the right to institute an action in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/618
district court to enjoin the violation of any provision of this article, in addition to the criminal and administrative
penalties contained herein, and the district court shall have the power to grant any and all types of injunctive
relief in such cases.
(b) Section 16.03.003 [16.03.008] also contains additional administrative penalties which apply to persons,
firms or corporations who are subdividing, developing or improving land within the city and who are subject to
the regulatory and permitting processes of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.907)
Sec. 16.03.008 Abatement of violations by city; lien for city's costs
(a) An erosion and sedimentation nuisance or violation will generally consist of two problems: (i) a failure on
private property to stabilize soils against erosion; and (ii) subsequent sedimentation onto public property causing
unsightly or bothersome situations. The city shall have the right, as set forth in this section, to remedy either or
both problems, and require the responsible party to pay the cost incurred.
(1) When deemed necessary by the director of public works and upon expiration of the notice
period required in section 16.03.006(b), if action has not begun by the party responsible for the
violation, the city may take action to remove or clean up bothersome sedimentation on public
property. The cost incurred will be billed to the responsible party and payment due within thirty (30)
days of the mailing of such statement. This action by the city is in addition to the fines that may be
levied for such violation. It should also be understood that the condition of the private property that
failed to prevent the erosion might still constitute a violation of this article.
(2) In the event that the party responsible for a violation shall fail to make his/her private property,
or property within their control, comply with this article, or begin action to cause compliance within
the notice period provided for herein, the director of public works, or his/her designee, may take
action for abatement on said private property by the city. Additional notice shall be given to the
owner by letter, addressed to him/her at the address shown on the last approved tax rolls of the city or
at the last known address. In the alternative, the city may notify the owner by publication in the city's
official newspaper on two (2) occasions. At the expiration of ten (10) days after notification or
publication, the city may enter upon such premises and may do such work as is necessary or cause the
same to be done in order that the premises may comply with the requirements set forth within this
article. A statement of the cost incurred by the city to abate such condition shall be mailed to the
owner of said premises, which statement shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing
thereof.
(b) In the event said statement has not been paid within thirty (30) days, the city manager may file a statement
with the county clerk of the expenses incurred to abate such condition on said premises, and the city shall have a
privileged lien on any lot, tract or parcel of land upon which such expense is incurred in accordance with the
provisions of section 342.007 of Vernon's Annotated Health and Safety Code, together with ten percent (10%)
[interest] on the delinquent amount from the date such payment is due. The lien shall be second only to tax liens
and liens for street improvements. For such an expenditure and interest as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and
recovery and foreclosure of said lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made,
as aforesaid, or a copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work performed
by the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 10.908)
ARTICLE 16.04 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 16.04.001 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/618
(a) Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water
Code, section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council of the city does ordain as follows.
(b) Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which
cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses
vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(c) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(d) Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following
methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 16.04.002 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/618
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at
the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/618
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally dependent use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/618
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/618
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of
the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/618
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this article. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
Sec. 16.04.003 General provisions
(a) Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the city.
(b) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
(1) The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in
the current scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Dallas
County, and Incorporated Areas,” dated July 7, 2014, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRMs) dated July 7, 2014.
(2) And any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
article.
(c) Establishment of development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this article.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 16.04.004 Administration
(a) Designation of the floodplain administrator. The managing director of public works and development
services is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/618
article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood
Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 16.04.003(b),
the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions
of section 16.04.005.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(c) Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain
administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/618
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following
information is required:
(A) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new and substantially improved structures;
(B) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 16.04.005(b)(2);
(D) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection (b)(1), above;
(2) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be
based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(F) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems;
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(H) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(d) Variance procedures.
(1) The board of adjustments shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this article.
(2) The board of adjustments shall hear and render decision on an appeal only when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator
in the enforcement or administration of this article.
(3) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustments may appeal such
decision in the district court for a review based on the record before the board of adjustment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/618
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(2) of this section have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose
and objectives of this article.
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(A) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(B) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
articles.
(C) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood
elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(11) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements
and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(A) The criteria outlined in subsections (d)(1)–(9) above, are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 16.04.005 Provisions for flood hazard reduction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/618
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided
as set forth in section 16.04.003(b), section 16.04.004(b)(8), or subsection (c)(3) below, the following provisions
are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 16.04.004(c)(1), is
satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/618
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park
or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 16.04.004(c)(1), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for “manufactured homes” as provided in this subsection.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
(c) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 16.04.001(b), (c) and (d) of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/618
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section
16.04.003(c) and the provisions of this section of this article.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater
than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 16.04.003(b)
or section 16.04.004(b)(4) of this article.
(4) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 16.04.003(b), are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (d)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance 2014-06-09 adopted 6/23/14)
CHAPTER 18
STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE 18.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 18.01.001 Construction and maintenance of bridges, culverts and crossways used for access to
private property
In order to establish, erect, construct, regulate and keep in good repair bridges, culverts and/or crossways used
by each property owner as a means of ingress and egress by and between his property and the public
thoroughfare of any nature, and to regulate the construction and use of the same, it is hereby directed that the
cost of such construction, repair and upkeep shall be defrayed by the owners of the lot or part of lot or block
fronting on the public thoroughfare. The cost of bridges, culverts and/or crossways constructed by the city shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/618
be collected, if necessary, by the sale of the lot or part of lot or block on which it fronts, together with the cost of
collection, in the same manner as is provided for construction and/or maintenance of sidewalks in the city. Said
construction shall conform to specifications set out by the city superintendent or engineer, the purpose of which
shall be to allow the free and unhindered movement of surface water in the drainage areas of the city. (2002
Code, art. 3.1000)
Sec. 18.01.002 Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, parkway areas or public grounds
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber, in whole or in part, any portion of any public
street, alleyway, sidewalk, or public property in the city with any item, whether temporary or permanent,
including but not limited to: lumber, boxes, posts, fences, basketball goals, soccer goals, and skate ramps, unless
expressly authorized by city ordinance or state law.
(b) In addition to the penalty provided for herein, if any person violates the provisions of this section, the city
has the right to remove any such obstruction or encumbrance. Any costs, charges, and expenses incurred by the
city in the removal, storage or disposal of the obstruction or encumbrance shall be a charge to and personal
liability of the violator.
(Ordinance 2017-08-29 adopted 8/14/17)
ARTICLE 18.02 ASSESSMENTS FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS†
Sec. 18.02.001 Petition for improvement
Upon receipt by the city of a petition signed by at least seventy-five (75) percent of the property owners and
owners of seventy-five (75) percent of the total front footage of property abutting upon the streets and highways
or portions thereof requested to be improved, the city will consider instituting the required procedures under the
city charter and state statutes for the construction of such improvements and the levying of paving assessments
against the abutting property for a portion of the cost of construction of such improvements. (2002 Code, sec.
3.1101)
Sec. 18.02.002 Amount of assessment; amount paid by city
In the event that it is determined by the city to construct the requested improvements, it is hereby declared to be
a policy of the city to pay for one-third (1/3) of the total cost of construction of such improvements and to levy
paving assessments for the remaining two-thirds of the cost of such improvements against the owners of
property abutting upon the streets and highways or portions thereof proposed to be improved, so that the
property abutting upon each side of the street or highway shall be assessed one-third (1/3) of the total cost of the
construction of such improvements. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1102)
Sec. 18.02.003 Levy; determination of method of payment
The city council shall determine the method of paying for such paving assessments and will levy such paving
assessments under the provisions of the city charter and V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 311. (2002
Code, sec. 3.1103)
ARTICLE 18.03 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND OTHER
STRUCTURES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18.03.001 Intent and purpose
It is the intent and purpose of this article to protect the public safety and general welfare by setting and providing
minimum standards, provisions and requirements for the construction and repair of sidewalks, driveways, curbs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/618
and gutters, setbacks, drainage facilities, pavement of public streets, highways, alleys or other public places, and
appurtenances and structures thereto, water and sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances and structures thereto,
and to provide for suitable materials and methods of construction of sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters,
setbacks, drainage facilities, pavement of public streets, highways, alleys or other public places, and
appurtenances and structures thereto, and water and sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances and structures
thereto on public property which are constructed, surfaced, paved, changed, altered, repaired, replaced, removed
or eliminated or changed in use, and to [for] sidewalks, garage floors and driveways on private property when
poured in conjunction with the construction of new houses, apartments or commercial buildings. This article
shall be deemed to be remedial, and is enacted for the beneficial interests of the public. Free and unhampered
passage on the streets and sidewalks shall be held paramount to other interests. (2002 Code, sec. 3.901)
Sec. 18.03.002 Definitions
(a) For the purpose of construing and enforcing this article, certain abbreviations, words, terms, phrases and
their derivatives shall be construed as set out herein unless the context indicates otherwise. Words used in the
singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the
feminine, and words in the feminine gender include the masculine. Words relating to buildings and structures on
private property and their use shall be construed to conform to the meanings set out in the building code and the
development code of the city. All other words shall have their usual meanings. When a public official is referred
to by the title of his office, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of
Lancaster or his authorized deputy” unless the context indicates otherwise.
(b) The following words, when used in this article, are defined as follows:
City manager. The city manager or his authorized representative.
Contractor. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of installing or altering walks, drives,
curbs, gutters, pavements or appurtenances on public property. This term shall also include those who represent
themselves to be engaged in the business, whether actually doing the work or not, and includes any person who
subcontracts to do such work.
Council. The city council of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Curb. A vertical or sloping member along the edge of a pavement forming part of a gutter, strengthening or
protecting the pavement edge and clearly defining the pavement edge to vehicle operators. The surface at the
curb facing the general direction of the pavement is called the “face.”
Driveway approach. An area, construction or facility between the roadway of a public street and private property
intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to private property.
Gutter. The artificially surfaced and generally shallow waterway provided usually at the side of the street
adjacent to and part of the curb for the drainage of surface water.
Intersection.
(1) The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the edge of the roadway of two (2)
or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not one such street crosses the other.
(2) Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then each crossing of
each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
Off-street parking. A type of parking wherein the maneuvering of the vehicle while parking and unparking, as
well as the actual parking itself, is done entirely on private property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/618
Person. A human being, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns; and, where the context permits, it also
includes a firm, partnership, association, or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of
the aforesaid.
Roadway. That portion of a highway, street, or road improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
In the event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” as used herein shall refer to
any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.
Sidewalk or walk. That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent
property lines, for the use of pedestrians.
Street. A term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the rightof-
way. This term shall also be used in urban areas to denote a highway or street.
Traffic island or median strip. A barrier within a roadway to exclude vehicles, designed for the purpose of
separating or directing streams of vehicular traffic.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.902)
Sec. 18.03.003 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation or others violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code. Every day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty shall be in
addition to and cumulative of the primary liability for any loss or damage resulting from defective and unsafe
conditions of sidewalks or curbs imposed by this article upon the abutting property owner of said defective and
unsafe sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveways. (2002 Code, sec. 3.910)
Sec. 18.03.004 Fees
There shall be a fee assessed for each permit for the repair or new construction of sidewalks, driveways, curbs
and/or gutters. The fee shall be as established by the city council. The permits for such work shall not be valid
until the fee has been paid. Where such concrete construction is covered by a building permit, this fee shall not
be required. (2002 Code, sec. 3.908)
Sec. 18.03.005 Variances
In unusual circumstances, the terms and provisions of this article may be varied by resolution of the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.909)
Sec. 18.03.006 Liability for damage or injury resulting from defective condition
(a) Abutting owner's liability. The abutting property owner or person, firm or corporation enjoying the use of
any property abutting on a sidewalk or curb that has become defective, and has resulted in causing damage or
injury as a result of such defective condition, shall be primarily liable in damages for any loss or damage
sustained as a result of such defective condition. The city shall not be held as assuming any such liability by
reason of inspection or reinspection authorized herein or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any access,
facilities, surfacing or appurtenance not made in accordance with standards or specifications of this article.
(b) Special user's liability. It shall be the duty of any property owner, landlord, tenant, lessee, sublessee,
person, firm or corporation making special use of any sidewalk or curb for the purpose of ingress or egress, for
loading elevators, downspout drains or any other special use of whatsoever kind or character, whether recited
herein or not, to keep said sidewalk, parkway, curb and driveway abutting said property in a good and safe
condition and free from any defects and hazards of whatsoever kind and character. Such special user shall be
liable in damages for any loss or damage sustained as a result of any defective condition of the sidewalk,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/618
driveway, curb, loading elevator, downspout drain or any other special use or facility of whatsoever kind or
character.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.903)
Sec. 18.03.007 Enforcement officers
(a) Generally. The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the code official of the city
or such other person as may be designated by the city manager, and for this purpose he shall have police power.
(b) Nonliability of code official. When action is taken by the code official or his authorized representatives to
enforce the provisions of this article, such action shall be in the name of and on behalf of the city, and the code
official or his representatives so acting for the city shall not render themselves personally liable for any damage
which may accrue to persons or property as a result of any action committed in good faith in the discharge of
their duties, and any suit brought against the code official or his representative by reason thereof shall be
defended by the city attorney throughout the proceedings.
(c) Authority of code official.
(1) The code official shall have authority to take the legal steps necessary to secure compliance
with the provisions of this article.
(2) The code official or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter any premises in the
discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test, or
otherwise to ensure compliance with this article.
(3) The code official shall have the power to inspect or reinspect surfacing and the laying of
surfacing materials, and to issue notices or affix them to premises, or to reject surfacing materials not
meeting the standards provided herein, and shall have such other powers as are provided in this
article. The code official shall have the power to control and regulate improvements and facilities
placed upon public property and the power to cause to be removed all obstructions and
encroachments not in conformance with a valid permit and the requirements herein.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.904(a)–(c))
Sec. 18.03.008 Bond
(a) Required; conditions. No person, firm or corporation, or any of their agents, servants or employees, shall
construct, reconstruct or repair any public sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway approach in the city without
executing and delivering to the city a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), payable to the city,
with a good and sufficient corporate surety thereon, authorized to do business in the state, which bond shall be
conditioned as follows:
(1) Said bond shall be conditioned that all work shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner,
and that such person, firm or corporation shall faithfully and strictly comply with the specifications
and with the terms of such ordinances, resolutions or regulations that may be passed by the governing
body governing and relating to the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters
or driveway approaches, and that the city shall be fully indemnified and be held whole and harmless
from any and all costs, expenses or damage, whether real or asserted, on account of any injury done
to any person or property in the prosecution of said work or that may arise out of or be occasioned by
the performance of said work. Said bond shall be conditioned further that the same person, firm or
corporation shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the work was done, maintain all
such construction for a period of one (1) year from the date of such construction, reconstruction or
repair, to the satisfaction of the city manager at any time within one (1) year after the construction,
reconstruction or repair of such facility, and after ten (10) days' notice from the city manager to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/618
reconstruct or repair the same, and the opinion of the city manager as to the necessity of such
reconstruction or repair shall be binding on the parties thereto, which bond shall for such purpose be
in force for one (1) year after the construction, reconstruction or repair of such facility, and one
recovery shall not exhaust said bond, but such bond shall be a continuing obligation against the
sureties thereon until the entire amount therein provided for shall have been exhausted. In case the
bond herein provided for shall be decreased on account of any recovery which may be obtained,
arising out of the violation of any condition of the same, the governing body shall require, upon
notice to it of such fact, an additional bond to be given by any person, firm or corporation in
accordance with this article in an amount sufficient, when added to the unexhausted amount of the
original bond, to be at all times equal to the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The city may,
for itself or for the use and benefit of any person injured or damaged by reason of any defective
construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway approach by any
person, firm or corporation, maintain suit on said bond in any court having jurisdiction thereof, or suit
may be maintained thereon by any person injured or damaged by reason of the failure of any person,
firm or corporation who shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway
approach in the city to observe the conditions of said bond; provided, however, that nothing in this
article shall affect the bond of any person, firm or corporation now engaged in constructing,
reconstructing or repairing such facilities which have already been executed in accordance with the
terms of the existing city ordinance, nor shall this be construed to in any manner diminish the liability
of any surety or principal on said bond. No person, firm or corporation having a bond to construct,
reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveways on public property
within the city shall be permitted to take out a permit for the reconstruction, alteration or repair of any
such facility on any public property within the city and allow any person other than the bona fide
holder of such bond to do any of the work. No permit for the reconstruction, alteration or repair of
any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway on any public property within the city shall be granted unless
the one-year maintenance bond provided for herein shall be in full force and effect at the time of
request for such permit and the doing of the work. A certificate of general liability insurance may be
substituted in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with the approval of the code
official.
(2) It shall be an affirmative defense to the aforementioned bond requirement for a homeowner
who resides at his property as his homestead to file an affidavit with the code official stating that he is
the owner of the property, that he resides there as his homestead and that he is performing the work
himself.
(b) Liability. This article shall not be construed to relieve from or to lessen the responsibility or liability for
damages of any person owning, controlling or installing any surfaces to persons or property caused by a defect
therein.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.904(d), (e))
Sec. 18.03.009 Permit
(a) Required. No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove, replace, pave,
repave, surface or resurface any walk, drive, curb, gutter, paved area or appurtenance on public property in the
city without first obtaining from the code official a permit to do so.
(b) Application. To obtain a permit as required by this article, the bonded contractor or his authorized
representative shall file with the code official an application in writing therefor on a form to be furnished for that
purpose. Such bonded contractor shall be registered with the code official and the contractor shall furnish a list
of the authorized representatives who are to secure permits for him. Each application for a permit shall describe
the abutting property adjacent to which the proposed work on public property is to be done, either by lot, block
or tract and house number, location on the street or similar description which will readily identify and definitely
locate the site of the proposed work. Each applicant shall give such other pertinent information as shall be
required by the code official. Where the contractor is required by regulations adopted under city council
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/618
Resolution No. 14-83 to furnish a performance bond, then the requirement for a permit under this clause will be
waived.
(c) Lot or plot plan. When required by the code official, an applicant for a permit shall file a lot or plot plan
showing the following:
(1) The exact location of the proposed building or structure;
(2) Every existing building or structure on abutting property;
(3) Every existing facility on public property adjacent thereto, to the centerline of the street rightof-
way;
(4) All proposed walks, drives, curbs, gutters, pavements, public utility poles, fire hydrants, gas
meters, water meters, storm sewer inlets, manholes or any other appurtenances.
Such plan shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature,
character and extent of the work proposed, and shall show in detail that the works will conform to this article and
to all related ordinances, rules and regulations, including the subdivision regulations and city council Resolution
No. 14-83. Plans submitted at the time a plot is submitted for approval under the subdivision regulation
ordinance shall meet requirements of this article, the requirements of the subdivision regulations and the
requirements of city council Resolution No. 14-83. Plans submitted at the time an application is made as
provided in the building code of the city for construction on abutting property may be used to meet this
requirement.
(d) Expiration. Each permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized therein is not
commenced within six (6) months of the date of the permit or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended
or abandoned after the expiration of the initial six-month period. Before the work may be recommenced, a new
permit shall be obtained. No permit issued in violation of this article shall operate as granting any vested right,
and such permit shall be deemed to be null and void and confer no right whatsoever under it.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.904(f)–(i))
Sec. 18.03.010 Responsibility for repair
When a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter or appurtenance becomes defective, unsafe or hazardous, it shall be the
duty of the owner of the abutting property to reconstruct or repair same, and the expense of such work shall be
borne by the abutting property owner. When a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter or appurtenance is found to be
defective, unsafe or hazardous, the code official shall notify the owner of the abutting property to reconstruct or
repair same. Any owner who fails to reconstruct or repair such defective, unsafe or hazardous condition within
thirty (30) days from the date of the written notice from the code official to do so shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (2002 Code, sec. 3.906(a))
Sec. 18.03.011 Restoration of curb when driveway approach is abandoned
Whenever the use of any driveway approach is abandoned and no longer used for vehicular access to the
abutting property, it shall be the duty of the abutting property owner to restore the curb according to the
standards provided in this article. (2002 Code, sec. 3.906(b))
Sec. 18.03.012 Placing or dropping concrete or mortar on pavement
It shall be unlawful for any person to mix concrete or mortar or any mixture or substance containing cement on
any existing pavement on public property or to leave or cause to be left any excess concrete or mortar or any
mixture or substance containing cement on any existing pavement on public property or to allow same to leak or
fall from any container or receptacle onto pavement on public property. If any concrete, mortar or any mixture or
substance containing cement is accidentally dropped or placed upon any pavement on public property within the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/618
city, the person responsible shall immediately remove same before said substance hardens or sets on the
pavement. (2002 Code, sec. 3.906(c))
Sec. 18.03.013 Covers for downspout drains under sidewalks
Whenever water from roofs of adjacent buildings is drained or conducted under sidewalks from downspout
drains to the street gutters through aqueducts or concrete troughs, these openings in the sidewalk shall be fitted
with strong metal covers which shall be securely held in place with screws or other fasteners which will not rust
or corrode. Such cover shall be set flush with the surface of the sidewalk and securely bolted, fastened or so
constructed that it cannot slip, shift or become out of alignment with the surface of the sidewalk. (2002 Code,
sec. 3.906(d))
Sec. 18.03.014 Alternate materials and methods
The provisions of this article shall not prevent the use of types of construction or materials or methods of
construction offered as an alternate for the types of construction or materials or methods of construction
specifically required by this article, but such alternate types of construction or materials or methods of
construction to be given consideration shall be offered for approval as being sufficient, safe and equal to the
standards set out in this article. When specifically authorized by the code official, upon review of the access
facilities by the city manager and of the types of construction or materials or methods of construction by the city
manager, materials and construction which have been approved shall be used and installed in accordance with
the terms of approval. Such approvals and the conditions upon which they are issued shall be specific, shall be
reasonable when considered in the light of convenience and safety to the general public, shall not create an
injustice, and shall be made a matter of public record. (2002 Code, sec. 3.907)
Secs. 18.03.015–18.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Standards and Specifications
Sec. 18.03.041 Materials
Materials used in sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters, setbacks, drainage facilities, pavement of public
streets, highways, alleys or other public places and appurtenances and structures thereto shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the construction specifications, design criteria standards and specifications provided by
city council Resolution No. 14-83. (2002 Code, sec. 3.905(a))
Sec. 18.03.042 Sidewalks
(a) Sidewalks, public, private and including lead walks, shall be constructed with a minimum thickness of four
(4) inches. They shall utilize NCTCOG class A concrete with 3000 psi and #3 steel bar reinforcement laid on a
spacing of eighteen (18) inch centers each direction and tied at all cross-sections, greased smooth dowels every
twenty (20) feet with an approved expansion joint material. Every four (4) feet on four (4) foot wide sidewalks,
or five (5) feet on every five (5) foot wide sidewalks, shall have a concrete joint.
(b) Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width. The sidewalk shall be located on the city parkway
adjacent to the private property line. Sidewalks shall be graded at one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot such that the
sidewalk at the property line shall be no greater than two and one-half (2-1/2) inches higher than the top of curb
on a typical ten (10) foot parkway.
(c) All fire hydrants, streetlights and utility poles that conflict with sidewalks or barrier-free ramps shall be
relocated at the utility contractor's expense.
(d) Entrances to sidewalks and streets or approaches shall meet the current Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/618
(2002 Code, sec. 3.905(b))
Sec. 18.03.043 Driveways
(a) Residential driveways. Residential driveways shall be dowelled into alley or street approaches.
(1) General standards. All approaches shall be constructed of six (6) inch thick NCTCOG class A
reinforced concrete pavement with number three (#3) steel bars on eighteen (18) inch centers each
way. The driveway approach shall begin at the street curb and extend to the property line. The
driveway approach shall be constructed such that the height of the drive approach at the property
ROW with a normal ten (10) feet parkway shall be two and one-half (2-1/2) inches higher than the
top of the curb. Two-foot asphalt transition shall be required on asphalt streets.
(2) Width of driveway approaches. Residential driveway approaches shall not be less than twelve
(12) feet in width nor more than twenty (20) feet wide measured at the property line. Specific
variance to this criteria may be requested by the property owner. Any variance granted based on a
specific design submittal must have the approval of the public works department.
(3) Radius. Residential driveways shall be constructed with the return curbs having a rolled face
disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the street curb with a minimum five (5) foot radius with a
typical ten (10) foot radius requirement.
(4) Provision for joint approaches. Driveway approaches shall be located entirely within the
frontage of the premises they serve, except that joint or cooperative driveways with adjoining
property holders may be permitted and may be required by the public works director. When the joint
drive approach is proposed by the developer, the request must be made by all the interested parties
and all property owners involved. The design of the joint driveway facilities must be submitted with
the request to be approved by the public works director.
(5) Driveway approaches for corner lots. The drive approach on corner lots must be located to
approximately line up with the side of the house or garage that is farthest from the intersection. The
drive approach edge farthest from the street intersection must be within three (3) feet of the far side
of the house or garage.
Only drive approaches in accordance with the above criteria will be allowed onto residential streets or the minor
street at a street intersection. If both streets are residentially classified, a circular drive will be allowed on a
corner lot if one of its two approaches meets the above location criteria. The other drive approach can have its
near side no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the property corner closest to the intersection. If both streets
have the same classification, other than residential per the currently adopted city thoroughfare plan, the public
works director shall make the determination as to which street access will be allowed.
(b) Commercial/industrial driveway approaches.
(1) General standards. Commercial and industrial driveway approaches shall be constructed of six
(6) inch thick NCTCOG class A concrete with #3 steel bars on eighteen (18) inch centers each way.
The driveway shall begin at the curb of the street and extend to the property line. The drive approach
shall be constructed such that the height of the drive approach at the property line shall be two and
one-half (2-1/2) inches higher than the top of curb at the street. Radius and width of approaches shall
meet the city design guidelines. Maximum width shall be reviewed and approved by city staff.
(2) Width of driveway approach. The width of any commercial or industrial driveway approach
shall not be less than thirty-five (35) feet measured along the property line. Specific variance to this
criteria may be requested by the developer. Any variance granted based upon a specific design
submittal must have the approval of the city manager or city manager's designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/618
(3) Radius. Commercial and industrial driveways shall be constructed with the return curbs having
a rolled face disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the street curb with a minimum ten (10) foot
radius and a maximum thirty (30) foot radius. Fire lanes shall have a turning radius of thirty (30) feet.
(4) Allowable spacing for driveway approaches. On streets classified as collector streets, the
minimum centerline spacing between driveways shall be at least the minimum lot width for the
zoning district in which the use of the driveway is proposed. On streets classified as arterials,
minimum spacing shall be per the general design standards and approved by the public works
director. This arterial spacing criteria shall be applied irrespective of the number of individual
properties located within the intervening distance. Deviation from this criteria may be requested by
the developer. Any deviation granted will be based on a specific design submittal and must have the
approval of the public works director.
(5) Provision for joint approaches. Driveway approaches shall be located entirely within the
frontage of the premises and shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from each side property line,
except that joint or cooperative drive approaches with adjoining property holders may be permitted in
order to conform with the provisions of subsection (4) above. Any request for joint drive access must
be by agreement of all parties involved and a specific plan submittal must be included for approval of
the public works director. Both properties will be required to dedicate public ingress and egress
easements to cover the approach and joint access area and must be filed on the plat and filed with the
county court of records and one copy of this record must be submitted to the city.
(6) Driveway approaches on corner lots. The driveway for the corner lot, if allowed, must be
located a minimum of the lot width for the zoning district in which the use of the driveway is
proposed from the point of intersection of the curblines of both streets.
(7) Angle of driveway approach. The angle of the driveway approach with the curbline shall be
ninety degrees (90°).
(8) Sidewalk to be removed. Where a driveway approach is to be built, the sidewalk shall be
removed and the entire area replaced as a driveway. The drive approach shall extend to the property
line. The sidewalk removed shall be tied back into the approach by 18 inches on center, and meet
American Disabilities with Act (ADA) requirements to be barrier-free.
(c) Driveways crossing bar ditches.
(1) Culvert pipe. The minimum twelve-inch (12") culvert pipe size of inside diameter will be
determined based upon the drainage area that it serves. The ends of all culvert pipes shall be cut at a
6:1 slope.
(2) Radius. Driveways shall be constructed with the return curbs joining the edge of pavement at
the street with a minimum five (5) foot radius.
(3) Sloped area around culvert pipe. The maximum slope from the edge of the driveway to the top
of the culvert pipe shall be 3:1. The sloped area around the end of the culvert pipe shall be sodded or
hydromulched to resist erosion. Safety devices shall be installed as required by the design engineer.
(4) Cross-slope; longitudinal slope. The minimum cross-slope on the drive shall be 1/8 inch per
foot. The minimum longitudinal slope between the edge of pavement at the street and the valley over
the culvert pipe shall be 1/4 inch per foot.
(5) Maintenance. Future maintenance of the drive approach, sidewalks and culvert pipe is the
responsibility of the property owner.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/618
(6) Ditch grading. During the drive approach installation, all ditch grading upstream and
downstream of the proposed driveway culvert is the responsibility of the property owner, approved by
the city.
(d) General standards.
(1) Driveway approaches at street intersections or pedestrian crossings. Driveway approaches shall
not be located in street intersections or at established pedestrian crossings.
(2) Driveway approaches near obstructions. Driveways shall be kept at a minimum of five (5) feet
away from obstructions such as streetlight posts, fire hydrants, traffic signals, etc.
(3) Driveway approach not to be obstructed. Driveway approaches shall not be constructed or
designed for parking of vehicles or for use as angle parking.
(4) Accumulative width of driveway approaches. Driveway approaches shall not occupy more than
forty (40) percent of the frontage of a lot or tract unless approved by the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.905(c))
Sec. 18.03.044 Curbs and gutters
Curbs, curbs and gutters, and separate gutters shall comply with all applicable standards, details and
specifications adopted by city council Resolution No. 14-83. (2002 Code, sec. 3.905(d))
Sec. 18.03.045 General installation standards
The installation of walks, drives, curbs, gutters, drainage facilities, pavements and appurtenances and water and
sewer lines and appurtenances shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Approval of materials. No materials of any kind shall be used until they have been examined
and approved by the city manager or his authorized representative. The contractor shall furnish the
required samples for the making of tests and other required examinations prior to the use of same.
(2) Alignment and grade. The work authorized by such permits shall be aligned with the stakes and
set to the grade as approved by the city manager.
(3) Stakes. Stakes approved by the city manager shall be protected by the contractor.
(4) Lights and guards. The contractor shall provide necessary red lanterns and flares and
safeguards so placed that pedestrians will not be injured and vehicular traffic shall not be
unnecessarily impeded and be protected from injury. Provisions shall be made for the passage of
water in the street gutter.
(5) Cleanup. Immediately upon completion of the work, the contractor shall remove from the area
all unused material, dirt, debris and loose concrete. He shall see that the entire area is broom-clean
and usable.
(6) Retaining walls, fences, etc., on public property. No buttresses, steps, projections, retaining
walls or fences shall be constructed on any public property unless such construction is approved by
the city.
(7) Nameplate. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be marked by means of a suitable stamp or die of
a design approved by the code official, making an impression in the finish with the contractor's name
and the month and the year the work is done. No lettering or signs shall be imprinted in the surfacing
material except as above mentioned.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/618
(2002 Code, sec. 3.905(e))
Sec. 18.03.046 Access to abutting property
Walks, curbs, gutters, pavements and appurtenances on public property, and other facilities to provide access to
abutting property, shall be constructed, provided or repaired in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Residential driveway approaches. Residential driveway approaches shall comply with the
following standards:
(A) Width of driveway approach. Residential driveway approaches shall not be less than ten
(10) feet nor more than thirty (30) feet in width measured at the property line.
(B) Radius. Residential driveway approaches shall be constructed with the return curbs
having a rolled face disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the street curb with a five-foot
minimum radius, except that on major thoroughfares the minimum radius shall be ten (10) feet.
(C) Sidewalk to be removed. Where the residential driveway approach is designed to cross an
existing sidewalk, the sidewalk included in the driveway approach area shall be removed and
reconstructed as a driveway approach.
(D) Curb and gutter to be removed. Where a driveway approach is to be constructed at a
location where there exists a curb and gutter, the curb and gutter shall be removed to the nearest
construction joint, the steel exposed and tied into the new steel. The driveway approach shall
extend to the back side of the existing or future sidewalk.
(2) Commercial driveway approaches. Walks, drives, curbs, gutters, pavements and appurtenances
on public property, and other facilities to provide access to premises used for other than residential
purposes, shall be constructed, provided or repaired in accordance with the following standards and
requirements, except on state or federal highways, freeways or interstate routes and city major
thoroughfares of right-of-way width of eighty (80) feet or more:
(A) Width of driveway approach. The width of any commercial driveway approach shall be
not less than twelve (12) feet nor more than forty (40) feet measured along the property line,
except that driveway approaches for motor vehicle docks within a building shall not exceed
sixty (60) feet in width at the property line. Where more dock space is required, the driveway
approaches shall be separated by a traffic island meeting the standards set out in subsection (2)
(D) below. On state and federal highways, freeways or interstate routes and city major
thoroughfares of right-of-way width of eighty (80) feet or more, driveway approaches shall be
according to the current state highway department standard regulations for access driveways to
state highways as to design only. All materials and methods of construction shall conform to
this article.
(B) Maximum space to be occupied by driveway approaches. Driveway approaches shall not
occupy more than seventy (70) percent of the frontage abutting the roadway of the tract of
ground devoted to one use which abuts the roadway.
(C) Number of driveway approaches allowed. Not more than two (2) driveway approaches
shall be permitted on any parcel of property with a frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet or
less. Additional openings for parcels of property having a frontage of one hundred fifty (150)
feet or less may be permitted after proof to the city manager of necessity and convenience to the
public.
(D) Separation between driveway approaches. When more than one (1) driveway approach is
required to serve a parcel of property, a traffic island shall separate the driveway approaches.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/618
The width of the traffic island at the property line shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
Where the grade at the property line is the same as the sidewalk, a six-inch raised curb shall be
constructed at the back of the traffic island along the property line and on private property. The
raised curb shall be constructed so as to end twenty-four (24) inches from the intersection of the
driveway approach with the property line.
(E) Provision for joint approaches. Driveway approaches shall be located entirely within the
frontage of the premises abutting the work and shall be located not less than five (5) feet from
each side of the property line, except that joint driveway approaches with adjoining property
holders may be permitted provided joint application is made by all interested parties and the
width set out in subsection (A) above is not exceeded.
(F) Angle of driveway approach. The angle of the driveway approach with the curbline shall
be not less than forty-five (45) degrees.
(G) Radius. Commercial driveway approaches shall be constructed with the return curbs
having a roll face disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the street curb with a twenty-foot
minimum radius.
(H) Sidewalk to be removed. Where a commercial driveway approach is to be built, the
sidewalk shall be removed and the entire area replaced as a driveway. The driveway approach
shall extend to the back side of the existing or future sidewalk.
(I) Curb and gutter to be removed. Where a driveway approach is to be constructed at a
location where there exists a curb and gutter, said curb and gutter shall be removed to the
nearest construction joint. The driveway approach shall extend to the back side of the existing
or future sidewalk.
(J) Driveway approaches near intersections. Where existing right-of-way permits, driveway
approaches nearest an intersection of two (2) streets shall meet the following minimum
requirements: The corner rounding shall have curbs constructed with a minimum radius of
twenty (20) feet continuously between the points of tangency of the curblines of both streets.
The first driveway may start from the point of tangency of the curbline and corner radius and be
cut in with a five-foot minimum radius.
(K) Driveway approaches near roadway facilities. Driveway approaches at or near streets and
traffic interchanges, grade separations and traffic circles shall be so located that traffic entering
or leaving the street will not impede, confuse, imperil or otherwise interfere with vehicular
traffic.
(L) Driveway approaches at street intersections or pedestrian crossings. Driveway approaches
shall not be located at street intersections or at established pedestrian crossings.
(M) Driveway approaches in angle parking areas. Driveway approaches shall not be
constructed in existing angle parking areas, except when the curb is restored to its normal
location along the roadway in front of the premises.
(N) Driveway approach not to be obstructed. Driveway approaches shall not be constructed
or designed for use for the standing or parking of vehicles or for use as angle parking.
(O) Premises used as motor vehicle service stations or parking lots. Premises used as motor
vehicle service stations or parking lots shall have a six-inch raised curb or other approved traffic
barrier along the entire street frontage except at the driveway approaches and access walks. The
curb shall be placed so that automobile bumpers shall not extend over the sidewalk or public
property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/618
(P) Additional standards. The pavement of public streets, highways, alleys or other public
places, and appurtenances and structures thereto, construction of drainage facilities, and
construction of water and sewer lines and appurtenances and structures thereto shall be in
accordance with applicable sections of the city subdivision regulations and/or city council
Resolution No. 14-83 for construction specifications, design criteria and general design
standards.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.905(f))
ARTICLE 18.04 EXCAVATIONS AND EMBANKMENTS
Sec. 18.04.001 Penalty
(a) Any person who shall make any cut or excavation in, through or under any public place or public easement
or the right-of-way of any public street or alley in the city, except as specifically otherwise provided for by
ordinance, shall constitute a class C misdemeanor.
(b) Any person who shall be found guilty of violating any provisions or requirements of this article shall upon
conviction be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this
code.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1203)
Sec. 18.04.002 General provisions
(a) Permit required; emergency work. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
excavation or embankment in any street, avenue, alley or public easement in the city without first obtaining a
written permit from the city. Provided, however, that emergency repairs or emergency replacement of existing
utilities so as to prevent the interruption of necessary services, which may require excavation off of the traveled
portion of streets, avenues or alleys, but within public easements or rights-of-way in the city, may be made
without the prior obtaining of a written permit from the city; provided, further, that in such emergency
circumstances such permits shall be immediately thereafter obtained as soon as practicable.
(b) Design and construction standards. All improvements constructed, altered or maintained within the public
right-of-way of streets and alleys or any public easement shall be accomplished in accordance with this article,
all other applicable city ordinances and state statutes, the city's General Design Manual, Manual for the Design
of the Storm Drainage System, and the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(c) Consent of city required. No person shall place, construct or erect any temporary or permanent object or
structure within, upon, along or across any public street, alley, right-of-way or any public easement in the city,
including the land located between the property line of a lot, tract or parcel and the adjacent curb, and, if no curb
exists, then to a line ten feet (10') from the edge of the street pavement toward the property line, without the
consent of the city, unless otherwise allowed by law.
(d) Administration of construction. The director of public works shall administer the construction of
improvements within the public right-of-way.
(e) Nonliability of city. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any city official or
employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any
construction or excavation work for which a permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the city or any official or
employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections
authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
(f) Removal of hazards. In case any improvement has become a hazard, the city may remove such
improvement and replace it with improvements that mitigate the hazard and are in compliance with this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/618
(g) Subdivision improvements agreement. Prior to approval and recording of the final plat or replat of any
subdivision for which improvements are required by the city, there shall be a subdivision improvements
agreement executed by the developer and the city, setting forth the improvements required in connection with
said subdivision. Such improvements shall include street, alley, water, sewer, drainage and any other applicable
public improvements. The subdivision improvements agreement shall grant a contract lien to the city upon the
property contained in the subdivision securing the costs and expenses of installing and constructing the required
subdivision improvements. In lieu of the requirement for a lien in the subdivision improvements agreement, the
developer shall have the option of securing the estimated costs and expenses for the required subdivision
improvements by a bank escrow agreement, a bank letter of credit, the deposit with the city of a bank cashier's
check, a developer's subdivision bond or any other security device approved by the city council at the time of its
approval and ratification of the subdivision improvements agreement.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1201)
Sec. 18.04.003 Permit required; exemptions; fees
(a) Permit required. All construction within the public right-of-way, including the opening of any street,
sidewalk or other area under the custody or control of the city, is prohibited unless a permit therefor has first
been obtained from the director of public works of the city as herein provided or unless the work is specifically
exempt therefrom as provided in this section.
(b) Exemptions.
(1) Work done by the city or under city contract and under direction of the city is exempt from the
permit fee provisions of this article, but such work must be done in compliance with all of the other
provisions of this article.
(2) Work done by public utility companies operating under a current license, permit or franchise
from the city or contractors for such public utility company is exempt from the permit fee provisions
of this article, but such work must be done in compliance with all of the other provisions of this
article.
(3) Work done by governmental agencies or by contractors under contract and under supervision of
governmental agencies is exempt from the permit fee provisions of this article, but such work must be
done in compliance with all of the other provisions of this article.
(4) Work done pursuant to a single-family, duplex or townhouse permit obtained under the
development code is exempt from the permit requirements of this section, but any work done within
the public right-of way must conform to the applicable provisions of this article.
(c) Permit fees; bond. Permit fees shall be as established by the city council. Such fee, if paid by check,
money order, bank draft or other negotiable instrument, shall be made payable to the city treasurer. If paid by
cash, such cash shall be remitted daily to the city treasurer, who shall deposit it to the credit of the general fund.
The construction bond for work in a city right-of-way shall be a $10,000.00 bond amount, or a $2,000.00 bond
amount where work is not to exceed $2,000.00 in value for any one permit that may be acquired for that work
within the right-of-way.
(d) Damage restoration fee.
(1) All persons making a cut in the street pavement shall pay a street cut damage restoration fee.
This fee shall be based on the size of the cut, recognizing that for each cut there is an “area of
influence” extending 21" laterally from each edge of the cut that is damaged by the cut and the cost of
the repair, according to the following formula: (Length of Cut + 3.5') x (Width of Cut + 3.5') minus
(Length of Cut x Width of Cut) x Cost Per Square Foot = Damage Restoration Fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/618
(2) Persons making cuts in the street shall have the option of repairing the “area of influence” at
the same time as they repair the actual permitted cut, by following the rules prescribed by the director
of public works for repair of pavement cuts; in such cases the damage restoration fee shall be reduced
by 60%. It is recognized that street surfaces more than five (5) years of age have a depreciated value,
and the damage restoration fee shall be reduced by 40% for cuts in street surfaces greater than five
(5) years old. The calculation of the reduced damage restoration fee shall be rounded to the nearest
one-half dollar.
(3) The monies collected shall be placed in the general fund, designated for street preservation, and
shall be used for the cost of resurfacing the streets of the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1202(a))
Sec. 18.04.004 Application for permit; issuance; bond and insurance requirements
(a) Application for permit.
(1) No permit hereunder shall be issued unless a written application as promulgated for the
issuance of said permit is submitted to the director of public works, the permit to contain such
information as may be required by the director of public works.
(2) Two (2) sets of plans or sketches must be submitted showing the extent of the proposed work
and/or such other information as may be required under the circumstances by the city.
(b) Issuance of permit.
(1) The director of public works shall issue a permit hereunder, after receipt of a proper
application, plans, permit fee and proper bond and insurance certificates, provided that the director of
public works is convinced that the submitted plans for construction will meet all requirements of this
article and other applicable city and state laws.
(2) Upon approval of the permit, the director of public works shall deliver to the applicant such
permit with one set of plans for the proposed work indicating approval thereon, any revisions
required in the proposed work and grades and/or benchmarks necessary for compliance with the city
design requirements. Where there are special conditions, practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the way of literal enforcement of the strict letter and provisions of this article, the
director of public works is hereby authorized to vary the application of any such provisions in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article, but consistent with the public interest,
safety and general welfare. Any substantial variances shall be in writing and shall be specifically
noted in the permit issued by the director of public works.
(c) Emergency action. In the event of any emergency in which a water or sewer main, conduit or other utility
in or under any street breaks or is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety
of any individual, the person causing or knowing of such damage, break or condition shall immediately notify
the owner of such facility of such fact, and the person owning or controlling such water or sewer main, conduit
or other utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, shall immediately take
proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life,
health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility, unless exempt under
this article, shall apply for a permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the director of
public works office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining a
permit hereunder.
(d) Construction bond. Before a construction permit as herein provided is issued to an applicant, a bond in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be provided to the city. A bond of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) will be permitted where the work to be performed by the applicant shall not exceed two thousand
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/618
dollars ($2,000.00) in value for any one permit that may acquired for that work within the right-of-way. The
required bond must be:
(1) With a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do business in the state;
(2) Duly completed on a form prescribed and furnished by the city;
(3) Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance and performance in accordance with the Code of
Ordinances and the specifications of the city; and the bond is further conditioned that the permittee
shall restore and place in a good and safe condition, as near as practical to original condition, all
openings and excavations made in all streets, alleys or other public right-of-way. An annual bond
may be given under these provisions which shall remain in force for a period of one year from the
date of the initial permit granted hereunder, or until all work in the public right-of-way under any
permit granted during the year after the date of the original permit has been completed.
Construction contractors who have provided bonds of greater amount under the terms of a contract with the city
or other governmental agency are exempt from additional bond requirements under this subsection.
(e) Public liability insurance.
(1) Before work may begin under a permit issued in accordance with this section, the permittee
shall file with the director of public works, and thereafter keep in full force and effect throughout the
time of work, a policy or policies for comprehensive general liability insurance, issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state, which policy shall be performable in the
county, insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property
caused by the negligent or willful acts of said permittee or his agents or employees in the construction
of or growing out of the construction of said work. The maximum amount of recovery under such
insurance policy shall not be less than the following sums for damages caused by the construction of
said work:
(A) For bodily injury or death in any one occurrence and in the aggregate, three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00);
(B) For the injury or destruction of property in any one occurrence and in the aggregate, fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
(2) All insurance policies shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereon up to the full
amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. It shall be the duty of the permittee and the
surety to give notice to the city, by filing written notice with the director of public works, of the
expiration of the policy, at least ten (10) days before the expiration thereof.
(3) Construction contractors who have provided public liability insurance of greater amounts under
the terms of a contract with the city or other governmental agency are exempt from additional
requirements under this subsection.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1202(b))
Sec. 18.04.005 Safety precautions
(a) Barricades. When an excavation is made in any street, sidewalk or public place in the city, the person by or
for whom such excavation is made shall cause a rail or other sufficient fence to be placed and fixed so as to
enclose such excavation, and the dirt, ground or other material thrown into the street therefrom, and such
protection shall be continued during the whole time such excavation shall be open.
(b) Lights. At night, a sufficient number of marker lights shall be fixed to some part of the rail or fence
required by subsection (a), or placed in some other proper manner over or near such excavation, and the dirt,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/618
gravel or other material taken from the same, to warn pedestrians and drivers of the existence of such
excavation, dirt, gravel and materials and the danger therefrom. Such lights shall be kept so lighted from twilight
through the whole of the night, and shall be continued every evening and night such excavation is open and until
such dirt, gravel or other material has been removed.
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1202(c))
Sec. 18.04.006 Responsibility for work
Every holder of a permit for opening shall, by himself, his agent, servant, contractor or employee, cause every
excavation where openings are made to be neatly cut, thoroughly filled with approved sub-base material, tamped
and resurfaced, and therefrom remove all surplus material, all such work to be subject to the inspection and
approval of the director of public works. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1202(d))
Sec. 18.04.007 Unlawful excavations
The excavation of any street, sidewalk or public place within the city or digging below the surface thereof
without complying with all the provisions of this article shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law,
constitute a street obstruction subject to removal as provided in this article. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1202(e))
Sec. 18.04.008 Color coding of excavations
Persons making excavations covered by this article shall cause the perimeter of said excavations to be spray
painted according to the following schedule:
Color Type
Blue Water
Green Sanitary sewer
Color Type
Yellow Natural gas, oil, steam
Red Electric
Orange Telephone/television
Pink Temporary survey markings
White Proposed excavation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/618
(2002 Code, sec. 3.1202(f))
Sec. 18.04.009 Indemnification of city
A condition of each and every permit issued pursuant to this article is that the applicant shall protect and save
harmless the city, its agents, servants and employees from any and all liability for injuries to persons or property
resulting from or caused by any activities associated with and authorized by the issuance of such permits, or the
excavations resulting therefrom. (2002 Code, sec. 3.1202(g))
ARTICLE 18.05 NAMING OF CITY FACILITIES POLICY
Sec. 18.05.001 Purpose
This policy is implemented to establish uniform criteria and procedures, applicable to all persons, groups, firms
and agencies, associated with the naming or renaming of city facilities, including buildings, parks, recreational
facilities, streets and other publicly owned facilities.
Sec. 18.05.002 Objective
(a) To establish a systematic and consistent approach for the official naming of city facilities.
(b) To establish a policy that considers community tradition and continuity of name, while utilizing
established criteria that emphasize geography, local history, community values and character, civics and service
to the city in the naming or renaming of municipal facilities.
Sec. 18.05.003 Scope
All city property and publicly owned rights-of-way.
Sec. 18.05.004 Policy
(a) The primary function of naming development areas, parks, municipal facilities, streets and honorary streets
is to recognize and commemorate noteworthy persons associated with the city, reflect the city's heritage, and to
recognize the flora, fauna, and natural features of the community. Streets and facilities should generally be
named after people, places and events having made a significant impact on the quality of life within the city,
and/or events of significance to the city's development.
(b) Naming criteria:
(1) Proposed names should generally met one of the following criteria:
(A) To honor and commemorate noteworthy persons or organizations who made exceptional
contributions to the city, including one or more of the following:
(i) Demonstrated excellence, courage or exceptional service to the citizens of the city
(sustained, continuous public service over a period of 25 years or two-thirds of the
person's life space);
(ii) Volunteered and gave extraordinary help or care to individuals, families or groups,
or supported community services or humanitarian causes;
(iii) Worked to foster equality and reduce discrimination;
(iv) Risked his or her life to save or protect others;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/618
(v) Achieved a deed or activity performed in an outstanding professional manner or of
an uncommonly high standard that brought considerable benefit or great honor to the city;
(vi) Made an outstanding contribution to the city;
(vii) Made a significant financial contribution to the city;
(viii) Public service as an elected official; and
(ix) Public service as a community volunteer.
(B) To commemorate local history, places, events, culture, ethnic or gender diversity of the
community, including early pioneers who have contributed significantly to the city.
(C) To strengthen neighborhood identity;
(D) To recognize native wildlife, natural features, or flora and fauna of the geographical or
topographical features related to the city.
(2) The following names shall not be used:
(A) When renaming a street, names of living persons for streets, other than a recognized
national figure;
(B) Duplicative names of streets already existing within the city;
(C) Names that are similar to existing parks, properties, or facilities in the city system (or
other systems in the region) should not be considered in order to minimize confusion;
(D) Names which are, and could be considered discriminatory or derogatory, or that express a
particular political affiliation; and
(E) Names that could be considered advertising.
(3) This policy shall not affect the platting or designation of new city streets.
(4) Requests will not be considered when submitted by an individual or a group for selfnomination.
The only exception to this policy is when a significant financial contribution is made and
the naming is a condition of the gift.
(5) There must be a well-defined connection associated with the contributions of the individuals or
community organization and the city facility.
(6) The significance of the contribution from the individual/organization needs to be evaluated in
terms of the service impact of the city facility. Programs and projects must be described in specific
quantifiable terms.
(7) Individuals and organizations that have made contributions of regional or community wide
significance may be considered for naming of facilities that serve the region or community.
(8) Individuals and organizations that have made contributions of area or neighborhood wide
significance may be considered for naming facilities that serve areas or neighborhoods within the
city.
(9) The city reserves the right to change the name to maintain consistency with these policies.
However, the city must review prior documentation for initial naming or renaming of public property
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/618
or right-of-way. Names that have become ingrained or widely accepted in the community should not
be abandoned unless council has amended current policy or there are compelling reasons and strong
public sentiment for doing so. Historical or commonly used place names should be preserved
wherever possible.
(10) When city property is named for an individual/organization, this action in no way gives the
individual, family members or organization naming rights over other features on the property.
Features within the facility or on the property will remain eligible for naming without the consent of
the individual or family members for which the property is currently named.
Sec. 18.05.005 Municipal facilities
(a) Procedures.
(1) A city council subcommittee will be formed and be responsible for recommending a name for
city facilities to the entire city council for consideration.
(2) The subcommittee will be made up five (5) individuals. Two (2) councilmembers, at least one
representative from a board or commission which oversees the city function of the city facility, and
two (2) members at-large representing the public. If a relevant advisory board or commission does
not exist, then the subcommittee will be made up of three (3) councilmembers.
(3) The appointments shall be made by the mayor subject to city council approval.
(4) The subcommittee shall be responsible for research, study, and recommendation of a proposed
name to the city council. Recommendations, including rationale for the recommendations shall be
submitted to the entire city council in writing.
(5) Any recommendation which involved the name of a person shall include the following:
(A) Application;
(B) A biographical or informational sketch;
(C) Rationale supporting the nomination; and
(D) The name(s) of the person(s) or supporting group(s) responsible for the nomination.
(6) The subcommittee shall solicit and use public input during the formation of such
recommendations.
(7) The subcommittee may also solicit and use input from city staff during the formation of such
recommendations.
(8) The subcommittee must approve the recommendation by a simple majority.
(9) The city council shall approve by resolution or disapprove the name recommended by the
subcommittee.
(10) If the recommendation(s) is disapproved by the city council, then the matter may be referred
back to the subcommittee fur further action.
(b) Guidelines.
(1) City facilities shall be named at the earliest possible and most appropriate date.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/618
(2) Facilities such as a city hall, municipal court, police station, fire station, municipal service
center, etc. shall include the name for the function that they serve to the public in order to prevent
confusion and misrepresentation of the facility's mission (such as Jane Doe Municipal Airport or John
Doe Memorial Fire Station).
(3) The subcommittee may recommend that the facility may be dedicated in honor of an individual
in lieu of naming.
(4) City facility names shall be familiar to the majority of citizens, easy to recall, and unique and
lasting.
(5) Facilities may not be named for members of the city's staff, boards and commissions, city
council, or any other official or employee (elected or otherwise) concerned with the functions and/or
control of the city, for so long as such relationship exists.
(6) Nothing herein shall be construed to require the city council to name every facility.
(7) Individual rooms, such as a conference room, etc., may be given a name which is different from
that of the overall facility. The procedure for naming such a room shall be the same as for naming an
entire facility.
(8) The subcommittee shall not contact any individuals whose names are under consideration. It
shall also keep strictly confidential all information it has received or discussed, and any
recommendation(s) it makes until such decision is taken to the entire city council for discussion and
action.
(9) Once a name has been established, the building services department will be responsible for the
installation of appropriate signage and markers.
(c) Renaming existing facilities.
(1) Proposals to rename facilities are not encouraged and should be entertained only after fully
investigating and considering potential impact of dropping the current. When appropriate, facilities
may be renamed. The procedure for doing so shall be the same for originally naming the facility.
(2) Public requests to rename existing facilities will be received by the city secretary's office and
directed to the appropriate department for further investigation and evaluation against naming
criteria.
Sec. 18.05.006 Parkland and facilities
(a) Procedures.
(1) The parks and recreation advisory board (“parks board”) may be notified of the need to name a
park or facility by the city council, city manager.
(2) The chairman of the parks board shall name a committee that will be responsible for
recommending a name for all parklands and facilities to the board.
(3) The committee shall be responsible for research, study, and recommendation of a proposed
name to the board. Recommendations, including rationale for the selection of the recommended name
shall be given in writing.
(4) Any recommendation which involved the name of a person shall include the following:
(A) Application;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/618
(B) A biographical or informational sketch;
(C) Rationale supporting the nomination; and
(D) The name(s) of the person(s) or supporting group(s) responsible for the nomination.
(5) The committee shall solicit and use public input during the formation of such
recommendations.
(6) The committee may also solicit and use input from city staff during the formation of such
recommendations.
(7) The parks board shall also solicit and use public input during the formation of such
recommendations.
(8) The parks board shall confirm or reject the name recommended by the committee.
(9) If the committee's recommendation is rejected by the parks board, then the matter may be
referred back to the committee for further action.
(10) All recommended names for such facilities must be confirmed by a majority vote of the
members of the parks board.
(11) Upon confirmation, the recommended name shall be forwarded to the city council for the
consideration and final approval.
(12) The city council shall approve by resolution or disapprove the name recommended by the
parks board.
(13) If the recommendation(s) is disapproved by the city council, then the matter may be referred
back to the parks board for further action.
(b) Guidelines.
(1) Names for new parks shall typically be established within 90 days from the date of land
acquisition or at the earliest possible time. The name of new facilities shall be established prior to the
completion of construction. Names for parts or areas of parks and facilities may be established at any
time.
(2) The committee may recommend that the facility may be dedicated in honor of an individual in
lieu of naming.
(3) Parkland and facility names shall be familiar to the majority of citizens, easy to recall, and
unique and lasting.
(4) Facilities may not be named for members of the city's staff, boards and commissions, city
council, or any other official or employee (elected or otherwise) concerned with the functions and/or
control of the city, for so long as such relationship exists.
(5) Nothing herein shall be construed to require the city council to name every facility.
(6) Parts or areas within the park or recreation facility may be given a name which is different than
the park or building. Such parts or areas may include (but are not to be limited to) gardens,
playgrounds, athletic fields, structures, swimming pools and meeting rooms. Names for such facilities
shall be established by the same criteria and procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/618
(7) The committee shall not contact any individuals whose names are under consideration. It shall
also keep strictly confidential all information it has received or discussed, and any
recommendation(s) it makes until such decision is taken to the entire city council for discussion and
action.
(8) Once a name has been established, the director of quality of life and cultural services will be
responsible for the installation of appropriate signage and markers.
(c) Renaming existing facilities.
(1) Proposals to rename facilities are not encouraged and should be entertained only after fully
investigating and considering potential impact of dropping the current. When appropriate, facilities
may be renamed. The procedure for doing so shall be the same for originally naming the facility.
(2) Public requests to rename existing facilities will be received by the city secretary's office and
directed to the appropriate department for further investigation and evaluation against naming
criteria.
Sec. 18.05.007 Street name changes
(a) Procedures.
(1) Reasons for name change. Applications for a street name change may be considered for any
one (1) of the following reasons, which must be specified in the application:
(A) To establish continuity of the street's name.
(B) To eliminate name spelling duplication, phonetic duplication, or misspelling.
(C) To bring coherence to the street numbering designation (east, west, north, south).
(D) To provide a necessary roadway designation (street, road, lane, circle, drive, boulevard,
and similar designations).
(E) To honor a person, place, institution, group entity, event or similar subject, subject to
naming criteria listed in this policy.
(F) To enhance a neighborhood through association of the street name with its location, area
characteristics, history, or similar factors, subject to the naming criteria listed in this policy.
(2) Application by petition.
(A) An application for a change of the name of a street may be filed by any person, group,
firm or agency with the department of public works in the form of a petition signed by not
fewer than eighty percent (80%) of all owners, or owner's attorney-in-fact, of property abutting
the subject street. “Owners” of such abutting property shall be determined by the then-current
city real property ad valorem tax roll. The applicant shall make a formal request for the official
application form from the department of public works engineering division. The petition shall
contain the following minimum information:
(i) A detailed description of the request;
(ii) The owner's address, printed name, signature, and whether they oppose or suppose
the street name change.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/618
(B) The application shall state the present official name of the city street, the proposed new
name, and a statement of the reason or reasons from among those listed above. The application
shall also indicate the name and address of each person, group, agency, or entity requesting the
street name change and responsible for payment of the associated costs for signage and
installation.
(3) City-initiated changes. In all instances where it is the city's recommendation that a street name
be changed, the department head shall file a request for a change of the name of a street with the
department of public works. The written request shall state the present official name of the city street,
the proposed new name, and a statement of reason or reasons, from among those listed above,
claimed for such name change.
(4) Processing; approvals or denials; installation of signs.
(A) Upon receipt of a completed application form, the public works department shall confirm
that the petition meets the requirements provided herein and the city-initiated request meets the
requirements provided herein.
(B) If a completed application form is not submitted to the public works department by the
application within ninety (90) days of the date of the formal request for the application, the
application is considered expired.
(C) In all cases where the application by petition has expired or been rejected for not meeting
any of the requirements provided herein, any applicant may submit a second formal request for
application for the same street only after a period five (5) years from the date of the previous
formal request for application.
(D) Upon confirming that the petition or city-initiated request meets the requirements of this
article, the public works department will determine the costs associated with the installation of
new city street name signs.
(E) The public works department will notify by mail all the property owners on the subject
street to verify the petition. The letter will also notify the residents of the cost for the installation
of new city street name signs and provide contact information for the collection of payments. If
more than 20% of the property owners contact the city objecting to the street name change, in
writing, the city will deny the street name change application.
(F) If all cases where the application by petition has been approved such approval is
contingent on the city's receipt of advance payment for the costs associated with the installation
of new city street name signs by the person, group, agency, or entity designated on the
application as responsible for such payment.
(G) All approved street name changes shall be forwarded to the streets division for the
ordering of and installation of the new street name signs.
(H) The public works department shall provide a copy of each street name change to the local
utility companies, all department directors, 911 administrators, Dallas Central Appraisals
District, U.S. Postal Service, and county voter's registrar's office.
(b) Street naming alternatives.
(1) Individuals and organizations are encouraged to consider alternatives to street renaming for the
commemoration of individuals or organizations. For example, interpretative plaques at key locations
on buildings or sites, or where appropriate, in sidewalks or other visible pedestrian areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/618
(2) In some cases, an “honorary street” designation may be given to certain sections of existing
streets to commemorate the lives of important community members. A commemorative street blade
sign may be mounted below the official street name for a defined length of the street, if approved, at
the expense of the applicants. “Honorary designations” of streets may be considered as requests for
renaming facilities.
(3) For “honorary street” designations, the city shall develop and provide a standard sign
specification for approved requests.
(Resolution 2018-02-17 adopted 2/26/18)
ARTICLE 18.06 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Sec. 18.06.001 Title
This article shall be commonly known and cited as the parks and recreation code.
Sec. 18.06.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future and
words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word “shall” is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
Minor child. Individuals age 10 and under.
Sec. 18.06.003 Master plan adopted
(a) The city council has adopted a parks, recreation, and open space master plan, hereinafter called the
“approved plan,” which is on file in the office of the city secretary.
(b) The approved plan shall be filed for record in the official city records and the approved plan shall be
available to the public and to all landowners and used as an officially approved parks, recreation, and open space
master plan by the city administration, city parks and recreation advisory board, tree board, and city council.
(Ordinance 2008-02-07 adopted 2/11/08)
Sec. 18.06.004 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 18.06.004 pertaining to the parks and recreation advisory board, tree board, and recreational
development corporation and deriving from Ordinance 2008-02-07 adopted 2/11/08 and Ordinance 2015-11-25 adopted 11/16/15, was
superseded by Ordinance 2018-12-53 adopted 12/10/18. Similar provisions can now be found in article 5.02.
Sec. 18.06.005 Mandatory park land dedication
Ordinance No. 2006-10-41 adopted October 24, 2006.
Editor's note–Ord. 2006-10-41 added art. 14.1400, park land dedication, to the development code.
Sec. 18.06.006 Enforcement
(a) Enforcement officers. The parks and recreation director or designee, and any member of the police
department, shall, in conjunction with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/618
(b) Ejectment from park. The parks and recreation director or designee, and any member of the police
department, shall have the authority to demand that any person acting in violation of this article leave the park or
city recreational facility leased or owned. “Demand,” as that term is used in this section, shall mean the giving of
an order to the person in violation of this article, instructing that such person leave and depart from the premises
of the park or city recreational facility leased or owned. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain within the
park premises after receiving such an order. Such failure shall constitute criminal trespass.
Sec. 18.06.007 Fees
All fees for rentals and memberships are approved by city council and outlined in the master fee schedule.
Sec. 18.06.008 General regulations
Within the limits of any park, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, by omission or commission, to do
any of the acts hereinafter specified, except as may be otherwise provided:
(1) It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or person in custody of such minor child to allow,
suffer or permit such child to go into any park or recreational facility owned or operated by the city
unless such child is accompanied by a person not less than fourteen (14) years of age who is capable
of supervising and caring for such child, and who has agreed with such parent, guardian or person in
custody of such child to be responsible for the safety of such child.
(2) To hitch, fasten, lead, drive, or let loose any animal, reptile, fish, or fowl of any kind, provided
that this shall not apply to horses, dogs or cats when led by a chain, cord, or leash.
(3) The director of parks and recreation shall be authorized to establish hours of operation for all
parks and recreation facilities based upon usage, funding, and need.
(4) No group or individual will be allowed to charge an admission fee for activities held at parks
and recreation facilities or the surrounding grounds without prior approval of the director of parks
and recreation.
(5) Any alterations to the appearance of parks and recreation facilities, to include, but not limited
to, the hanging of plants, additional lighting, attached video screens, etc., must have prior approval by
the director of parks and recreation as to the manner in which said alterations are to be accomplished.
These must be removed without damage to the facility by the reserving group during the rental
period. Any damage which may result from the installation or removal of any fixtures or materials
will result in the assessment of a damage/security deposit.
(6) Groups having reservations at parks and recreation facilities shall be permitted to use only the
area(s) which were designated for them at the time the reservation was confirmed.
(7) The director of parks and recreation reserves the right to refuse any group the privilege of using
parks and recreation facilities if past usage resulted in violation of facility policies. Any group
charged with a second occurrence will be barred from making any future reservations. In addition,
any first occurrence deemed flagrant by the director of parks and recreation may cause a group to be
precluded from any future usage.
(8) No gambling or loitering shall be permitted on all parks and recreation facility premises. All
patrons must vacate the premises upon the conclusion of their rental period.
(9) To ride or drive any horse or other animal, except in areas specifically designated for such
purpose.
(10) To carry or discharge any firearm, firecrackers, torpedoes, or any other fireworks, air guns,
BB guns, bows and arrows, or slingshots. This prohibition shall not apply to individuals licensed to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/618
carry concealed handguns.
(11) To operate any motorized model airplane, boat or rocket, except in such areas as may be
specifically designated for such purposes by the parks and recreation director or designee.
(12) To damage, cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage,
pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, or other structure, apparatus, or property, or to mark or write
upon, paint, or deface any building, monument, sign, fence, bench, or other structure.
(13) To swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the water of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other
body of water.
(14) To make or kindle a fire, except in picnic stoves or fire pits in areas designated for that
purpose.
(15) To wash dishes or to empty salt water or other waste liquids in areas other than those
specifically designated for such purposes.
(16) No person shall use any portion of any park facility for toilet purposes except the public
restrooms or temporary portable units provided.
(17) No person over the age of six (6) years to use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.
(18) No person shall conduct or participate in any tournament, camp, or organized sporting activity
which has not been specifically authorized by the department, or which conflicts with a scheduled
activity or event authorized by the department.
(19) No person shall interfere with, disobey or ignore any lawful order of an employee while in the
performance of his/her duties in any park area or facility.
(20) To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, or other refuse elsewhere than in refuse containers
provided for such purpose.
(21) To participate or engage in any activity on any public park area when such activity will create
a danger to the public or may be considered a public nuisance. The parks and recreation director or
designee may designate particular locations within park areas for specific activities.
(22) Overnight camping on any park property, except by special permit issued by the parks and
recreation director or designee.
(23) To disrupt or disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, service, concert, exercise, or
exhibition.
(24) No cremation remains shall be disposed of on park land.
(25) To distribute, post, place, or erect any advertising handbill, circular, bill, notice, paper, or other
advertising device without special permit issued by the parks and recreation director or designee.
(26) To sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise, or services without special
permit issued by the parks and recreation director or designee.
(27) To practice, carry on, conduct, or solicit for any trade, occupation, business, or profession.
(28) To go into or remain in any city park at a time when the park is officially closed to the public
without a special permit issued by the parks and recreation director or designee. All city parks shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/618
be closed to the public during the times indicated, and signs indicating such shall be posted at
conspicuous places to give notice thereof.
(29) Glass containers are prohibited in all parks and recreation facilities.
(30) Registered sex offenders and individuals that have been convicted of possession and/or
distribution of controlled substances are prohibited from use, access or participation in any and all
activities, facilities or participation in municipal parks and recreation facilities owned, leased,
contracted or sponsored by the city.
(31) Smoking and the use of all tobacco products shall be prohibited within the confines of any city
park, athletic facility or any enclosed park facility.
(32) No pets shall be permitted within any playground area or where any organized activity is
being conducted. This prohibition shall not apply to service animals used for persons with disabilities
or law enforcement.
(33) The use of metal detectors in city parks and recreational facilities is prohibited.
Sec. 18.06.009 Special rules for specific facilities
Each park facility may develop rules and regulations that address problems specific to that facility, which shall
be in writing and approved by the director. Patrons shall comply with all rules and regulations posted at
individual facilities or for special events.
Sec. 18.06.010 Vehicular regulations
Within the limits of any park, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do any of the acts hereinafter
specified, except as may be otherwise provided:
(1) To drive a vehicle at a rate of speed faster than fifteen (15) miles per hour upon any drive or
street in any park of the city unless otherwise posted on standard traffic signs.
(2) To exhibit any unnecessary acceleration of a vehicle such as to cause gravel to be thrown, tires
to squeal, or the vehicle to spin in an unsafe or hazardous manner.
(3) To drive a vehicle over or across the curbs, sidewalks, grass, or lawn within any park area
unless authorized by the parks and recreation director or designee.
(4) For any vehicle used for the purpose of transporting freight and merchandise, or brick, stone, or
gravel, and all those commonly known as express or delivery vans, to enter upon or drive through any
public park, except by special permit issued by the parks and recreation director or designee.
(5) To park in areas other than those set aside for this purpose. In areas having no parking areas
marked, all parking will take place outside of the boundary or curbline, where existing.
(6) Where parking stalls have been designated, all vehicles shall be parked within and between the
lines designating a single vehicle parking space and not otherwise.
(7) Where parking lots or areas within parks have been designated for head-in parking to front on a
visible parking line without delineated single vehicle spaces, the front of the vehicle shall be placed
on the parking line.
(8) No vehicle shall be parked or left behind any other vehicle in the parking line or back of such
parking line in any manner so as to obstruct, block, or hinder ingress or egress from the line. Where a
vehicle is parked or left in violation of this section in such a manner as to obstruct or block traffic and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/618
the owner or operator of the vehicle cannot be found or refuses to remove such vehicle, police
officers or other authorized representatives of the city may move the vehicle so that traffic will not be
impeded. No variation to the requirements of this subsection shall be allowed, except by special
permit issued by the parks and recreation director or designee.
Sec. 18.06.011 Damaging park property
If any person damages or defaces any real or personal property under the control or responsibility of the parks
and recreation department, such violators shall be held responsible for the actual costs to repair or replace such
damaged item or items.
Sec. 18.06.012 Facility scheduling; reservation procedures
(a) Requests for reservations for any of the facilities in any of the parks must be made through the parks and
recreation department. Such reservations must be requested in person no later than two (2) weeks (14 days) prior
to the date for which the reservation is requested.
(b) Parties and activities involving minors ages 11 to 17 require the following:
(1) Reservations will not exceed 50 minors per event.
(2) One city police officer in uniform for every 25 minors.
(3) Guest list must be provided. No individuals will be permitted to enter the reservation unless
named on the list.
(4) Participants are not allowed to leave the reservation once checked in.
(5) No reservations will be allowed to exceed the city's curfew hours for minors (article 14.02,
division 2).
(6) One chaperone (age 25 or older) for every 25 minors.
(7) City-sponsored events shall be exempt.
(c) The parks and recreation director is authorized to refuse or deny any request for reservations for reasonable
cause. The parks and recreation director further has the right and obligation to cancel or suspend any such
reservation previously issued if, in the opinion of the parks and recreation director, such cancellation or
suspension is in the best interests of the citizens of the city and/or is necessary for the maintenance and control
of facilities under the responsibility of the parks and recreation department.
(d) At the conclusion of the reservation of any facility, the facility must be left in a clean and orderly
condition. All applicants agree, by signing of the reservation contract, to pay the cost of repairing any damage to
park property incurred by the group using the facility as determined by the parks and recreation department.
(e) All facilities that are not reserved are available for use by the general public on a first come, first served
basis. A listing of reserved facilities, including the time of reservation and the party holding such reservation,
will be maintained by the parks and recreation department and will be available for inspection during regular
working hours.
Sec. 18.06.013 Reservations for picnic pavilions
(a) All park picnic pavilions can be reserved. Reservations must be made in person by the individual
responsible for the reservation. Reservations will be granted for a pavilion between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/618
(b) All facilities that are not reserved are available for use by the general public on a first come, first served
basis. A listing of reserved facilities, including the time of reservation and the party holding such reservation,
will be maintained by the parks and recreation department and will be available for inspection during regular
working hours.
Sec. 18.06.014 Reservations for athletic facilities
Reservations for a playing facility will be granted for a reasonable period of time between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and sunset for unlighted facilities and between 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. for lighted facilities, as available.
Sec. 18.06.015 Special permits
(a) In addition to any other provision of this article that requires the obtaining of a permit prior to engaging in
a given activity, it shall be unlawful for any person in a park to conduct, operate, present, manage or take part in
any of the following activities unless a permit is obtained from the parks and recreation director prior to the start
of such activity:
(1) Any organized team or league sports activity.
(2) Giving any theatrical entertainment, moving picture show, parade, procession or public
gathering, festival, concert, recreational program, event, or other outdoor presentation, whether or not
an admission fee is charged.
(b) Special permits for activities not identified or required by this article must be applied for in person no later
than 14 days prior to the date for which the permit is requested.
(c) The person or persons utilizing such permit must have the permit in their possession or, if possible, posted
in a conspicuous location, and available for inspection by the parks and recreation director or designee or any
member of the police department.
(d) The parks and recreation director has the right to refuse or deny any request for a special permit for
reasonable cause. The parks and recreation director further has the right and obligation to cancel or suspend any
such special permit previously issued if, in the opinion of the parks and recreation director, such cancellation or
suspension is in the best interests of the citizens of the city and/or is necessary for the maintenance and control
of facilities under the responsibility of the parks and recreation department.
(e) Any person making a request for a reservation may appeal the refusal of such request to the city manager.
Sec. 18.06.016 Amplified sound
(a) Except when approved by the parks and recreation director or designee, no person shall operate any device
so that the sound could be heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of persons in a public place or in
neighboring premises.
(b) No permit shall be issued for the use of amplified sound beyond 10 p.m. unless approved by the parks and
recreation director.
Sec. 18.06.017 Roller skates, skateboards and bicycles
Roller skates, skateboards and bicycles are permitted on designated trails within city parks. Roller skating,
skateboarding and bicycle riding are prohibited on playgrounds, sidewalks, and tennis courts, in picnic pavilions
or monument-type structures or in any other park area except as designated by the parks and recreation director
or designee.
Sec. 18.06.018 Mass gatherings
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/618
(a) It shall be unlawful to hold any meeting or gathering within the parks and recreation department facilities
which will attract more than 50 persons without first obtaining a special permit and/or reservation contract from
the parks and recreation director or designee for such purpose.
(b) The parks and recreation director may require adequate public safety personnel and portable sanitary
facilities to ensure the safety and well-being of participants.
Sec. 18.06.019 Golfing
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or hit a golf ball in, into, upon or over any public park owned,
leased, operated or maintained by the city, except in those areas designated and posted for such activities.
(b) No golfing will be permitted on any and all athletic fields.
Sec. 18.06.020 Advertisements
(a) Advertising by the use of billboards, signs, markers, audio devices, or any other means whatsoever,
including handbills, circulars, flyers, and posters, is prohibited without written permission of the parks and
recreation director, a copy of which written permission shall be available on-site at all times.
(b) Any and all distribution of such materials shall follow all rules and regulations of article 8.08 of the city
code.
Sec. 18.06.021 Trail use
(a) No person shall operate or use a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, motorbike, minibike, ATV, or
bicycle, on a trail or path not designated for use with such vehicles.
(b) On the hike and bike trails, bicyclists shall yield to walkers and joggers.
(c) Trail users on the hike and bike trails should not be more than two abreast when this action will impede
other traffic on the trail. Trail users should leave ample room on the trail for other users to pass safely.
(d) Bicyclists should maintain bicycles in good condition and should operate them in a safe manner. All
bicycles shall be equipped with properly functioning brakes.
Sec. 18.06.022 Alcoholic beverages
(a) No person shall sell, store, possess or consume an alcoholic beverage in any city park. The term “alcoholic
beverage,” as that term is used in this article, shall be defined as used in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
(b) At a special civic event sponsored by the city, the city manager may grant a special event permit, for a
period not to exceed two consecutive days, for consumption, possession and/or sale of beer and wine by a person
who has obtained a permit under state law. In issuing such permit, the city manager may designate all or part of
such park or facilities located thereon for such permit, and may establish such hours of operation as deemed
appropriate.
(c) Requests to serve alcoholic beverages during reservations using the Grand Hall in the Lancaster Recreation
Center, Lancaster Senior Center and Community House must be made through the parks and recreation
department.
(1) Such reservations must be requested in writing at the time of the initial reservation.
(2) Such written request must state the purpose of the reservation, the specific areas of the facility
for which the reservation is requested, the time or times and date or dates for which the reservation is
requested, and the person or persons who intend to utilize such facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/618
(3) Such reservations are required to have a licensed city police department officer in uniform on
duty at all times during the reservation.
(4) A deposit in the amount established by city council will be collected when making the
reservation.
(5) Alcoholic beverages may only be served at events such as wedding receptions, anniversary
parties, and city-sponsored events.
(6) Alcoholic beverages may only be served at closed events not open to the general public.
(7) Beer, wine, and champagne are the only alcoholic beverages that are permitted. No liquor will
be permitted.
(8) It is the renter's responsibility to ensure that no minors or visibly intoxicated are served
alcoholic beverages.
(Ordinance 2008-02-07 adopted 2/11/08)
Sec. 18.06.023 Youth programs standards of care
The city council shall, after public hearing, annually review and adopt by resolution youth programs standards of
care to be employed for city owned and operated and operated [sic] facilities and programming. The standards
adopted shall include staff ratios, training, health and safety, monitoring, enforcement, conducting background
checks for program employees and volunteers, and such other requirements as the city council deems
appropriate. A copy of such standards shall be provided to the parents or guardian of any youth program
enrollee. (Ordinance 2010-04-08 adopted 4/26/10)
ARTICLE 18.07 LIBRARY
Sec. 18.07.001 Name
The name of the public library of the city shall be the Lancaster Veterans Memorial Library. (2002 Code, sec.
9.901)
Sec. 18.07.002 Definitions
In this article:
Director. The director of libraries for the city or his or her designated agent.
Library. The Lancaster Veterans Memorial Library and any branch libraries maintained by the city.
Library materials. Any book, equipment, recording, magazine, periodical or film belonging to the library and
designated for circulation for time periods by the director as set out in this article.
Patron. Any person who uses or seeks to use any facility, service, program or item offered by the library.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.902)
Sec. 18.07.003 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 18.07.003 pertaining to the library board and deriving from the 2002 Code, sec. 9.903, was superseded
by Ordinance 2018-12-53 adopted 12/10/18. Similar provisions can now be found in section 5.02.010.
Sec. 18.07.004 Use of library
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/618
Use of the library shall be free to all residents of the city and shall be administered by the director. The library
shall be kept open for use during such hours as may be fixed by the director and approved by the library board.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.904)
Sec. 18.07.005 Library cards
(a) Any resident of the city may obtain a library card by filing an application along with proof of residence.
(b) A record of the library card will be kept on file in the library, and possession of a valid library card will
allow a patron to borrow any materials and equipment designated for circulation for such time periods as may be
stipulated and indicated thereon by the director.
(c) A nonresident of the city may be issued a library card by filing an application and paying a fee to be
established by resolution of the city council from time to time for such purpose. A nonresident will have the
same right of use of the library as a resident, subject to the payment of such fees and securing of a library card.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.905)
Sec. 18.07.006 Borrowing materials
(a) A patron of the library shall be charged a fine as set out below for return of library materials after the due
date indicated on the checkout card included within the materials.
(b) If library materials borrowed from the library have not been returned by the due date specified, the director
shall mail a notice to the patron at the patron's address as shown in the library records, naming the material
involved, the due date and the fact that the library materials have not been returned on time. If the patron has
failed to return the library materials within seven (7) days of the date the director has mailed the original notice,
the director shall mail a second notice to the patron at the same address advising that the patron must return the
library materials within thirty (30) days of the date of the second notice or a complaint will be filed in the
municipal court of the city charging the patron with failure to return the borrowed materials.
(c) In addition to other provisions of this article, if library materials are not returned by the date specified, the
director may suspend the use of the library card by the patron until all of such materials are returned and the
appropriate fines or fees are paid in full.
(d) The patron in whose name the materials were borrowed shall pay the replacement cost of a comparable
volume for lost materials, plus processing fees.
(e) Any other fees or charges for damaged or lost materials or equipment will be set by the library board.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.906)
Sec. 18.07.007 Illegal removal of materials; responsibility of parents for damage caused by child
(a) Every patron over the age of seventeen (17) years who shall take or borrow from the library any book,
pamphlet, periodical, paper or other library property or materials and intentionally fail or refuse to return the
same on the due date thereof, except in accordance with the rules of the library, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the fines provided herein, plus replacement and processing costs of any
unreturned materials and all fines normally assessed under library rules.
(b) A parent or other person who has the duty of control and reasonable discipline of a child is liable for any
damage to library property when such damage is proximately caused by:
(1) The negligent conduct of the child, if the conduct is reasonably attributable to the negligent
failure of the parent or other person to exercise that duty; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/618
(2) The willful and malicious conduct of a child who is at least twelve (12) years of age but under
seventeen (17) years of age.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.907)
Sec. 18.07.008 Fines and fees; additional rules
(a) A fine as established by the city council will be charged for late library materials, including holidays and
days the library is closed. The fine shall not exceed the cost of the book.
(b) The fees for the library shall be as established by the city council.
(c) The library board shall establish such other fees, fines, rules and regulations as may be necessary to
provide the efficient operation of the library.
(2002 Code, sec. 9.908)
Sec. 18.07.009 Library department
The library board, director, assistant librarians and such other employees as may work directly for the library
shall constitute the public library department of the city. The director shall be the head of such department and,
as such, shall be appointed by the city manager. (2002 Code, sec. 9.909)
CHAPTER 20
TAXATION
ARTICLE 20.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 20.01.001 Fees for expenses of collection of delinquent taxes
(a) Whenever any accounts for delinquent taxes owed the city are given to its tax attorney for collection, by
suit or otherwise, whether said attorney be an employee of the city or an attorney retained under a delinquent tax
collection contract, the city shall be entitled to and shall collect a fee of fifteen (15) percent of the delinquent
taxes and penalty (including any interest owed) due on each delinquent property at the time of collection, either
before or after suit and/or foreclosure sale.
(b) In addition to the collection expenses provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the city shall be
entitled to collect the actual expenses incurred by the city in providing all data and information as to the name,
identity and location of necessary parties and the legal description of property necessary to the filing of any suit
for delinquent taxes.
(2002 Code, secs. 11.301–11.302)
Charter reference–Delinquent taxes, sec. 6.03.
State law reference–Contract with attorney for collection of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 6.30.
ARTICLE 20.02 TAX ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR
Sec. 20.02.001 Office created; bond
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/618
There is hereby created the office of tax assessor and collector of the city under the charter, which office shall be
filled by appointment by the city manager. The tax assessor and collector shall give a surety bond for the faithful
performance of his duties, including compliance with all controlling provisions of the state law and charter of the
city which are applicable to the functions of the office, in a sum which shall be fixed by the city council.
Sec. 20.02.002 Duties
The tax assessor and collector shall perform all duties prescribed by state law and the city charter and such other
duties as may be required by the city council.
(Ordinance 47-01 adopted 12/10/01)
ARTICLE 20.03 PROPERTY TAX†
Sec. 20.03.001 Additional penalty on delinquent personal property taxes
An additional penalty on delinquent personal property taxes for tax years 2005 and subsequent years is hereby
authorized and imposed, as provided by section 33.11, Texas Property Tax Code, in the amount of 20% of the
delinquent tax, penalty and interest, if tax becomes delinquent on February 1 of a year and remains delinquent on
the 60th day thereafter. (Ordinance 2006-02-06 adopted 2/27/06)
Charter reference–Delinquent taxes, sec. 6.03.
Sec. 20.03.002 Taxation of freeport goods
The exemption from ad valorem taxation for “freeport goods” pursuant to art. VIII, section 1-j of the Texas
Constitution and section 11.251 of the Texas Property Tax Code shall be effective beginning with the tax year
2003. (2002 Code, art. 11.500)
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
Sec. 20.03.003 Taxation of tangible personal property in transit
(a) Definitions. The following terms have the same meaning as defined in section 11.253 of the Texas Tax
Code as amended.
Bailee and warehouse. Have the meanings assigned by section 7.102, Business and Commerce Code.
Dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment
inventory, and retail manufactured housing inventory. Have the meanings assigned by subchapter B, chapter 23
of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
Goods in transit. Tangible personal property that:
(1) Is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or
outside this state;
(2) Is stored under a contract of bailment by a public warehouse operator at one or more public
warehouse facilities in this state that are not in any way owned or controlled by the owner of the
personal property for the account of the person who acquired or imported the property;
(3) Is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than 175 days after
the date the person acquired the property in or imported the property into this state; and
(4) Does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory,
dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/618
manufactured housing inventory.
Location. A physical address.
Petroleum product. A liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural
gas.
Public warehouse operator. A person that:
(1) Is both a bailee and a warehouse; and
(2) Stores under a contract of bailment, at one or more public warehouse facilities, tangible
personal property that is owned by other persons solely for the account of those persons and not for
the operator's account.
(b) Beginning tax year 2012 and continuing thereafter until further action is taken by the city council, “goodsin-
transit,” as defined herein, shall be subject to ad valorem property taxation by the city.
(Ordinance 2011-10-35 adopted 10/24/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
Sec. 20.03.004 Leased vehicles
A motor vehicle, whether or not held or used for the production of income, that is subject to a lease, shall be
levied upon and assessed ad valorem taxes due and payable to the city, regardless of the date of the inception of
the lease. It is the express intent of the city council to comply with the provisions of section 11.252(f) of the
Texas Tax Code to remove the exemption authorized by section 11.252(a) of the Texas Tax Code. (Ordinance 47-
01 adopted 12/10/01)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on leased vehicles otherwise exempted, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.252.
ARTICLE 20.04 SALES AND USE TAX*
Sec. 20.04.001 Tax on sale of gas and electricity for residential use
The city, by majority vote of its governing body, hereby votes to retain the taxes authorized by the Municipal
Sales and Use Tax Act (V.T.C.A., Tax Code, chapter 321) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution,
lease or rental of, and the use, storage or other consumption of, gas and electricity for residential use, as
authorized by section 6 of House Bill No. 1, Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second Called Session. (2002 Code,
sec. 11.101)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Sec. 20.04.002 Tax on telecommunications services
(a) Authorized.
(1) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes
of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the
telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates.
If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call
or other communication is billed.
(2) The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section 321.210 is hereby
repealed by the city as authorized by subsection (b) thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/618
(3) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all
other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state.
(4) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States registered or
certified mail a copy of Ordinance No. 14-87 along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's
vote and discussion on Ordinance No. 14-87.
(b) Effect. This section is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city, and this section
shall not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances. The tax provided for hereunder shall not serve
as an offset to, be in lieu of, or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city pursuant to any franchise, street
use ordinance, charter provision, statute, or, without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable
by any [person, and it is the] intent hereof that all such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind
and nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction or limitation hereby.
(2002 Code, secs. 11.102, 11.103)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on the sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
321.210.
ARTICLE 20.05 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 20.05.001 Levy
A tax is hereby imposed on a person who under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or
agreement pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel,
costs two dollars ($2.00) or more each day and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The tax authorized is imposed at a
rate of seven (7) percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel. The tax does not apply to a person who has the
right to use or possess a room in a hotel for thirty (30) or more days. (2002 Code, sec. 11.401)
Sec. 20.05.002 Definitions
As herein employed, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:
Consideration. The cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall
not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to
the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations.
The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses or
other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include
hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one
ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a
period of less than thirty (30) days.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel
if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.402)
Sec. 20.05.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by this article
for the city. (2002 Code, sec. 11.403)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/618
Sec. 20.05.004 Quarterly reports; payment
The taxes provided for herein shall be paid on a quarterly basis as follows, to wit: the regular calendar quarters
of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter
being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and
the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. On the last day of the month
following each quarterly period, every person required by this article to collect the taxes imposed herein shall
file a report with the finance director of the city showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the
preceding quarter, the amount of taxes collected on such occupancies and such other information as the finance
director may reasonably require. Such persons shall pay the taxes due on such occupancies at the time of filing
of such report. Said report shall be a copy of the quarterly tax report filed with the state comptroller in
connection with the state hotel occupancy tax. (2002 Code, sec. 11.404)
Sec. 20.05.005 Examination of records
The finance director of the city shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to
effectively collect the tax levied herein and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to the books and records
necessary to enable the finance director to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article
and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. (2002 Code, sec. 11.405)
Sec. 20.05.006 Penalty for failure to pay tax; injunction
If the person who is required to pay to the finance director the tax imposed by this article fails to file a report or
does not pay the tax when it is due, the person shall forfeit to the city a penalty of five (5) percent of the amount
of tax due. If the person who is required to pay the tax to the finance director does not pay the tax within thirty
(30) days after it is due, the person shall forfeit to the city a penalty of an additional five (5) percent of the
amount of tax due. The minimum penalty under this section is one dollar ($1.00). The city attorney, acting for
the city, may bring suit against the person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this article and pay the
collections over to the city and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due, to enjoin the person
from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's
order. (2002 Code, sec. 11.406)
Sec. 20.05.007 Use of revenue
All revenues received from any occupancy tax authorized under this article shall be used only for those purposes
authorized under chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code. (2002 Code, sec. 11.407)
Sec. 20.05.008 Contract for administration of revenue
Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code, the city manager is hereby authorized to enter
into a contract with the Lancaster Chamber of Commerce to administer revenues derived from the occupancy tax
provided for herein, upon such terms and conditions as may be approved by the city council. (2002 Code, sec.
11.408)
ARTICLE 20.06 TAX ABATEMENT GUIDELINES*
Sec. 20.06.001 Definitions
As herein employed, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:
Abatement. The full or partial exemption from ad valorem taxes of certain properties in a zone designated for
economic development purposes pursuant to the act.
Agreement. A contractual agreement between a property owner and a taxing jurisdiction for the purpose of tax
abatement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/618
Base year value. The assessed value of eligible property [on] January 1 preceding the execution of the agreement
plus the agreed-upon value of eligible property improvements made after January 1 but prior to the execution of
the abatement agreement.
Economic life. The number of years a property improvement is expected to be in service. Provided, however, in
no event shall such number of years exceed the depreciation allowance specified in the federal Internal Revenue
Service Code.
Expansion. The addition of buildings, structures, fixed equipment or machinery for the purpose of increasing
production capacity.
Facility. Property improvements completed or in the process of construction which together comprise an integral
whole.
Modernization. The replacement and upgrading of existing facilities, which increases the productive input or
output, updates the technology or substantially lowers the unit cost of the operation, and extends the economic
life of the facility. Modernization may result from the construction, alteration or installation of buildings,
structures, fixed machinery and equipment. It shall not be for the purpose of reconditioning, refurbishing,
repairing or completion of deferred maintenance.
New facility. A property previously undeveloped which is placed into service by means other than, or in
conjunction with, expansion or modernization.
Reinvestment zone. Those areas defined as reinvestment zones in chapter 312, Tax Code, Texas Civil Statutes.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.601)
Sec. 20.06.002 Tax abatement authorized; eligibility
(a) Authorized facilities. A facility may be eligible for tax abatement if it is determined that such a facility will
enhance the economic vitality of the community through a combination of new capital investment, increased tax
revenues or the creation of additional job opportunities.
(b) Creation of new value. Abatement may only be granted for the additional value of eligible property
improvements made subsequent to and specified in an abatement agreement between the city and the property
owner and lessee (if required), subject to such limitations as the city council and the city require.
(c) Eligible property. Tax abatement may be extended to the value of improvements to new or existing real
property including buildings, structures, fixed machinery and equipment, site improvement, plus that office
space and related fixed improvements and tangible personal property necessary to the operation and
administration of the facility. The increase in market value for tax purposes of land as a direct result and in
conjunction with the new property improvement will also be considered eligible property for abatement.
(d) Ineligible property. The following specific types of property shall be fully taxable and ineligible for
abatement: inventories, supplies, personal property and furnishings not necessary to the operation and
administration of the facility and land, except as noted above.
(e) Leased facilities. If a leased facility is granted [tax abatement], the lessee shall be furnished a copy of
applicable tax abatement agreements.
(f) Value and terms of abatement. Abatement shall be granted, effective with the January 1 evaluation date,
immediately following execution of the agreement. If a modernization project includes facility replacement, the
basis for abatement shall be the value of the new unit(s) less the value of the old unit(s). The maximum
abatement for the value of the eligible property shall be determined by the city council at the time of the
agreement, but in no case shall the maximum exceed that amount permitted by chapter 312, Tax Code. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/618
maximum period of abatement shall not exceed ten (10) years. The value and term of the abatement will be
determined using the following criteria:
(1) Number of jobs created in excess of the minimum required herein.
(2) Capital investment in eligible property in excess of the minimum required herein.
(3) Capital investment in new taxable property to be included in the project.
(4) Sales taxes and all other revenues that would be generated by the project to the benefit of
governmental entities.
(5) Off-site infrastructure investment by the applicant.
(6) Off-site infrastructure investments required by the city in order to serve the project.
(7) The project's influence as a catalyst or magnet to attract or retain additional favorable
development within the city.
(8) The project's influence in serving as an example and catalyst in upgrading development in
terms of functional, visual or material quality.
(g) Percentage of abatement. The city council shall have the authority to determine the percentage of tax
abatement according to the above criteria in order to:
(1) Accomplish the city's economic development goals.
(2) Ensure that governmental entities are not hampered in their delivery of services.
(3) Ensure that the property tax burden is not shifted to present taxpayers.
(h) Economic qualifications. In order to be eligible for tax abatement, the planned improvement must:
(1) Have a minimal capital investment of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) in
eligible property.
(2) Create and maintain, for the term of the agreement, employment for at least five (5) people on a
permanent basis.
(3) Not have a significantly adverse effect upon competition in the local market with established
local businesses.
The city council may at its discretion choose to waive either or both the minimal capital investment and
employment requirements outlined above if the project otherwise meets the guidelines and criteria for granting
tax abatement.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.602)
Sec. 20.06.003 Application
(a) Filing. Any present or potential owner of taxable property may request tax abatement by filing a written
application with the city manager and the chief executive officer of any other taxing jurisdiction as deemed
appropriate by the applicant.
(b) Contents. The application shall consist of a completed application form accompanied by a general
description of the new improvements to be undertaken; a descriptive list of the improvements for which
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/618
abatement is requested; a list of the kind, number and location of all proposed improvements of the property; a
map and property description; and a time schedule for undertaking and completing the proposed improvements.
In the case of a modernization or expansion project, a statement of the assessed value of the facility separately
stated for real and personal property shall be given for the tax year immediately preceding the application. The
application form may require such financial and other information as the city deems appropriate for evaluating
the financial capacity and other relevant factors of the applicant.
(c) Notification to governmental bodies. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager shall
forward a copy of the application to the presiding officers of the governmental agencies having jurisdiction of
the property covered by the application.
(d) Feasibility study. After receipt of an application for tax abatement, the city shall consider the feasibility
and the impact of the proposed tax abatement. The study of feasibility shall include but not be limited to an
estimate of the economic effect of the abatement of taxes and the benefit to the governmental jurisdictions and
the property to be covered by such abatement.
(e) Required findings. In order to enter into a tax abatement agreement, the city must find that the terms of the
proposed agreement meet these guidelines and criteria. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to examine each application for tax abatement on a case-by-case basis and determine whether or not the
proposed project complies with the intent of these guidelines and criteria. Nothing herein shall be construed to
require the city council to approve any application for tax abatement. The city council may reject any application
for tax abatement without cause.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.603)
Sec. 20.06.004 Contents of agreement
The tax abatement agreement with the owners of the facility shall include:
(1) The estimated value to be subject to abatement.
(2) The percentage of value to be abated each year as provided in section 20.06.002.
(3) The commencement date and termination date of the agreement.
(4) The proposed use of the facility, nature of construction, time schedule, map, property
description and improvements list as provided in the application.
(5) The contractual obligations in the event of default, delinquent taxes or recapture, as provided in
these guidelines or other provisions that may be required for uniformity or by state law.
(6) The amount of capital improvement and minimum number of jobs created by the project.
(7) Reporting requirements, including periodic capital investment reports during construction and
periodic manpower reports from the applicant's personnel officer confirming the number of additional
employees added and retained as a result of the capital investment.
(8) The applicant shall warrant that the information provided the taxing jurisdictions is true and
correct and that any materially false or misleading information provided on the application or in any
periodic report to the taxing jurisdictions may be grounds for the termination of the existing tax
abatement and possible liability for recapture of past taxes normally due.
(9) Any additional provisions determined by the city council to be instrumental to the economic
vitality of the project and not inconsistent with chapter 312, V.T.C.A. Tax Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/618
(10) The provisions of Ordinance No. 27-89 shall be attached as an annex to any agreement
pursuant to this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.604)
Sec. 20.06.005 Recapture
(a) Nonperformance of operation. In the event that the facility is completed but fails to commence production
of product or service for any reason, excepting fire, other casualty, accident or natural disaster, within one (1)
year following completion, the agreement shall terminate and so shall the abatement of the taxes for the period
following completion that production does not commence. The taxes otherwise abated for that calendar year
shall be paid to the city within sixty (60) days from the date of termination.
(b) Discontinued operation. In the event that the facility is completed and begins producing product or service,
but subsequently discontinues producing product or service for any reason, excepting fire, explosion, other
casualty, accident or natural disaster, for a continuous period of one (1) year during the abatement period, then
the agreement shall terminate and so shall the abatement of the taxes for the same period during which the
facility no longer produces. The taxes otherwise abated for that calendar year shall be paid to the city within
sixty (60) days from the date of termination.
(c) Notice of default. Should the city council determine that the company or individual is in default according
to the terms and conditions of its agreement, the city shall notify the company or individual in writing at the
address stated in the agreement, and if such is not cured within sixty (60) days from the date of such notice, then
the agreement may be terminated.
(d) Delinquent taxes. In the event that the company or individual: (i) allows its ad valorem taxes owed the city
to become delinquent and fails to timely and properly follow the legal procedures for their protest and/or contest;
or (ii) violates any of the terms and conditions of the abatement agreement and fails to cure during the cure
period, the agreement then may be terminated and all taxes otherwise abated during the delinquent period will be
recaptured and paid within sixty (60) days of termination.
(e) Actual capital investment. Should the governing body determine that the total capital investment in eligible
property is lower than provided in the agreement, the difference between the tax abated and the tax that would
have been abated based upon the actual capital investment as determined shall be paid to the taxing jurisdiction
within sixty (60) days of notification to the company or the individual of such determination.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.605)
Sec. 20.06.006 Administration
(a) Access to facility. The agreement shall stipulate that employees and/or designated representatives of the
taxing jurisdictions will have access to the facility during the term of the agreement to inspect the facility to
determine if the terms and conditions of the agreement are being met. All inspections shall be conducted in a
manner so as to not unreasonably interfere with the construction and/or operation of the facility; provided,
however, the city may conduct “spot” inspections requiring no advance notification to the applicant. All
inspections will be made with one (1) or more representatives of the company or individual, and in accordance
with its safety standards.
(b) Annual evaluation. Upon completion of construction, the eligible jurisdiction individually or in
conjunction with other affected jurisdictions shall annually evaluate each facility receiving abatement to ensure
compliance with the agreement and report possible violations of the agreement.
(c) Transfer or assignment of agreement. Tax abatement agreements may be assigned to a new owner or lessee
of the facility with the written consent of the city council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Any assignment shall provide that the assignee shall irrevocably and unconditionally assume all the duties and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/618
obligations of the assignor upon the same terms and conditions as set out in the agreement. Any assignment of a
tax abatement agreement shall be to an entity that contemplates the same improvements or repairs to the
property, except to the extent such improvements or repairs have been completed. No assignment shall be
approved if the assignor or the assignee is indebted to the city for ad valorem taxes or other obligations.
(2002 Code, sec. 11.606)
Sec. 20.06.007 Ratification of existing guidelines
The foregoing guidelines are hereby ratified and readopted as set forth in this article. (2002 Code, sec. 11.607)
ARTICLE 20.07 REINVESTMENT ZONES
Sec. 20.07.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
The ordinances of the city designating reinvestment zones and economic reinvestment zones, as adopted by the
city, are not included in the code, but they are specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in
the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 22
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 22.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 22.01.001 Motor vehicles to be operated only on areas designed for traffic
(a) Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle in or upon any
public property in the city except on paved roadways or streets, parking areas such as shopping center parking
lots, public alleys and driveways which are specifically designed for motor vehicle traffic.
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.1701–12.1702)
Sec. 22.01.002 Use of alleys generally; speed limit in alleys
(a) Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall, for the purpose of this
section, have the meanings respectively prescribed for them in this subsection as follows:
Alley. Any public way not exceeding twenty (20) feet in width which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled but not operated upon rails.
Residential area. The territory adjacent to an alley when the property on such alley for a distance of three
hundred (300) feet or more is in the main improved with residences.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/618
(b) Unlawful use. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon an alley
in a residential area within the corporate limits of the city unless otherwise provided for in subsection (c) of this
section.
(c) Lawful use. It shall be lawful to operate a motor vehicle upon any alley within the corporate limits of the
city where passage is primarily for the convenience of the properties abutting thereon and for the convenience of
those who provide a service for said abutting properties.
(d) Speed limit. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle upon an alley within the corporate limits of the
city at a speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
(e) Posting of signs. The chief of police of the city is hereby authorized to install such signs as may be
necessary to control alley traffic as affected by the passage of this section.
(f) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.1801–12.1806)
Sec. 22.01.003 Through traffic in alleys
No though traffic shall be permitted on any alley within the city limits except for sanitation vehicles, service
vehicles making pickups or deliveries, or authorized emergency vehicles. (2002 Code, sec. 12.802(b))
Sec. 22.01.004 Following fire vehicle; parking near fire
(a) Prohibited acts. The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business or volunteer firemen on duty,
shall not follow any fire apparatus, fire truck or fire department emergency vehicle traveling in response to a fire
alarm closer than one thousand (1,000) feet, or drive into or park any such vehicle within the block where the
fire apparatus, fire truck or fire department emergency vehicle has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.1901–12.1902)
State law reference–Following or obstructing fire apparatus or ambulance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.407.
Sec. 22.01.005 Operation of bicycles, roller skates or skateboards in retail areas
(a) Operation on sidewalk or pedestrian way prohibited. No person riding on and propelling a bicycle, roller
skates, skateboard or any similar vehicle or device propelled by human power may ride, propel or operate the
same on any area designed, marked or used as a sidewalk or pedestrian way, except upon a permanent or duly
authorized temporary driveway, within a retail area as defined in this section.
(b) Posting of signs. The owner or person in control of a retail area as defined in this section shall post a
conspicuous sign at all entrances to the retail area as defined in this section, such sign to contain language that
clearly prohibits a person from riding on and propelling a bicycle, roller skates, skateboard or similar vehicle or
device propelled by human power upon areas marked or used as a sidewalk or pedestrian way. The size, design
and wording of such sign shall be as approved by the chief of police of the city.
(c) Retail area defined. “Retail area” as used in this section shall mean any area within a retail district,
neighborhood service district, commercial highway district, commercial district or other zoning district of the
city which permits neighborhood shopping facilities, retail and service uses, office uses and other nonresidential
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/618
uses predominantly serving personal needs with retail sales, provided that the area within which the vehicles
described herein may be prohibited shall be those sidewalks, pedestrian ways, driveways or other marked areas
or ways adjacent to or abutting such retail establishments or leading to such establishments from their required
parking areas.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.401–12.403)
ARTICLE 22.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22.02.001 Authority of city manager
(a) The city manager or his designee shall have the duty to conduct an analysis of traffic accidents and to
undertake remedial measures, to conduct investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city
officials in the development of the ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out additional
powers and duties imposed under this article and other traffic ordinances.
(b) Whenever and wherever congestion of traffic, frequency of passing of vehicles or pedestrians or both, the
direction of the flow of traffic, the dimensions and conditions of streets and sidewalks and the use of property
abutting the streets are such that the city manager or his designee deems it necessary for the free flow and
expeditious handling of traffic and the safety of persons and property, the city manager or his designee, in
compliance with this article, is authorized as follows:
(1) To place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when it is required under this
article to make effective the provisions of this article, and may place and maintain such additional
traffic-control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this article or under
state law or to guide or to warn traffic.
(2) To direct intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electronic traffic-control signals or
lights, and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections and
supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of such traffic-control devices.
(3) If any traffic-control signs, signals or devices shall be erected or maintained on roads or
highways or streets that have been designated by the department of transportation by minutes or
resolution as state highways and all signs or signals required under this article for those purposes
[sic], and as far as practical, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city and be done so
with the approval of the department of transportation.
(4) It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to conduct investigations of traffic
conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to
improve traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this article
and other traffic ordinances.
(5) Whenever and wherever the congestion of traffic, the frequency of passage of vehicles or
pedestrians or both, the direction and volume of the flow of traffic, the dimensions and conditions of
the streets and sidewalks, and the use of property abutting the streets are such that the city manager or
his designee finds it to be necessary for the free flow and the expeditious handling of traffic and the
safety of persons and property, the city manager or his designee, in compliance with this article, is
authorized as follows:
(A) To place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required
under this article to make effective the provisions of this article, and may place and maintain
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/618
such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this
article or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
(B) To designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control
signals or lights, and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such
intersections and supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control
devices.
(C) To conduct studies and investigations of the public streets and highways within the city,
and shall study the need of the public for parking vehicles on public streets, the width and
length of public streets where parking is desired, the availability of parking space and frequency
of parking on the public streets, and the needs of business and commercial establishments to
have regulated parking on the public streets and, after making such studies, the city manager or
his designee or his designated representative shall determine when parking, stopping or
standing motor vehicles should be prohibited on public streets and highways in the city, and
shall install appropriate signs or by curb markings, giving notice that parking, stopping or
standing is prohibited. The city manager or his designee shall make changes in the parking,
stopping or standing prohibitions and regulations from time to time as required by the studies
and investigations. The city manager or his designee shall also keep accurate records of all
parking designations, prohibitions and sign installations.
(D) To determine and designate intersections, streets, highways and alleys with exits from
commercial or apartment property where particular hazards exist, and to determine whether
motor vehicles shall stop at one or more exits from any such commercial or apartment property
and to erect a stop sign at every such exit where a stop is required.
(E) To conduct studies and investigations of the public streets and highways within the city,
and shall study the needs of the public for areas on the public streets for the exclusive use of
bicycles during certain hours of the day, and the width and length of areas on public streets
where bicycle lanes are desired, and, after making such studies, the city manager or his designee
shall designate those areas on public streets and highways of the city where areas for the
exclusive use of bicycles are required and should be in effect by means of appropriate signs and
street markings, giving notice that only bicycles may use an area of a public street or highway
during certain hours of the day. The city manager or his designee may change areas designated
for the exclusive use of bicycles from time to time as required by studies and investigations.
The city manager or his designee shall also keep accurate records of all bicycle lane
designations, sign installations and street markings.
(F) To designate and maintain crosswalks.
(G) To establish safety zones on any of the streets of the city.
(H) To mark lanes for traffic and parking stalls on the streets of the city.
(I) To designate the locations at which the making of right, left or complete turns at any
intersection of streets or at median openings on divided streets in the city is prohibited.
(J) To designate the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at or near certain intersections.
(K) To designate routes directing traffic near public or private schools, parks and public
buildings.
(L) To determine the location of passenger zones, loading zones and handicapped zones.
(M) To designate locations on the streets of the city for use as public cab stands.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/618
(N) To designate locations on the streets of the city for use as bus stops.
(O) To designate intersections of streets at which drivers operating vehicles approaching
intersection on one or more of the intersecting streets must bring such vehicle to a complete
stop before proceeding into such intersection.
(P) To make such changes as changing conditions may require in any designation,
determination or regulation the city manager or his designee is authorized to make under this
article.
(Q) To designate one-way streets.
(R) To install temporary traffic-control devices for special events or studies.
(S) To designate intersections of streets at which drivers operating vehicles on one or more of
the intersecting streets shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the
designated roadway and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching the intersection on
another intersecting street so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(T) To designate streets on which the operation of bicycles shall be prohibited.
(U) To designate and mark appropriately those traffic lanes on multi-laned streets, drives or
driveways to be used by vehicles engaging in left turn movements.
(V) To determine locations for the prohibition of right turns on red signals at intersections
controlled by traffic-control devices, and also the prohibition of left turns on red signals at the
intersections which are of two one-way streets and are controlled by traffic-control devices
where such left turns would be otherwise permissible by direction of the traffic flow upon the
streets.
(W) The city manager or his designee or his designated representative shall, on the basis of
an engineering and traffic survey, designate school traffic zones with appropriate street
markings or signs, which street markings or signs shall be placed at the school zones by the city
manager or his designee or his designated representative and which street markings or signs
shall be in conformity with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(X) The city manager or his designee or his designated representative shall conduct studies
and investigations of the public streets and highways within the city and shall study the quantity
and frequency of truck travel on the public streets, and the needs of the public to have regulated
truck travel on the public streets, and after making such studies, the city manager or his
designee or his designated representative shall establish no through truck zones in the city, and
shall regulate such prohibition by installing appropriate signs.
(Y) The city manager or his designee or his designated representative shall make changes in
the no through truck zone designations from time to time as required by the studies and
investigations. The city manager or his designee or his designated representative shall keep
accurate records of all no through truck zone designations and sign installations. The city
manager or his designee shall erect appropriate signs to designate the no through truck zones.
(Z) The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed
any trees, plants or other vegetative matter constituting a violation of this article or to be so
trimmed, pruned or removed as to eliminate the prohibited condition.
(AA) The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to determine time periods when
routine street and utility maintenance may not close a roadway or lane because of peak traffic
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/618
flow characteristics.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.101)
Sec. 22.02.002 Conformance with state manual; uniformity
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the
state transportation commission or resolution adopted by the legislative body of the city. All signs and signals
required under this article for a particular purpose shall be, so far as practicable, uniform as to type and location
throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of the state law
or this article shall be official traffic-control devices. (2002 Code, sec. 12.102)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 22.02.003 Existing devices ratified
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings heretofore placed or erected by the city and now in use
for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be the
official traffic-control devices; provided, however, that such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the
provisions of state law or this article. (2002 Code, sec. 12.103)
Sec. 22.02.004 Obedience
(a) The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with the authority granted under this article or any other traffic ordinance of the city, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle as contained in section 22.02.009.
(b) All traffic-control devices and signs of every kind, character and description erected by the chief of police
shall have the force and effect of an ordinance within themselves. All pedestrians and drivers of any vehicle and
every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall
obey the directions on any such sign or marker of every description, kind and nature whatsoever concerning the
regulation of traffic. The violation of the direction of any such sign, signal, device or marker of any kind, nature
or description whatsoever is hereby prohibited.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.104)
State law reference–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004.
Sec. 22.02.005 Traffic-control signal legend
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the word “go,” “caution,” or “stop” or
exhibiting different colored lights successively, the following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights
shall indicate as follows:
(1) Green alone or “go”.
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless
a sign at such place prohibits either or both such turns. But vehicular traffic shall yield the rightof-
way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent
crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
(B) Pedestrians approaching the intersection may proceed across the roadway within any
marked or unmarked crosswalk in the direction vehicular traffic is permitted to travel.
(2) Yellow alone or “caution” when shown following green or “go” signal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/618
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the
intersection, but, if such stop cannot be made in safety by a vehicle at the time of appearance of
the yellow light, the vehicle may be driven through the intersection.
(B) Pedestrians proceeding in the direction of or approaching such signal shall remain on the
curb.
(3) Red alone or “stop”.
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain
standing until green, a green arrow or “go” is shown alone.
(B) When a sign reading “right turn on red” is displayed in connection with a traffic signal, a
vehicle may turn right on the red signal, but only after having first come to a complete stop at
the nearest crosswalk before entering the intersection and then only when such right turn does
not interfere with pedestrian or other traffic.
(C) No pedestrian proceeding in the direction of or approaching such signal shall enter the
red light.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.105)
State law reference–Traffic-control signals in general, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.007.
Sec. 22.02.006 Installation of stop signs
As provided in section 22.02.001, as amended, the city manager or his designee shall maintain a comprehensive
list of all stop signs erected in accordance with this article, and the city manager or his designee shall erect such
signage in substantial compliance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, or at each
intersection as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk thereafter, or, if none, at the nearest line of
the roadway. (2002 Code, sec. 12.106)
Sec. 22.02.007 Specifications for stop signs; location
Every sign erected pursuant to this article shall bear the word “stop” in letters not less than eight (8) inches in
height, and said signs shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination or by
fixed floodlights projected on the face of the sign or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Any
stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. (2002 Code, sec. 12.107)
Sec. 22.02.008 Stopping at stop sign
When stop signs are erected as provided in this article at or near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of
a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection,
except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal. (2002 Code, sec. 12.108)
State law reference–Manner of stopping at stop or yield sign, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.010.
Sec. 22.02.009 Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles
(a) The provisions of this article regulating the operation of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, being defined as vehicles of the fire department, police department and such ambulances and
emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the chief of police, except as follows. The driver, when operating such vehicle in an emergency, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/618
(1) Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this article.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down at such speed as may
be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Disregard regulations governing direction and [of] movement or turning in specified directions
so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(b) The foregoing exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences
of his reckless disregard of the safety of others.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.109)
State law reference–Operation of authorized emergency vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 546.
Sec. 22.02.010 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction in municipal court shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec. 12.110)
Secs. 22.02.011–22.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Automated Red Light Enforcement*
Sec. 22.02.031 Definitions
In this division:
Department. The state department of transportation.
Intersection. The place or area where two or more streets intersect.
Owner. The owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the state department
of transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country.
Photographic traffic signal monitoring system. A system that:
(1) Consists of a camera and vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an electrically
operated traffic-control signal; and
(2) Is capable of producing at least two recorded images that depict the license plate attached to a
motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic-control signal.
Recorded image. An image recorded by a photographic traffic monitoring system that depicts the rear of a motor
vehicle and is automatically recorded on a photograph or digital image.
System location. The approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic monitoring system is
directed and in operation.
Traffic-control signal. Shall have the meaning assigned by section 541.304 of the Texas Transportation Code, as
amended.
Sec. 22.02.032 Installation and operation of system
Before installing a photographic traffic signal enforcement system at an intersection approach:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/618
(1) The city manager or designee shall conduct a traffic engineering study of the approach to
determine whether, in addition to or as an alternative to the system, a design change to the approach
or a change in the signalization of the intersection is likely to reduce the number of red light
violations at the intersection.
(2) An intersection approach must be selected for the installation of a photographic traffic signal
enforcement system based on traffic volume, the history of accidents at the approach, the number or
frequency of red light violations at the intersection, and similar traffic engineering and safety criteria,
without regard to the ethnic or socioeconomic characteristics of the area in which the approach is
located.
(3) The city manager or designee shall report results of the traffic engineering study required by
subsection (1) to a citizen advisory committee consisting of one person appointed by each member of
the city council. The committee shall advise the city manager or designee on the installation and
operation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system established under this division.
(4) The city manager or designee shall install signs along each roadway that leads to an intersection
at which a photographic traffic signal enforcement system is in active use. The signs must be at least
one hundred feet (100') from the intersection or located according to standards established in the
manual adopted by the Texas Transportation Commission under section 544.001 of the
Transportation Code, be easily readable to any operator approaching the intersection, and clearly
indicate the presence of a photographic monitoring system that records violations that may result in
the issuance of a notice of violation and the imposition of a monetary penalty.
(5) The local authority or person with which the city manager or designee contracts for the
administration and enforcement of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system may not provide
information about a civil penalty imposed under this division to a credit bureau, as defined by section
392.001, Finance Code.
(6) Before installing a photographic traffic signal enforcement system at an intersection approach,
the local authority shall compile a written report of the number and type of traffic accidents that have
occurred at the intersection for a period of at least eighteen (18) months before the date of the report.
(7) Not later than six (6) months after the date of the installation of the photographic traffic signal
enforcement system at the intersection, the city manager or designee shall provide the state
department of transportation a copy of the report required by subsection (6).
(8) After installing a photographic traffic signal enforcement system at an intersection approach,
the city shall monitor and annually report to the state department of transportation the number and
type of traffic accidents at the intersection to determine whether the system results in a reduction in
accidents or a reduction in the severity of accidents.
(9) The report must be in writing in the form prescribed by the state department of transportation.
Sec. 22.02.033 Civil penalty
(a) The city council finds and determines that a vehicle that proceeds into an intersection when the trafficcontrol
signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal damages the public by
endangering vehicle operators and pedestrians alike, by decreasing the efficiency of traffic-control and traffic
flow efforts, and by increasing the number of serious accidents to which public safety agencies must respond at
the expense of the taxpayers.
(b) The owner of a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty if the vehicle proceeds into an intersection at a
system location when the traffic-control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red
signal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/618
(c) The civil penalty for which the owner is liable is in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
Sec. 22.02.034 Enforcement procedures; notice of violation
(a) The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this division.
(b) In order to impose a civil penalty under this division, the department shall mail a notice of violation to the
owner of the motor vehicle liable for the civil penalty not later than the 30th day after the date the violation is
alleged to have occurred, to:
(1) The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the state department of
transportation; or
(2) If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the
motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous
to the state department of transportation.
(c) A notice of violation issued under this division shall contain the following:
(1) A description of the violation alleged;
(2) The location of the intersection where the violation occurred;
(3) The date and time of the violation;
(4) The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(5) The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(6) A copy of a recorded image of the vehicle involved in the violation that is limited solely to
depiction of the area that the registration number is displayed on the license plate of the vehicle
involved in the violation;
(7) The amount of the civil penalty to be imposed for the violation;
(8) The number of days the person has in which to pay or contest the civil penalty and a statement
that the person incurs a late payment if not paid within the period;
(9) A statement that the owner of the vehicle in the notice of violation may elect to pay the civil
penalty by mail sent to a specified address instead of appearing at the time and place of the
administrative adjudication hearing;
(10) A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil
penalty;
(11) Information that informs the person named in the notice of violation:
(A) Of the person's right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person in an
administrative adjudication;
(B) Of the manner and time in which imposition of the civil penalty may be contested;
(C) That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is an
admission of liability and that failure to appear at an administrative adjudication hearing after
having requested a hearing is an admission of liability; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/618
(D) That failure to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed shall result in the imposition
of a late payment fee of $25.00.
Sec. 22.02.035 Administrative adjudication hearing
(a) A person who receives a notice of violation under this division may contest the imposition of the civil
penalty before an administrative hearing officer. The request for a hearing must be filed on or before the date
specified in the notice of violation, which may not be earlier than the 30th day after the date of the notice of
violation was mailed. Upon receipt of the request, the department shall notify the person of the date and time of
the hearing on the administrative adjudication. The administrative adjudication hearing shall be held before a
hearing officer appointed by the city council.
(b) Failure to pay a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability in the full
amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation and constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal
under section 22.02.037.
(c) Failure to appear at an administrative adjudication hearing after having requested a hearing is an admission
of liability for the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation and constitutes a waiver of
the right to appeal under section 22.02.037.
(d) A person who fails to pay a civil penalty within the time allowed by this division shall be additionally
liable for a late payment penalty in the amount of $25.00.
(e) The civil penalty shall not be assessed if, after a hearing, the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability.
(f) A person who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing or who requests an administrative
adjudication hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing is liable for a late fee in
the amount of $25.00 in addition to the amount of the civil penalty assessed for the violation. A person who is
found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the civil penalty and late fee
within 10 days of the hearing.
(g) In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proved at the hearing by a preponderance of
the evidence. The reliability of the photographic traffic-control signal monitoring system used to produce the
recorded image of the violation may be attested to in an administrative adjudication hearing by affidavit of an
officer or employee of the city or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who
is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that
alleges a violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is admissible in a proceeding under
this division, is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit, and is prima facie evidence of the violation
alleged in the notice of violation.
Sec. 22.02.036 Untimely request for hearing
Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, a person who fails to pay the amount of a civil penalty
or to contest liability in a timely manner is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing on the violation if:
(1) The person files an affidavit with the hearing officer stating the date on which the person
received the notice of violation that was mailed to the person; and
(2) Within the same period required by section 22.02.034(c)(11)(B) for a hearing to be timely
requested but measured from the date the mailed notice was received as stated in the affidavit filed
under subsection (1), the person requests an administrative adjudication hearing.
Sec. 22.02.037 Appeals
(a) The owner of a motor vehicle determined by a hearing officer to be liable for a civil penalty may appeal
that determination to a judge by filing an appeal petition with the clerk of the court. The petition must be filed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/618
with the municipal court of the municipality.
(b) The petition must be filed before the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication
hearing officer entered the finding of liability for the civil penalty and accompanied by a payment of the costs
required by law for the court.
(c) The court clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner of the motor vehicle and the appropriate
department, agency, or office of the local authority of the date, time and place of the hearing.
(d) An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner of the motor
vehicle. The owner shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation to perfect the owner's appeal.
(e) An appeal under this division shall be determined by the court by trial de novo.
Sec. 22.02.038 Order by hearing officer
(a) The hearing officer at any administrative adjudication hearing under this division shall issue an order
stating:
(1) Whether the person charged with the violation is liable for the violation; and
(2) The amount of any penalty or late fee, if any, assessed against the person.
(b) The orders issued under subsection (a) may be filed with the office of hearing examiner.
(c) The hearing examiner shall keep the orders in a separate index and file. The orders may be recorded using
microfilm, microfiche, or data processing techniques.
Sec. 22.02.039 Presumptions
(a) It is presumed that the owner of the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of
violation mailed to the person if the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a
photographic traffic signal enforcement system belongs to the owner of the motor vehicle.
(b) If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph
or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the
business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice
of violation, the presumption under subsection (a) is rebutted on the presentation of evidence establishing that
the vehicle was at that time:
(1) Being test-driven by another person;
(2) Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person; or
(3) Owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation.
(c) Notwithstanding section 22.02.035, the presentation of evidence under subsection (b) by a person who is in
the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or did not own the vehicle at the time of the violation
must be made by affidavit, through testimony at the administrative adjudication hearing under section 22.02.035,
or by a written declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted by
mail to the local authority or the entity with which the local authority contracts.
(d) If the presumption established by subsection (a) is rebutted under subsection (b), a civil penalty may not be
imposed on the owner of the vehicle or the person named in the notice of violation, as applicable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/618
(e) If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in the
photograph or digital image taken by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person
in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual,
the owner of the motor vehicle shall provide to the local authority or the entity with which the local authority
contracts the name and address of the individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the
photograph or digital image and a statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the
vehicle. The owner shall provide the information required by this subsection not later than the 30th day after the
date the notice of violation is received. If the owner provides the required information, it is presumed that the
individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation and the
local authority or contractor may send a notice of violation to that individual at the address provided by the
owner of the motor vehicle.
Sec. 22.02.040 Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy
(a) The imposition of a civil penalty under this division is not a criminal conviction for any purpose.
(b) A civil penalty may not be imposed under this division on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of
the vehicle was arrested or was issued a citation and notice to appear by a peace officer for the same violation of
section 544.007(d) of the Texas Transportation Code recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement
system.
(c) A person who fails to pay the civil penalty or to timely contest liability for the penalty is considered to
admit liability for the full amount of the civil penalty stated in the summons mailed to the person.
Sec. 22.02.041 Appointment of hearing officer; authority
The city council shall, after recommendation by the city manager, appoint a hearing officer under this division,
who shall have the authority to administer oaths and issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents.
Sec. 22.02.042 General surveillance prohibited
The city manager or designee shall operate a photographic traffic-control signal enforcement system only for the
purpose of detecting a violation or suspected violation of a traffic-control signal.
Sec. 22.02.043 Submitting false affidavit
A person commits an offense if the person submits a false affidavit pursuant to this division. An offense under
this section is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 2007-12-57 adopted 12/10/07)
ARTICLE 22.03 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Sec. 22.03.001 Reckless driving
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle upon a public street or
highway or any public place in the city in a reckless manner. Any person who drives or operates a motor vehicle
in willful or wanton disregard of the rights or safety of others or without due caution or circumspection, [or] in a
manner so as to create unreasonable noise, shall be guilty of reckless driving.
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.2001–12.2002)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/618
State law reference–Reckless driving, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.401.
Sec. 22.03.002 U-turns
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle in such a manner as to violate a trafficcontrol
sign, signal or device of any kind or nature whatsoever which indicates that U-turns are prohibited at a
certain intersection. U-turns are specifically prohibited at the following locations:
From eastbound Pleasant Run Road to westbound Pleasant Run Road at its intersection with
Elm Street during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
(2002 Code, art. 12.2100)
Sec. 22.03.003 One-way streets and alleys
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or alley designated as a one-way
street or alley, in any direction other than so designated, as follows:
Street Condition/Extent
Marquis One-way in a south direction from 7:15 a.m. to 3:15 p.m. on school
days from its point of intersection with Monticello to its point of
intersection with Manchester.
(Ordinance 2009-02-05 adopted 2/9/09)
State law reference–One-way roadways, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.059.
ARTICLE 22.04 SPEED REGULATIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22.04.001 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction in municipal court shall be punished by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code for
each and every offense.
Sec. 22.04.002 General speed limit on streets and alleys
A person commits an offense if he operates a vehicle on any street within the city at a speed of greater than 30
miles per hour or on any public alley at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter. Any speed in excess of 30 miles per hour on a public street or 15 miles per hour in a public alley, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and
is unlawful.
(Ordinance 2009-06-16 adopted 6/8/09)
Sec. 22.04.003 Speed limits on specific streets
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/618
A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle on the following designated streets at a speed
greater than the speed designated by this section for that street or portion of that street, and any speed in excess
of the limit provided in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable nor prudent and
is unlawful.
Street Extent Speed
(mph)
Ames Road From its point of intersection with Houston School
Road to its point of intersection with Wintergreen
Road.
35
Bear Creek Road From its point of intersection with Dallas Avenue to its
point of intersection with IH 35E.
45
Belt Line Road From its point of intersection with IH 35E to a point
500 feet west of its point of intersection with Martin
Drive.
45
Belt Line Road From its point of intersection with Dallas Avenue to its
point of intersection with Main Street.
40
Belt Line Road From its point of intersection with Lancaster-Hutchins
Road to its point of intersection with the city limits.
45
Belt Line Road From its point of intersection with Lancaster-Hutchins
Road to a point 1450 feet west of its point of
intersection with West Main Street.
40
Belt Line Road From its point of intersection with West Main Street to
its point of intersection with IH 35E.
45
Bluegrove Road From the point of its intersection with Pleasant Run
Road to its point of intersection with Belt Line Road.
35
Bluegrove Road From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with the city limits.
30
Cedardale Drive From its point of intersection with Dallas Avenue to its
point of intersection with Franklin Street.
30
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/618
Cedardale Drive From its point of intersection with Franklin Street to its
point of intersection with Houston School Road.
40
Cornell Road From its point of intersection with Lancaster-Hutchins
Road to its point of intersection with Pleasant Run
Road.
30
Cornell Road From its point of intersection with Pleasant Run Road
to its point of intersection with Greene Road.
40
Danieldale Drive From its point of intersection with Waters Street to its
point of intersection with IH 35E.
30
Danieldale Drive From its point of intersection with Houston School
Road to its point of intersection with Waters Street.
40
Duncanville Wheatland
Road
From its point of intersection with the Lancaster-Dallas
city limits to its point of intersection with Houston
School Road.
35
Street Extent Speed
(mph)
Ferris Road From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with the southern city limits.
40
Greene Road From its point of intersection with Lancaster-Hutchins
Road to its point of intersection with the eastern city
limits.
40
Houston School Road From its point of intersection with Pleasant Run Road
to a point 200 feet north of its point of intersection with
Wintergreen Road.
40
Houston School Road From a point 200 feet north of its intersection with
Wintergreen Road to a point 100 feet north of its point
of intersection with Ames Road.
40
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/618
Houston School Road From a point 100 feet north of its intersection with
Ames Road to its point of intersection with Duncanville
Wheatland Road.
40
Houston School Road From a point 100 feet north of its intersection with
Ames Road to its point of intersection with I-20 service
road.
45
Houston School Road From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with Pleasant Run Road.
45
Houston School Road From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with Main Street.
35
Houston School Road From its point of intersection with Main Street to its
point of intersection with the southern city limits.
30
IH 35E From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with Springfield Street.
40
IH 35E From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with the north city limits.
40
IH 35E From its point of intersection with Parkerville Road to
its point of intersection with the north city limits.
40
IH 35E From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with Parkerville Road.
40
Jefferson Street From its point of intersection with Pleasant Run Road
to its point of intersection with the city limits.
45
Lancaster-Hutchins Road From its point of intersection with Pleasant Run Road
to its point of intersection with the northern city limits.
35
Lancaster-Hutchins Road From its point of intersection with Pleasant Run Road
to its point of intersection with State Street.
30
Lancaster-Hutchins Road From its point of intersection with State Street to its 30
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/618
point of intersection with Dallas Avenue.
Main Street From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with Lancaster-Hutchins Road.
30
West Main Street From its point of intersection with West Belt Line Road
to its point of intersection with Big Sandy Lane.
40
Nokomis Road From its point of intersection with Belt Line Road to its
point of intersection with the southern city limits.
30
Street Extent Speed
(mph)
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Prescott Drive to a
point 100 feet east of its point of intersection with
Marsalis Road.
40
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Dallas Avenue to its
point of intersection with Prescott Drive.
40
Pleasant Run Road From a point 100 feet east of its point of intersection
with Marsalis Road to its point of intersection with IH
35E.
40
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Lancaster-Hutchins
Road to its point of intersection with the eastern city
limits.
40
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Lancaster-Hutchins
Road to its point of intersection with Prescott Drive.
40
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Bluegrove Road to
its point of intersection with IH 35E.
40
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Dallas Avenue to its
point of intersection with Bluegrove Road.
40
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Lancaster-Hutchins 40
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/618
Road to is point of intersection with Bluegrove Road.
Telephone Road From its point of intersection with Wintergreen Road to
its point of intersection with Dallas Avenue.
40
University Hills Blvd. From its point of intersection with the north right-ofway
of the IH 20 service road northwest to its
intersection with Wheatland Road.
45
Wintergreen Road From its point of intersection with IH 35E to its point
of intersection with Hulette Avenue.
30
Wintergreen Road From its point of intersection with Hulette Avenue to its
point of intersection with Houston School Road.
40
Wintergreen Road From its point of intersection with Houston School
Road to its point of intersection with Telephone Road.
40
Wintergreen Road From its point of intersection with Telephone Road
southward and eastward to its point of intersection with
SH 342 (N. Dallas Avenue).
35
Wintergreen Road From its point of intersection with N. Dallas Avenue to
its point of intersection with the east city limits.
40
(Ordinance 2009-06-16 adopted 6/8/09; Ordinance 2010-08-12 adopted 8/9/10; Ordinance 2010-12-28 adopted
12/13/10; Ordinance 2011-03-07 adopted 3/28/11; Ordinance 2013-06-05 adopted 6/10/13; Ordinance 2015-06-
05 adopted 6/22/15)
Sec. 22.04.004 Determination of speed limits
The city manager or designee shall determine on the basis of engineering and traffic surveys the reasonable and
safe maximum speed limits for each street within the city and submit recommendations based on his
investigation to the city council.
Sec. 22.04.005 Alteration of speed limits
On the basis of the recommendations of the city manager or designee, submitted in accordance with the
preceding section, the city council may alter the maximum speed limit established in this chapter as the council
deems necessary.
Sec. 22.04.006 Posting of signs
The city manager or designee shall post the maximum and minimum speeds established in this division by
appropriate signs in conspicuous places so that every motorist may be aware of the speed limits. No sign shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/618
required in an urban district where the maximum speed limit is 30 miles per hour and where there is no
minimum speed limit.
Sec. 22.04.007 Definition of urban district
An “urban district,” as used in this division, means the territory contiguous to and including any highway or
street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of
less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of one-fourth (1/4) mile or more.
Sec. 22.04.008 School zones
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates a vehicle in a school traffic zone at a speed greater than 20
miles per hour, and any speed in excess of 20 miles per hour is prima facie evidence that the speed is not
reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful.
(b) The city manager or designee shall designate school traffic zones with appropriate street markings or signs,
which street markings or signs shall be placed at the school zones by the city manager or designee. The speed
limit designated for school traffic zones shall be effective only on days when school is in session and at times
when appropriate signs advising motorists of the speed limit are placed in conspicuous places.
(c) The following streets or portions of streets are designated school traffic zones. The city manager or
designee shall erect traffic-control devices in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices on the following designated streets:
Street Extent Speed
(mph)
Atteberry Lane From 165 feet west of its point of intersection with
Millbrook Drive to its point of intersection with
Millbrook Drive.
20
Coral Drive From its point of intersection with Bermuda Avenue
to its point of intersection with Rolling Hills Place.
20
Main Street From 38 feet west of its intersection with Ellis Street
to its point of intersection with Crest Street.
20
Merrimac Drive From 340 feet west of its point of intersection with
Millbrook Drive to its point of intersection with
Millbrook Drive.
20
Street Extent Speed
(mph)
Millbrook Drive From its point of intersection with Rawlins Drive to
its point of intersection with Merrimac Drive.
20
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/618
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Carol Street to a
point 375 feet west of its point of intersection with
Elm Street.
20
Pleasant Run Road From a point 332 feet west of its point of
intersection with Chapman to a point 308 feet east of
its point of intersection with Chapman.
20
Rawlins Drive From a point 220 feet west of its point of
intersection with Millbrook Drive to a point 150 feet
east of its point of intersection with Millbrook Drive.
20
Rolling Hills Place From a point 288 feet north of its point of
intersection with Coral Drive to a point 514 south of
its point of intersection with Coral Drive.
20
(Ordinance 2009-06-16 adopted 6/8/09)
(d) The following streets or portions of streets are designated school traffic zones. The city manager or
designee shall erect traffic-control devices in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices on the following designated streets:
Street Extent Speed
(mph)
Belt Line Road From a point 700 feet west of its point of
intersection with Bluegrove Road to a point 860 feet
east of its intersection with Bluegrove Road.
20
Blue Grove Road From a point 583 feet north of its point of
intersection with Belt Line Road to a point 200 feet
south of its point of intersection with Belt Line
Road.
20
Lancaster Park Road From its point of intersection with Pleasant Run
Road to its point of intersection with Dogwood
Trail.
20
Main Street From its point of intersection with Pecan Grove to a
point 847 feet west of its point of intersection with
Belt Line Road.
20
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/618
Manchester From its point of intersection with McKenzie to a
point 77 feet west of Midbury.
20
Marquis From its point of intersection with Monticello to its
point of intersection with Manchester.
20
McKenzie From its point of intersection with Manchester to a
point 26 feet north of its point of intersection with
Marimont.
20
Monticello From a point 80 feet south of its point of intersection
with Ames to a point 26 feet north of its intersection
with Marimont.
20
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Westridge Street
west 480 feet.
20
Street Extent Speed
(mph)
Pleasant Run Road From a point 284 feet west of its point of
intersection with Blue Grove Road to a point 287
feet east of its point of intersection with Blue Grove
Road.
20
Pleasant Run Road From its point of intersection with Westridge Street
to its point of intersection with Irene Street.
20
Westridge Street From a point 224 feet north of its point of
intersection with Rea Street to its point of
intersection with Eighth Street.
20
Wintergreen Road From a point 630 feet east of its point of intersection
with Dallas Avenue to a point 1,447 feet west of its
point of intersection with Jefferson.
20
(Ordinance 2009-06-16 adopted 6/8/09; Ordinance 2010-08-12 adopted 8/9/10)
Sec. 22.04.009 Temporary speed zones
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/618
(a) In the event of construction on any street or highway, the city manager or designee is authorized to conduct
an engineering and traffic investigation to determine if the maximum lawful prima facie speed limit established
by this division or state law should be temporarily reduced in order to preserve and protect the public safety. If
the city manager or designee determines that such speed limit should be reduced, he shall enter a written finding
and order to that effect and, upon approval of that order in writing by the city manager or designee, temporary
official traffic-control devices shall be erected giving notice of such speed limit prior to enforcement.
(b) The finding and order of the city manager or designee shall estimate the length of time for which such
temporary speed limit shall be in effect, and if necessary an additional order in writing shall be entered in the
event it is necessary to extend such time. No such temporary speed limit shall be effective longer than is
provided in such written order, nor in any event longer than is necessary to complete the construction for which
the speed limit was ordered. A certified copy of the order shall be admissible in evidence in municipal court to
establish the authority of such temporary speed limit, and it is hereby determined and declared that any such
temporary speed limit found and ordered in accordance with this section shall be the speed which is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing, and any
violation of such temporary speed limit shall be considered a violation of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ordinance 2009-06-16 adopted 6/8/09)
Secs. 22.04.010–22.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Truck Speed Zones
Sec. 22.04.041 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code. (2002 Code, sec. 12.302)
Sec. 22.04.042 Speed limits established
No person shall operate or drive any motor or other vehicle on the following designated streets at a greater speed
than the speed designated for that street or portion of that street as set forth below in this section, and any speed
in excess of the limit set forth in this section shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is neither reasonable
nor prudent and is unlawful:
Street Extent Truck Speed
(mph)
Belt Line Road From Dallas Avenue to Interstate Hwy. 35E 30
Pleasant Run Road From Lancaster-Hutchins Road to Interstate Hwy.
35E
30
(2002 Code, sec. 12.301)
ARTICLE 22.05 USE OF HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONES IN SCHOOL ZONES*
Sec. 22.05.001 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/618
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Engaging in a call. Talking into, dialing or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but shall not include
holding a mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone.
Hand-held mobile telephone. A mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least one hand (or
prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).
Hands-free mobile telephone. A mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped
with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, or is a part of the
motor vehicle, by which the user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in
the case of a physically disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary
to activate, deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.
Mobile telephone. A device used for wireless telephone service and/or a personal digital assistant for data or
telecommunications services other than voice.
Personal digital assistant. A device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that provides for data
communication other than by voice.
Wireless telephone service. Two-way real time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to a
public switched telephone network and commonly referred to as a cellular service or personal communication
service.
Sec. 22.05.002 Restrictions; exemptions
(a) Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in
a school zone, as designated pursuant to this chapter, on official school days, during the hours when school zones
are in effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting hand-held mobile telephone use are posted in
place, while using a hand-held mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send or read messages or data.
(b) An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to or in the immediate proximity of his or
her ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section.
“Immediate proximity” shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile telephone to hear
telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such
operator's ear.
(c) Subsection (b) shall not apply to:
(1) The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following
regarding an emergency situation: an emergency response operator; a hospital, physician's office or
health clinic; or a public safety department;
(2) Any law enforcement [officer], police officer, emergency services official, first aid, emergency
medical technicians and personnel, or any fire safety official in the performance of duties arising out
of and in the course of his or her employment as such; or
(3) The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands-free manner.
Sec. 22.05.003 Liability
The violation of this article is a strict liability offense.
(Ordinance 2008-10-42 adopted 10/13/08)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/618
ARTICLE 22.06 PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22.06.001 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec. 12.508)
Sec. 22.06.002 Unlawfully parked vehicles declared nuisance; presumption that owner is responsible for
violation
If any vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street, highway, alley or other place where parking is
prohibited by this division or any other ordinance of the city, the same is hereby declared a nuisance per se, and
the fact that such vehicle is unattended or unoccupied by any person shall be prima facie evidence that the owner
unlawfully stopped, placed or parked such vehicle at such location. Further, no person shall allow, permit or
suffer any motor or other vehicle registered in his name to be left, stopped or parked in violation of this division
or any parking regulation of the city. (2002 Code, sec. 12.506)
State law reference–Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.308.
Sec. 22.06.003 Parking in paved alley
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle, boat or other impediment in any
paved alley within the city limits.
Sec. 22.06.004 Parking near postal receptacle
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle, boat or other impediment upon any
public street or alley between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. within fifteen (15) feet of a postal receptacle
or a grouping of postal receptacles, except a United States Postal Service vehicle, and except on Sundays and
federal holidays.
(Ordinance 2018-02-01 adopted 2/26/18)
Sec. 22.06.005 Parking near intersection of street and alley
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle, trailer, boat or other
impediment within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of a public street, within the city limits within [with] any
paved alley. For purposes of this section, “intersection” is defined as the area embraced within the prolongation
or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of a street and a
paved alley which join one another.
(b) The police department is authorized to issue citations to vehicles parked or left in violation of this division,
and to immediately remove or cause the removal of the vehicle or impediment to the city pound and to hold
same until claimed by the owner. The police department is authorized to hold the vehicle and to charge a pound
fee in accordance with an established schedule before such vehicle will be released.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.502)
Sec. 22.06.006 Parking for longer than twenty-four hours
No person shall leave standing or park in any public street within the city limits any vehicle, automobile or other
character of private property unattended for a longer continuous period of time than twenty-four (24) hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/618
(2002 Code, sec. 12.503)
Sec. 22.06.007 Parking vehicles over one and one-half tons in dwelling district
It shall be unlawful for any person, or any owner, to leave, park, or stand any truck, truck-tractor, road tractor,
semi-trailer or bus with a weight or rated carrying capacity in excess of one and one-half (1-1/2) tons, according
to the manufacturer's classification, upon any street or upon any private property within any area zoned by the
development code and map of the city as a single-family dwelling district, two-family dwelling district or
multiple-family dwelling district. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of such vehicles in such
areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading or unloading passengers, freight or merchandise, or for the
purpose of installation, repairs or service to public utilities, or for the purpose of accomplishing solid waste
disposal operations, but not otherwise. (2002 Code, sec. 12.504)
Sec. 22.06.008 Parking vehicles over one and one-half tons on Lotus Lane
It shall be unlawful for any person, or any owner, to leave, park, or stand any truck, truck-tractor, road tractor,
semi-trailer or bus with a weight or rated carrying capacity in excess of one and one-half (1-1/2) tons, according
to the manufacturer's classification, upon Lotus Lane at any time; provided, however, that the temporary parking
or standing of such vehicles in such areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers,
freight or merchandise, but not otherwise, shall be permitted. (2002 Code, sec. 12.505)
Secs. 22.06.009–22.06.040 Reserved
Division 2. Fire Lanes
Sec. 22.06.041 Standing and parking prohibited
From and after July 17, 1972, and the posting of appropriate signs as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for
any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle, trailer, boat or other impediment in any area within the city
designated as a fire lane. (2002 Code, sec. 12.601)
Sec. 22.06.042 Designation
The fire chief or his authorized representative is designated to conduct a fire safety study of public streets,
highways and alleys within the city and in parking lots commonly used by the public, and is hereby authorized to
determine and designate fire lanes as appropriate to the safety and well-being of the people and property of the
city. (2002 Code, sec. 12.602)
Sec. 22.06.043 Posting of signs
Upon determination and designation by the fire chief or his representative of a fire lane, the city manager or his
duly authorized representative is directed to post appropriate signs in a conspicuous place along such fire lanes,
stating in substance that it is a fire lane and that parking is prohibited at any time as set out in section 22.06.041
hereof. (2002 Code, sec. 12.603)
Sec. 22.06.044 Issuance of citations; removal of vehicles
(a) The police department is authorized to issue citations to vehicles parked or left in a fire lane in violation of
this division, and to immediately remove or cause the removal of the vehicle or impediment to the city pound
and to hold the same until claimed by the owner.
(b) The police department is authorized to hold the vehicle and to charge a pound fee in accordance with an
established schedule before such vehicle will be released.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.604)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/618
Sec. 22.06.045 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction in the municipal court shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec. 12.605)
Secs. 22.06.046–22.06.070 Reserved
Division 3. Parking Restrictions on Specific Streets
Sec. 22.06.071 Prohibited parking and permit parking on Centre Street and Pecan Street
(a) The purpose of this section is to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of Centre Street
and Pecan Street within areas zoned for residential uses for the parking of vehicles by persons using the city's
activity center, to protect that district from polluted air, excessive noise, and trash and refuse caused by the entry
of such vehicles, to protect the residents of that district from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their
residences, to preserve the character of that district as a residential district, to promote efficiency in the
maintenance of those streets in a clean and safe condition, to preserve the value of the property in that district, to
preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians and traffic safety generally, and to preserve the public
health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
(b) To accomplish the purposes set out in subsection (a) above, parking on the west side of the 400 block of
South Centre Street will be permit parking for residents and their guests only at all times, parking on the east
side of the 400 block of South Centre Street shall be prohibited, parking on the south side of the 100 and 200
blocks of Pecan Street will be by permit for residents and their guests only at all times, and parking on the north
side of the 100 and 200 blocks of Pecan Street shall be prohibited at all times.
(c) The city manager or his designee shall provide parking permits to the residents of the blocks described in
subsection (b) above equal in number to the number of motor vehicles registered to the resident of each property
plus four (4) guest parking permits for each residence.
(d) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle, trailer, boat or
other impediment in any area where parking is prohibited under this section and it shall be unlawful for any
person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle, trailer, boat or other impediment in any area restricted to permit
parking only under this section unless such motor vehicle, trailer, boat or other impediment shall have
permanently affixed thereto the parking permit provided for by this section.
(e) The chief of police is authorized and directed to install the appropriate signs as provided in section
22.02.001 to establish the prohibited and restricted parking zones provided for in this section. All such signs
shall conform to the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices promulgated by the state department of
transportation. The parking permits provided for in this section shall be on a form and affixed in the manner
required by the city manager or his designated representative in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.507)
Sec. 22.06.072 Pleasant Run Road
(a) Prohibited parking. From and after the passage of this section and the erection of appropriate signs as
provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle at any point on
Pleasant Run Road from the point of its intersection with Cornell Road to the point of its intersection with
Interstate Highway 35E in the city.
(b) Signs or markings. It shall be the duty of the city manager, or some other person designated by him, to
erect appropriate signs or mark curbs giving notice of the no parking regulation described herein, and such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/618
regulation shall not be effective unless such signs or markings are in place and are visible to ordinarily observant
persons.
(c) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.701–12.703)
Sec. 22.06.073 I-35E
(a) Prohibited parking. From and after May 18, 1981, and the erection of appropriate signs as provided herein,
it shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle at any point on I-35E from the point
of its intersection with Bear Creek Road to the point of its intersection with Lomita Drive in the city.
(b) Signs or markings. It shall be the duty of the city manager, or some other person designated by him, to
erect appropriate signs or mark curbs giving notice of the no parking regulation described herein, and such
regulation shall not be effective unless such signs or markings are in place and are visible to ordinarily observant
persons.
(c) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.801, 12.802(a), 12.803)
Sec. 22.06.074 Willowcreek Drive
(a) Prohibited parking. From and after April 1, 1985, and the erection of appropriate signs as provided herein,
it shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle at any point on Willowcreek Drive
(both North and South) from the point of its intersection with Sycamore Lane to the point of its intersection with
Pleasant Run Road in the city.
(b) Signs or markings. It shall be the duty of the city manager, or some other person designated by him, to
erect appropriate signs or mark curbs giving notice of the no parking regulation described herein, and such
regulation shall not be effective unless such signs or markings are in place and are visible to ordinarily observant
persons.
(c) Issuance of citations and removal of vehicles.
(1) The police department is authorized to issue citations to vehicles parked or left in a no parking
area in violation of this section, and to immediately remove or cause the removal of the vehicle or
impediment to the city pound and to hold the same until claimed by the owner.
(2) The police department is authorized to hold the vehicle and to charge a pound fee in accordance
with an established schedule before such vehicle will be released.
(d) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.901–12.904)
Sec. 22.06.075 Lancaster Park Drive
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/618
(a) Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave, stand or park any motor
vehicle at any point on the west side of Lancaster Park Drive from the point of its intersection with Maplecrest to
the point of its intersection with Dogwood Trail.
(b) Signs or markings. It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to erect appropriate signs or
markings giving notice of the parking regulation set out in subsection (a) of this section, and such regulation
shall not be effective unless such signs or markings are in place and are visible to ordinarily observant persons.
(2002 Code, secs. 12.1001, 12.1002)
Sec. 22.06.076 Rolling Hills Place
(a) Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave, stand or park any motor
vehicle at any point on the side of the 500 block of Rolling Hills Place, beginning seven hundred eighty-five feet
south of said street's intersection with Gateway Street and ending three hundred twenty feet north of said street's
intersection with Gateway Street.
(b) Signs or markings. The city manager or his designee shall cause the installation of appropriate no parking
traffic signs or markings along those portions of Rolling Hills Place designated as no parking zones in
accordance with this code, and such prohibitions as defined herein shall not be effective until such signage
and/or markings are in place and visible.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1003)
Sec. 22.06.077 West Rea Avenue
(a) Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave, stand or park any motor
vehicle in the 700 to 800 block of West Rea Avenue, Monday through Friday, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., on dates designated by the city manager or his designee and posted by the city engineer.
(b) Signs or markings. The city manager or his designee shall cause the installation of appropriate no parking
traffic signs or markings, specifying the designated dates, days and times, along those portions of West Rea
Avenue designated as no parking zones in accordance with this code, and such prohibitions as defined herein
shall not be effective until such signage and/or markings are in place and visible.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1004)
Sec. 22.06.078 Ash Lane
(a) Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave, stand or park any motor
vehicle in the 1100 to 1200 block of Ash Lane during the hours 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday,
on dates designated by the city manager or his designee and posted by the city engineer.
(b) Signs or markings. The city manager or his designee shall cause the installation of appropriate no parking
traffic signs or markings, specifying the designated dates, days and times, along those portions of Ash Lane
designated as no parking zones in accordance with this code, and such prohibitions as defined herein shall not be
effective until such signage and/or markings are in place and visible.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1005)
Secs. 22.06.079–22.06.0110 Reserved
Division 4. Commercial or Oversize Vehicles
Sec. 22.06.111 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/618
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction in the municipal court shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec. 12.1203)
Sec. 22.06.112 Restrictions
(a) Property in or within 100 feet of certain zoning districts. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park,
or stand the following vehicles upon any street, alley, public property or private property in any residential
zoning district, or within 100 feet of any residential zoning district: (Ordinance 2006-12-47, sec. 1, adopted
12/11/06)
(1) Commercial motor vehicle, road-tractor, tractor-trailer, truck, tractor;
(2) Motor vehicle, or a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000)
pounds, or van trailer, semitrailer, or similar vehicle having two or more axles and length greater than
twenty (20) feet.
In construing the provisions of this subsection, the definitions set forth in section 22.08.031 shall apply, except
as amended herein.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1201)
(b) Property located in commercial or industrial districts. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park, or
stand the following vehicles upon any street, alley, public property or private property in any commercial, retail
or industrial zoning district which is not screened from public view: (Ordinance 2006-12-47, sec. 2, adopted
12/11/06)
(1) Commercial road-tractor, tractor-trailer, truck, tractor;
(2) Motor vehicle, or a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000)
pounds, or van trailer, semitrailer, or similar vehicle having two or more axles and length greater than
twenty (20) feet.
In construing the provisions of this subsection, the definitions set forth in section 22.08.031 shall apply, except
as amended herein.
(c) Designation of permitted location. The city may, on application of the property owner, on any
nonresidential district premises, administratively designate an area within one (1) mile from I-35 or I-20 for
location of stopping, standing or parking a vehicle regulated under this division. The city manager or designee
shall administratively approve such application giving consideration to traffic safety, ingress and egress from the
premises and pedestrian safety.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1201)
Sec. 22.06.113 Defenses
It shall be a defense to prosecution under this division that the commercial motor vehicle was parked:
(1) At a truck terminal, or business whose sole purpose is to provide mechanical or tire service for
such vehicles; nothing contained herein shall prevent the parking or standing of the above-described
vehicles delivering goods at a point of origin or designation [destination] of such goods within the
city, loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise, or to a boat or recreational vehicle,
including a motor home or travel trailer, parked or stored in accordance with article 22.08, as
amended, of the Code of Ordinances of the city, but not otherwise; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/618
(2) Within one (1) mile from I-35 or I-20 where the owner/operator is conducting business on such
premises, and is on a designated area which has been approved by the city for the location of such
vehicles. In no event shall this defense be construed for an owner/operator to remain on the premises
for rest periods as mandated under state or federal law.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1202)
ARTICLE 22.07 CONDUCT IN PARKING AREAS
Sec. 22.07.001 Definition
For purposes of this article, “parking areas” are privately owned or publicly owned accessways or parking areas
commonly used by the general public without charge, maintained for the convenience of customers, clients or
patrons of one (1) or more business establishments or public offices. (2002 Code, sec. 12.1101)
Sec. 22.07.002 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec. 12.1105)
Sec. 22.07.003 Operation of motor vehicles
No person in control or possession of a motor vehicle in a parking area may:
(1) Accelerate or race the motor of a vehicle so as to cause a loud noise in a manner calculated to
disturb the person or persons present;
(2) Bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop, or blow the horn of the vehicle when there is no
necessity for the protection of a person or property in such a manner calculated to disturb the person
or persons present; or
(3) Hold a race or contest for speed with another motor vehicle or vehicles without the written
consent of the parking area owner or his authorized representative.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1102)
Sec. 22.07.004 Depositing trash, litter or other waste
No person may throw or deposit any trash, litter or other waste on a parking area. (2002 Code, sec. 12.1103)
Sec. 22.07.005 Entering or remaining on property of another
(a) A person commits an offense if he enters onto or remains on property or in a building of another without
effective consent and he:
(1) Had notice that the entry was forbidden; or
(2) Received notice to depart but failed to do so.
(b) For purposes of this section, “entry” means the intrusion of the entire body, and “notice” means an oral or
written communication by the owner or someone with apparent authority to act for the owner, fencing or other
enclosure obviously designed to exclude intruders, or signs posted to be reasonably likely to come to the
attention of intruders.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1104)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/618
ARTICLE 22.08 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 22.08.001–22.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Truck Routes
Sec. 22.08.031 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall, for the purpose of this division, have the
meanings respectively prescribed for them in this section as follows: (2002 Code, sec. 12.1301)
Commercial motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used for the transportation
of property, including every vehicle used for delivery purposes as defined in accordance with 49 USC section
31101, as amended. (Ordinance 2006-12-48, sec. 2, adopted 12/11/06)
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle, as herein defined, which is self-propelled. (2002 Code, sec. 12.1301)
Point of destination. The place where goods are unloaded from the commercial motor vehicle, its trailer or
hauling device for implementation into additional goods, retail sales and/or distribution.
Point of origin. The place where goods are produced and received from a manufacturer, origin [original]
equipment manufacturer, factory, or place of assembly.
(Ordinance 2006-12-48, sec. 2, adopted 12/11/06)
Pole trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the
towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads, such as poles, pipes or structural members,
capable generally of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connection.
Semi-trailer. Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some
part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle.
Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed or used for carrying property or passengers wholly on its
own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
Truck-tractor. Every motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed
as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
Vehicle. Every mechanical device in, upon or about which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a public highway, including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck-tractors, trailers and
semi-trailers, severally, as herein defined, but excepting devices moved by heat and power [human power] or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1301)
Sec. 22.08.032 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, who violates any of the provisions of this
division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec. 12.1306)
Sec. 22.08.033 Use required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/618
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer,
pole-trailer or any combination thereof through the city in inter-city travel without a local point of origin or local
point of final destination, except upon such streets as are designated as truck routes by this division. (2002 Code,
sec. 12.1302; Ordinance 2006-12-48, sec. 3, adopted 12/11/06)
Sec. 22.08.034 Exceptions
It shall be a defense to prosecution under this division to any such commercial motor vehicle as follows, to wit:
(1) To a commercial motor vehicle traveling from a place of origin or delivering goods to a point of
final destination or place of repair, loading or unloading over the shortest practicable route. The
operator of any such vehicle shall carry evidence of the location of its last stop, origin of trip and of
its destination.
(Ordinance 2006-12-48, sec. 4, adopted 12/11/06)
(2) To emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call.
(3) To vehicles operated by a public utility while cruising in an assigned area for the purpose of
inspecting the facilities of the public utility and/or providing maintenance service to the facilities.
(4) To vehicles operated for public service, garbage pickups, street repair and water service and
maintenance.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1303)
Sec. 22.08.035 Routes designated
(a) The following streets and parts of streets are designated truck routes under this division:
Street Extent
Beltline Road From the east city limits to the west city limits.
Danieldale Road From its point of intersection with the I-20 service
road west to its point of intersection with the I-
35E service road.
I-35E and I-35E service roads From the north city limits to the south city limits.
I-20 and I-20 service roads From the east city limits to the west city limits.
Lancaster-Hutchins Road From the north city limits to its intersection with
State Highway 342 (Dallas Avenue).
North Longhorn Drive From its intersection with Danieldale Road to its
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/618
intersection with West Road.
Pleasant Run Road From the east city limits to the west city limits.
Springfield Road From its intersection with I-35E service road to a
point 1597 feet east from its intersection with I-
35E service road.
State Highway No. 342 From the north city limits to the south city limits.
West Road From its intersection with North Longhorn Drive
to its intersection with I-35E service road.
(Ordinance 2006-12-48, sec. 5, adopted 12/11/06)
(b) The city superintendent or such other person designated by the city manager shall erect appropriate signs
and markings to designate the truck routes.
(c) Whenever any street designated as a truck route is being repaired or is otherwise temporarily out of use,
the city superintendent or such other person designated by the city manager is hereby authorized to designate
alternate truck routes for such period as might be necessary.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.1304)
Sec. 22.08.036 Violations
Except as otherwise provided for herein, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person to
drive, operate or move and/or to cause or permit to be driven, operated or moved, on any public street within the
corporate limits within the city, any commercial motor vehicle contrary to any of the regulations contained in
this division. (2002 Code, sec. 12.1305)
ARTICLE 22.09 TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Sec. 22.09.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms are defined:
Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area. Any location within Dallas County or Tarrant County, Texas.
Hazardous materials. Any quantity, group, form or class of material in any official publication of the Secretary
of Transportation of the United States under the authority of U.S.C.A. section 1803 (1976), as amended,
including any such publication issued after the effective date of this article.
Requiring placards. The material to be transported is hazardous and is in sufficient quantity to require placarding
in accordance with Department of Transportation hazardous materials regulations (49 U.S.C.A. section 1801 et
seq. (1976)).
Transport. To move any motor vehicle requiring placards upon any public thoroughfare or highway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/618
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2201)
Sec. 22.09.002 Routes designated
No person shall knowingly transport hazardous materials or knowingly cause hazardous materials to be
transported upon any public street within the corporate limits of the city, except on the following:
(1) That portion of Interstate Highway 35E and Interstate Highway 635 lying within the corporate
limits of the city.
(2) That portion of any federal or state highway or public thoroughfare used to reach a destination
or point of departure by the most direct route within corporate limits of the city.
(3) That portion of any federal or state highway or public thoroughfare within the corporate limits
of the city used to reach a destination or point of departure by the most direct route within the Dallas-
Fort Worth Metropolitan Area.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2202)
Sec. 22.09.003 Placards required; vehicle condition and equipment
The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials requiring placards shall not operate said vehicle
unless:
(1) Appropriate placards meeting U.S. Department of Transportation specifications are displayed as
required by 49 CFR part 172; and
(2) Before operation, the operator shall inspect the vehicle and determine that:
(A) The brakes are in good working condition;
(B) The steering mechanism is in good working condition;
(C) The electrical wiring is well insulated and firmly secured;
(D) The required lights are operative;
(E) The vehicle is in a safe condition to transport hazardous materials; and
(F) All emergency features on bulk transport carriers are installed and operative as outlined in
U.S. Department of Transportation specifications and requirements.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2203)
Sec. 22.09.004 Presumption that vehicle contains hazardous materials
It should be presumed for purposes of prosecution under this article that a transportation vehicle contains
hazardous materials if it bears a placard. (2002 Code, sec. 12.2204)
Sec. 22.09.005 Enforcement officers
Both the city fire department and the city police department are expressly authorized to enforce the provisions of
this article. (2002 Code, sec. 12.2205)
ARTICLE 22.10 TRUCK IDLING
Sec. 22.10.001 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/618
Unless specifically defined herein, the terms used in this article have the meanings commonly ascribed to them
in the field of air pollution control, unless the context provides otherwise.
Idle. The operation of an engine in the operating mode where the engine is not engaged in gear, where the engine
operates at a speed at the revolutions per minute specified by the engine or vehicle manufacturer for when the
accelerator is fully released, and there is no load on the engine.
Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled device powered by an internal combustion engine and designed to operate
with four or more wheels in contact with the ground, in or by which a person or property is or may be
transported, and is required to be registered under Texas Transportation Code, section 502.002, excluding
vehicles registered under section 502.006(c).
Primary propulsion engine. A gasoline- or diesel-fueled internal combustion engine attached to a motor vehicle
that provides the power to propel the motor vehicle into motion and maintain motion.
(Ordinance 2009-04-09 adopted 4/13/09)
Sec. 22.10.002 Penalty
An offense under this article is punishable as follows:
(1) Minimum of $200.00 fine per unit for the first offense.
(2) Minimum of $400.00 fine per unit for the second offense.
(3) Maximum fine not to exceed $500.00 per unit for the third and subsequent offense.
Sec. 22.10.003 Control requirements for motor vehicle idling
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle to idle for more
than five (5) consecutive minutes when the vehicle is not in motion.
Sec. 22.10.004 Exemptions
The provisions of this article do not apply to:
(1) A motor vehicle that has a gross vehicle rating of 14,000 pounds or less or of 14,400 pounds for
motor vehicles equipped with a system that provides heating, cooling, or electrical service to a
commercial vehicle's sleeper berth for the purpose of reducing the idling of the vehicle;
(Ordinance 2011-10-34 adopted 10/10/11)
(2) A motor vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight rating of 14,000 pounds or less, after
September 1, 2009;
(3) A motor vehicle forced to remain motionless because of traffic conditions over which the
operator has no control;
(4) A motor vehicle being used by the United States military, national guard, or reserve forces, or
as an emergency or law enforcement motor vehicle;
(5) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle providing power source necessary for
mechanical operation other than propulsion, and/or passenger compartment heating or air
conditioning;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/618
(6) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle being operated solely to defrost a
windshield;
(7) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being used to supply heat or air
conditioning necessary for passenger comfort/safety in those vehicles intended for commercial
passenger transportation or school buses, or for transit operations, in which case idling up to a
maximum of thirty (30) minutes is allowed;
(8) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being used to provide air conditioning
or heating necessary for employee health or safety while the employee is using the vehicle to perform
an essential job function related to roadway construction or maintenance;
(9) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle being used as airport ground support
equipment;
(10) The owner of a motor vehicle rented or leased to a person who operates the vehicle and is not
employed by the owner;
(Ordinance 2009-04-09 adopted 4/13/09)
(11) A motor vehicle when idling is necessary to power a heater or air conditioner while a driver is
using the vehicle's sleeper berth for a government-mandated rest period and is not within two miles of
a facility offering external heating and air-conditioning connections at a time when those connections
are available;
(12) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle being used to provide air conditioning or
heating necessary for employee health or safety in an armored vehicle while the employee remains
inside the vehicle to guard the contents or while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded; and
(13) Any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating greater than 8,500 pounds that is
equipped with a 2008 or subsequent model year heavy-duty diesel engine or liquefied or compressed
natural gas engine that has been certified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
another state environmental agency to emit no more than 30 grams of nitrogen oxides emissions per
hour when idling.
(Ordinance 2011-10-34 adopted 10/10/11)
ARTICLE 22.11 RIDING HORSES OR OTHER LIVESTOCK
Sec. 22.11.001 Penalty
An offense under this article is punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code for each
offense.
Sec. 22.11.002 Prohibited on certain streets
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse, mule, donkey, cow, bull, steer, hog, sheep, goat or other type
of livestock on the traveled portion or median of any highway, street, roadway, or alley on the following streets,
to wit:
Street Name Location
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/618
Beltline Road In its entirety.
Bluegrove Road In its entirety.
Cedardale Road In its entirety.
N. Dallas Avenue In its entirety.
Houston School Road In its entirety.
Jefferson Road From its intersection with Second Street northward to
its intersection with the city limits.
W. Pleasant Run Road In its entirety.
Sec. 22.11.003 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person:
(1) Lawfully riding a horse, mule, donkey, cow, bull, steer, hog, sheep, goat or other type of
livestock incident to a permitted special event or parade; or
(2) Lawfully riding a horse, mule, donkey, cow, bull, steer, hog, sheep, goat or other type of
livestock on a private road or driveway.
(Ordinance 2009-10-31 adopted 10/12/09)
ARTICLE 22.12 TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES
Sec. 22.12.001 Purpose
The purpose of the traffic calming devices on a residential and commercial street(s) is to slow and reduce
vehicular traffic in neighborhoods and in commercial areas. (2002 Code, sec. 12.2501)
Sec. 22.12.002 Definitions
Block. A section of a street separated by intersecting streets and containing at least one row of homes.
Commercial. An area located within the city that includes retail, commercial, industrial (light and heavy),
manufacturing and/or otherwise not residential districts as set forth in the comprehensive zoning act.
Neighborhood. An area within the city that includes an area within one-quarter (1/4) mile from the block where
the traffic calming device is proposed to be located.
Representative. A person serving as the coordinator between the survey area and the city for the installation of
traffic calming devices.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/618
Survey area. The area defined in which homes are to be surveyed in order to determine the degree of resident
support.
Survey form. A document provided by the city that provides information on a request and is used to collect
signatures and preferences of representatives of the homes in the defined survey area.
Traffic calming device. A raised area, approach, or departure, milled or rolled rivletts, traffic buttons, raised
profile markings, jiggle bars as pavement markers or groove strips of pavement placed on the roadway surface to
slow or impede the speed of vehicles.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2502)
Sec. 22.12.003 Eligibility for installation
(a) Residential areas. The citizens residing within the surveyed residential area may make application and be
considered for traffic calming device installation based on the following criteria:
(1) The street must be paved and on a dedicated right-of-way of the city.
(2) That portion of the street subject to this article shall be within a residentially zoned district as
provided in the development code.
(3) There must be no more than one moving lane of traffic in each direction.
(4) Traffic volume must be more than 500 vehicles per day but less than 5,000 vehicles per day.
(5) The street must have a legal speed limit of not greater than 30 miles per hour.
(6) The street must not be primary route for emergency vehicles. As determined by the police
and/or fire department, the city manager or his designee(s) shall have the authority to determine said
primary routes and upon such determination remove any such street from traffic calming device
installation that is considered critical for emergency response. Emergency response routes are subject
to change, and previously installed traffic calming devices may be removed by the city manager or
his designee for emergency response reasons.
(7) The city manager or his designee shall determine whether or not to install based on sound
engineering and traffic principles and shall determine the appropriate traffic calming device at a
particular location.
(b) Commercial areas. The city manager or his designee may impose traffic calming devices based on the
following criteria:
(1) The street must be paved and on a dedicated right-of-way of the city.
(2) There must be no more than one moving lane of traffic in each direction.
(3) Traffic volume must be more than 500 vehicles per day but less than 5,000 vehicles per day.
(4) The street must have a legal speed limit designating maximum speed.
(5) The street must not be primary route for emergency vehicles. As determined by the police
and/or fire department, the city manager or his designee(s) shall have the authority to determine said
primary routes and upon such determination remove any such street from traffic calming device
installation that is considered critical for emergency response. Emergency response routes are subject
to change, and previously installed traffic calming devices may be removed by the city manager or
his designee for emergency response reasons.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/618
(6) The city manager or his designee shall determine installation based on sound engineering and
traffic principles [and shall determine] the appropriate traffic calming device at a particular location.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2503)
Sec. 22.12.004 Location
A traffic calming device must be located according to the following requirements:
(1) Adequate sight distance must exist to accommodate traffic operations after its installation;
(2) Property adjacent to where a traffic calming device is located must be elevated above the street
to minimize the potential of flooding. There must be no adjacent property owners to the traffic
calming device who are opposed to its installation.
(3) The traffic calming device location must not have curves or grades that prevent the safe
placement of said device.
(4) The distance a traffic calming device must be included from utility features is at least 30 feet
from a manhole or valve cover, 50 feet upstream or 5 feet downstream from a storm sewer inlet, and
50 feet from a fire hydrant.
(5) The distance a traffic calming device must be to adjacent intersections and traffic-control
devices must be at least 250 feet from an intersection, 250 feet from an adjacent traffic calming
device, and 600 feet from an existing or currently approved traffic signal.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2504)
Sec. 22.12.005 Design standards
The city manager and his designee to the public works department shall prepare and maintain design standards
for traffic calming devices in accordance with the requirements set forth herein and shall select the appropriate
traffic calming device to be placed in any residential or commercial area. (2002 Code, sec. 12.2505)
Sec. 22.12.006 Payment of costs in residential districts
(a) The fee for the installation, removal or repair of traffic calming devices shall be an estimate of the actual
cost of the work to be performed as determined by the director of public works.
(b) The cost will be shared equally by the residents in the neighborhood and the city.
(c) One or more residents could pay the costs of the traffic calming device for the neighborhood or even a
private source. Engineering costs and maintenance of the traffic calming device will be paid for by the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2506)
Sec. 22.12.007 Payment of costs in commercial districts
(a) The fee for the installation, removal or repair of traffic calming devices shall be an estimate of the actual
cost of the work to be performed, as determined by the director of public works.
(b) One or more residents could pay the costs of the traffic calming device for the neighborhood or even a
private source. Engineering costs and maintenance of the traffic calming device will be paid for by the city.
(c) If the city manager or his designee in their sole discretion determines that the public safety requires
placement within a commercial area, the city shall bear the costs of the traffic calming devices. If requested by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/618
the commercial enterprises which abut or are adjacent to the public roadway, then costs may be shared with such
enterprises as provided in subsection (b) hereof.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2507)
Sec. 22.12.008 Installation process in residential areas
A resident who desires to have a traffic calming device on their street must initiate the installation process,
which is as follows:
(1) A request for a traffic calming device must be delivered in writing to the public works
department. Upon receipt of the request, the public works department will review the request in a
timely manner and contact the individual who requested the traffic calming device. If there are a
number of individuals requesting the traffic calming device, a representative will be designated as the
contact person for the city.
(2) The public works department will supply the representative with a survey form, survey area,
and proposed traffic calming device location. The survey form shall be provided by the city and
contain the following minimum information: (i) description of the request, (ii) traffic considerations,
and (iii) instructions to the residents. The resident must include the following information in their
response: address, printed name, signature and whether they support, oppose or have no preference to
the traffic calming device being installed. The survey area shall consist of the entire length of all
blocks within 500 feet on both sides of the proposed traffic calming device location.
(3) When the survey is complete, it must be returned to the public works department for review. At
least 80% of the residents must approve of the proposed traffic calming device in order for
consideration. The public works department will review the survey and other information on the
proposed traffic calming device and contact the representative in a timely manner with a decision. If
the traffic calming device is approved, the representative will be given an invoice prior to
construction for payment of the neighborhood's share of the traffic calming device.
(4) The public works department will notify by mail all the homes in the survey area advising. The
letter will also notify the residents of the costs for the traffic calming device and give them contact
information for the collection of payments. If more than 20% of the survey area contact the city in
writing objecting to the traffic calming device installation, the city shall not install such speed hump.
(5) Once payment has been received for installation of an approved traffic calming device from the
representative, the funds will be escrowed by the city and the project is placed on a priority list. Work
will begin on the traffic calming device as funds are approved by the city council for their
construction. If the traffic calming device is not constructed within three years of approval, the funds
will be returned. However, the neighborhood may at its option fund the remaining cost of the traffic
calming device and the same constructed by the city upon remittance of the balance of funds, or the
neighborhood will have their payment refunded. After refund or withdrawal by the neighborhood of
an application, the process must be renewed as provided herein.
(6) If payment has not been received for the traffic calming device within a year after the invoice is
sent, a new application will be required.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2508)
Sec. 22.12.009 Appeals
The city manager or his/her appointee may consider a request for a traffic calming device that was denied by the
public works department. The appeals process is as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/618
(1) Appeals should be submitted to the public works department in writing. The public works
department will forward the appeal and other information on the request to the city manager or
his/her appointee.
(2) The city manager or his/her appointee will consider the information and make a decision on the
appeal. The city manager's decision is final.
(2002 Code, sec. 12.2509)
ARTICLE 22.13 PHOTOGRAPHIC ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF
SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM VIOLATIONS
Sec. 22.13.001 Definitions
Automated school bus stop arm enforcement program. The installation of photographic school bus stop arm
enforcement systems on school buses operated within the city for the purpose of reducing school bus stop arm
violations and injuries to students citywide.
Camera-enforced school bus. A school bus equipped with a photographic school bus stop arm enforcement
system.
Date of issuance. The date that notice of violation is approved and mailed by a law enforcement officer in
accordance with this article.
Department. The department or departments of the city designated to enforce and administer this article, or the
department's designated representative.
Director. The director of the department or the director's authorized representative.
Hearing officer. An individual designated by the director to administratively adjudicate all school bus stop arm
violations for which a notice of violation has been issued.
Law enforcement officer. An individual licensed as a law enforcement officer by the Texas Commission on law
enforcement officers, including a peace officer, as defined under article 2.12, Texas Statutes, Code of Criminal
Procedure.
Mail date. The date that a notice of violation is mailed in accordance with this article.
Photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system. A system that:
(1) Consists of cameras installed on the exterior of a school bus that work in conjunction with an
automatic stop arm on the school bus, which stop arm, along with flashing warning lights and other
equipment required by section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, warns
drivers that the school bus is stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading students; and
(2) Is capable of producing a recorded image depicting the license plate attached to the front or the
rear of a motor vehicle that passes the school bus in violation of section 22.13.004 of this article.
Recorded image. A photographic or digital image recorded by a photographic school bus stop arm enforcement
system that depicts the front or the rear of a motor vehicle.
School bus. Has the meaning given that term in section 541.201 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
School bus stop arm notice of violation. The notice of a school bus stop arm violation issued under this article
(“notice of violation”).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/618
School bus stop arm violation. A violation of section 22.13.004 of this article.
Sec. 22.13.002 Law enforcement officers: powers, duties and functions
(a) The director shall appoint law enforcement officers to issue notice of violations.
(b) A law enforcement officer shall have the following powers, duties, and functions:
(1) To review recorded images from the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system to
determine whether a school bus stop arm violation has occurred.
(2) To order a notice of violation to be issued based on evidence from the recorded images.
(3) To void recorded images due to lack of evidence or due to knowledge that a defense described
in section 22.13.004 of this article applies.
Sec. 22.13.003 Hearing officers; powers, duties and functions
(a) The director shall designate hearing officers to administratively adjudicate all school bus stop arm
violations for which a notice of violation has been issued.
(b) A hearing officer shall have the following powers, duties, and functions:
(1) To administer oaths.
(2) To accept admissions to, and to hear and determine contests of, school bus stop arm violations
under this article.
(3) To issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, which
orders may be enforced by a municipal court.
(4) To assess civil fines, penalties, and other costs for a school bus stop arm violation in
accordance with section 22.13.011 of this article.
(5) To waive penalties assessed for a school bus stop arm violation in accordance with section
22.13.011 of this article.
Sec. 22.13.004 Violations as civil offenses; defenses; presumptions
(a) The owner of a motor vehicle that is operated in violation of section 545.066 of the Texas Transportation
Code, as amended, by passing a stopped camera-enforced school bus displaying the visual signals required by
section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, commits a civil offense and is liable for a civil
fine assessed under this article.
(b) It is a defense to a charge of a school bus stop arm violation under this section:
(1) The school bus was not operating the visual signals required by section 547.701(c) of the Texas
Transportation Code, as amended;
(2) The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction
of a law enforcement officer;
(3) The operator of the motor vehicle was in the process of passing the school bus before the
school bus operated a visual signal described by section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code,
as amended;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/618
(4) The operator of the motor vehicle passed the stopped school bus so as to yield the right-of-way
to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle;
(5) The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under chapter 546 of
the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, and the operator was acting in compliance with that
chapter;
(6) The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle being operated by a person other than the vehicle's
owner without the consent of the vehicle owner and proof is submitted to the hearing officer that the
theft of the motor vehicle had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency;
(7) The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was a
stolen plate being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had
been issued and proof is submitted to the hearing officer that the theft of the license plate had been
timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency; or
(8) The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain, or other unusually hazardous road
conditions existed that would have made compliance with this section more dangerous under the
circumstances than noncompliance.
(c) It is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle depicted in the recorded image of a school bus stop
arm violation for which a notice of violation is issued is the vehicle owner who committed the school bus stop
arm violation. Proof of ownership may be made by a computer-generated record of the registration of the vehicle
with the Texas Department of Transportation showing the name of the vehicle owner to whom state license
plates were issued. This proof is prima facie evidence of the ownership of the vehicle by the vehicle owner to
whom the certificate of registration was issued.
(d) A vehicle owner who is in the business of selling, renting, or leasing vehicles will not be liable for the civil
school bus stop arm fines, penalties, and costs imposed by the city on a vehicle for sale or a rented or leased
vehicle if the vehicle owner presents evidence establishing that the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was at
the time of the alleged violation being rented, leased, or test driven by another person. Evidence sufficient to
establish that the vehicle was being rented, leased, or test driven includes:
(1) The true name, address, and driver's license number and state of issuance of the person renting,
leasing, or test driving the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation
was taken; or
(2) A true copy of the lease or rental agreement in effect at the time the recorded image of the
school bus stop arm violation was taken.
(e) Evidence presented under subsection (d) of this section must be presented through oral testimony or by
affidavit under penalty of perjury. Evidence through oral testimony must be presented at the administrative
adjudication hearing. Evidence by affidavit under penalty of perjury may be presented by mail.
(f) If the owner of a vehicle presents evidence under subsections (d) and (e) of this section establishing that
the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was being rented, leased, or test driven at the time of the violation, the
vehicle owner may not be held liable for civil school bus stop arm fines, penalties, and costs, and the law
enforcement officer shall send the notice of violation to the test driver or lessee who is presumed to have
committed the school bus stop arm violation. An owner of a vehicle who fails to comply with subsections (d) or
(e) of this section will be treated as any other vehicle owner and will be liable for the school bus stop arm
violation.
(g) If, at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken, the vehicle depicted in
the recorded image was owned by a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle
was being rented or leased to an individual, the vehicle owner shall, within 30 calendar days after the date the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/618
notice of violation is received, provide to the administrator the name and address of the individual who was
renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the recorded image and a statement of the period during which
that individual was renting or leasing the vehicle. This information must be provided regardless of whether the
vehicle owner provides evidence under subsections (d) and (e) of this section that the vehicle was being rented,
leased, or test driven at the time of the school bus stop arm violation.
(h) A registered vehicle owner named in the notice of violation who did not hold legal title to the motor
vehicle at the time of a school bus stop arm violation will not be liable for the civil school bus stop arm fines,
penalties, and costs imposed by the city on that vehicle if the registered vehicle owner presents evidence
establishing that another vehicle owner held legal title to the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school
bus stop arm violation was taken. Evidence sufficient to establish that the vehicle was owned by another vehicle
owner at the time of the school bus stop arm violation includes:
(1) The true name, address, and driver's license number and state of issuance of the vehicle owner
who held legal title to the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation
was taken; or
(2) A true copy of any purchase or sale documentation (including proof of transfer of title) showing
the name of the vehicle owner who held title to the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the
school bus stop arm violation was taken (that vehicle owner's address must also be provided if not
contained in the documentation).
(i) Evidence presented under subsection (h) of this section must be presented through oral testimony or by
affidavit under penalty of perjury. Evidence through oral testimony must be presented at the administrative
adjudication hearing. Evidence by affidavit under penalty of perjury may be presented by mail.
(j) If the registered vehicle owner named in the notice of violation complies with subsections (h) and (i) of this
section, the registered vehicle owner may not be held liable for civil school bus stop arm fines, penalties, and
costs, and law enforcement officer shall send the notice of violation to the vehicle owner who held legal title to
the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken. A registered vehicle
owner named in the notice of violation who fails to comply with subsections (h) and (i) of this section will be
treated as any other vehicle owner and will be liable for the school bus stop arm violation.
Sec. 22.13.005 Notice of violation
(a) A notice of violation serves as the summons and complaint for purposes of the procedures.
(b) The notice of violation must be on a form prescribed by the administrator and must include the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation.
(2) A description of the violation alleged.
(3) The date and time of the violation and the location of the school bus where the violation
occurred.
(4) The notice of violation issuance date.
(5) The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation.
(6) A copy of a recorded image of the violation that includes a depiction of the registration number
displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation.
(7) The amount of the civil fine to be imposed for the violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/618
(8) The date by which the civil fine must be paid or the request for an administrative adjudication
hearing must be made.
(9) A statement that, in lieu of requesting an administrative adjudication hearing, the vehicle owner
named in the notice of violation may pay the civil fine in person or by mail at an address designated
on the notice of violation.
(10) A notification that the vehicle owner has the right to contest the imposition of the civil fine in
an administrative adjudication hearing by submitting a written request for an administrative
adjudication hearing within 30 calendar days after the date the notice of violation is issued.
(11) A notification that any request by the vehicle owner to have the law enforcement officer who
issued the notice of violation, present at the hearing must be made in writing as part of the written
request for an administrative adjudication hearing and that failure to timely make this request
constitutes a waiver of the vehicle owner's right to require the presence of the law enforcement officer
at the hearing.
(12) A notification that failure to pay the civil fine or to timely request an administrative
adjudication hearing is considered an admission of liability for the school bus stop arm violation, is a
waiver of the vehicle owner' s right to appeal the imposition of the civil fine, and will result in the
assessment of appropriate civil fines, penalties, and costs.
(13) A statement that the vehicle owner will incur a late payment penalty if the vehicle owner fails
to pay the civil fine or request an administrative adjudication hearing within 30 calendar days after
the date of issuance of the notice of violation.
(14) A notification that an arrest warrant may not be issued for failure to timely pay the civil fines,
penalties, and costs and that the imposition of the civil penalty may not be recorded on the vehicle
owner's driving record.
(c) The original or any copy of a notice of violation is a record kept in the ordinary course of city business and
is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in the notice of violation.
Sec. 22.13.006 Service of a notice of violation
In order to impose a civil fine under these procedures, law enforcement officer shall mail a notice of violation to
the owner of the motor vehicle involved in the school bus stop arm violation within 30 calendar days after the
date the violation is alleged to have occurred. The notice of violation must be mailed, by United States mail, to:
(1) The vehicle owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of
Transportation;
(2) If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the vehicle owner's address as shown on
the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country
analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation;
(3) If the vehicle owner presents evidence or information that the vehicle was being rented, leased,
or test driven at the time of the school bus stop arm violation, the address provided by the seller or
lessor; or
(4) If the registered vehicle owner presents evidence that another person had legal title to the
vehicle at the time of the school bus stop arm violation, the address provided.
Sec. 22.13.007 Answering a notice of violation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/618
(a) A vehicle owner who has been issued a notice of violation shall, either personally or through a
representative, answer to the charge of the school bus stop arm violation by the date shown on the notice of
violation, which date may not be earlier than the 30th day after the mail date of the notice of violation issued. An
answer may be made in any of the following ways:
(1) An admission of liability with a payment of the applicable civil fine, and any additional
penalties and costs.
(2) A request to schedule an administrative adjudication hearing to either deny liability or admit
liability with an explanation before a hearing officer.
(3) A denial of liability accompanied by an affidavit under penalty of perjury presenting evidence
that the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was at the time of the school bus stop arm violation
being rented, leased, or test driven.
(4) A denial of liability accompanied by an affidavit under penalty of perjury presenting evidence
that the person named in the notice of violation was not the owner of the vehicle depicted in the
recorded image at the time of the violation.
(5) A written request for permission from a hearing officer to adjudicate by mail.
(b) Payment of the civil fine and any additional penalties and costs may be made in person or by mailing
notice of violation to the address shown on the notice of violation, accompanied by payment of the amount
shown on the notice of violation. Payment by mail may be made only by credit card, money order or check.
Payment of the civil fine and all penalties and costs assessed under this article operates as a final disposition of
the school bus stop arm violation charge, except when payment is made to reset a scheduled hearing as assessed
under section 22.13.009.
Sec. 22.13.008 Adjudication by mail
(a) If a vehicle owner charged with a school bus stop arm violation shows good cause for not attending a
hearing, either personally or through a representative, the hearing officer may permit the matter to be adjudicated
by mail, which adjudication must be completed within 90 calendar days after the mail date of the notice of
violation.
(b) Letters, memoranda, affidavits, photographs, and other documentary materials will be admissible as
evidence for the purposes of adjudication by mail. The hearing officer may exclude from consideration any
material that is not relevant to the adjudication of the alleged violation.
(c) Failure of the vehicle owner to proceed with an adjudication by mail after requesting and receiving
permission to adjudicate by mail is an admission of liability for the school bus stop arm violation and will
subject the vehicle owner to the appropriate civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed by the hearing officer.
(d) If a hearing officer determines that adjudication cannot proceed by mail, the hearing officer shall advise
the vehicle owner by first-class mail that the vehicle owner must appear to answer the charge at a hearing.
Sec. 22.13.009 Hearings for disposition of notice of violation; notice of violation and photographic
recorded images as prima facie evidence
(a) Every hearing for the adjudication of a school bus stop arm violation under this article must be scheduled
for a hearing date held before a hearing officer not later than the 30th day after the administrator receives written
request for an administrative adjudication hearing. The administrator shall notify, by mail, the vehicle owner
requesting a hearing of the date, time, and location of the hearing.
(b) A vehicle owner may make a written request to reset a scheduled administrative adjudication hearing. A
scheduled administrative adjudication hearing may not be reset more than once unless the vehicle owner pays an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/618
amount equal to the applicable civil fine for the school bus stop arm violation, with any additional penalties and
costs. A receipt shall be issued for any amounts paid under this subsection. After presentation of the receipt, all
amounts paid will be refunded to the vehicle owner if the hearing officer, or a municipal court on appeal, finds
that the vehicle owner is not liable for the school bus stop arm violation.
(c) At a hearing, the notice of violation and the recorded image produced by the photographic school bus stop
arm enforcement system are prima facie proof of the school bus stop arm violation, and the law enforcement
officer who issued the notice of violation is not required to be present unless requested by the vehicle owner
charged or by the hearing officer. A vehicle owner's request to have the law enforcement officer, who issued the
notice of violation, present at the hearing must be in writing as part of the vehicle owner's request for an
administrative adjudication hearing.
(d) At a hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider evidence presented by the administrator and by the
vehicle owner. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to a hearing under this article, and the hearing officer
shall make a decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, after giving due
weight to all presumptions and prima facie evidence established by this article or other applicable law.
(e) At a hearing, the reliability of the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system used to produce
the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation may be attested to by affidavit of the administrator,
officer or employee of the city, or of the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system, who
is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of the administrator, officer or employee
of the city that alleges a school bus stop arm violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is
admissible in a proceeding under this article, is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit, and is prima facie
evidence of the violation alleged in the notice of violation.
(f) At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall immediately render an order or decision, either
by:
(1) Finding the vehicle owner liable for the school bus stop arm violation, assessing the applicable
civil fine and any penalties and other costs in accordance with this article, and notifying the vehicle
owner of the right to appeal to municipal court; or
(2) Finding the vehicle owner not liable for the school bus stop arm violation.
(g) An order of a hearing officer must be in writing, signed, and dated by the hearing officer and filed with the
administrator in a separate index and file. The order may be recorded using computer printouts, microfilm,
microfiche, or similar data processing techniques.
Sec. 22.13.010 Failure to answer notice of violation or failure to appear at a hearing
(a) The failure of a vehicle owner charged with a school bus stop arm violation to answer to the charge within
30 calendar days after the mail date or to appear at any hearing, including a hearing on appeal, when required to
appear is an admission of liability for the school bus stop arm violation, and the hearing officer, or the municipal
court in the case of an appeal, shall issue an order of liability and assess against the vehicle owner the
appropriate civil fines, penalties, and other costs.
(b) Within seven calendar days after filing an order of liability issued under these procedures, a hearing officer
or the entity with which the city contracts, shall mail notice to the vehicle owner of the order. The notice must be
sent by United States mail to the address required for service of a notice of violation or to the address of the
vehicle owner last known to the hearing officer. The notice must include a statement of:
(1) The amount of the civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed; and
(2) The right to appeal to municipal court.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/618
(c) Regardless of any other provision of this article, a vehicle owner who receives a notice of violation and
who fails to timely pay the civil fine or fails to timely request an administrative adjudication hearing is still
entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing if:
(1) The vehicle owner submits to the hearing officer a written request for a hearing, accompanied
by an affidavit and filing fee assessed under this article, that attests to the date on which the vehicle
owner received the notice of violation; and
(2) The written request, filing fee assessed under this article, and affidavit are submitted to the
hearing officer within 30 calendar days after the date the vehicle owner received the notice of
violation.
Sec. 22.13.011 Civil fines for violations; penalties and other costs
(a) If a civil fine is assessed, it must be in accordance with this section. A fine may not be waived or modified
by a hearing officer, or by a municipal court on appeal, when a vehicle owner is found liable for a school bus
stop arm violation, except that additional penalties and other costs may be added in accordance with this section.
(b) The owner of a motor vehicle liable for a school bus stop arm violation shall pay a civil fine of $300.00 for
each violation.
(c) An additional $25.00 late payment penalty will be assessed if the vehicle owner fails to:
(1) Answer a school bus stop arm citation within 30 calendar days after its date of issuance;
(2) Appear at a hearing scheduled to adjudicate the school bus stop arm violation charge; or
(3) After being found liable, pay all civil fines, penalties, fees, and costs assessed for a school bus
stop arm violation within the time designated by the hearing officer, or by the municipal court on
appeal.
(d) A penalty assessed under subsection (c) of this section may be waived by a hearing officer, or by a
municipal court on appeal, if the vehicle owner can establish that:
(1) Through no fault of the owner:
(A) No notice of the school bus stop arm violation was received as required by this article;
(B) No notice of the hearing officer's order was received as required by this article;
(C) Payment of the civil fine assessed for the school bus stop arm violation was not posted in
a timely manner; or
(5) The penalty was assessed in error.
Sec. 22.13.012 Appeal from hearing
(a) A vehicle owner determined by a hearing officer at an administrative adjudication hearing to be liable for a
school bus stop arm violation may appeal this determination to the municipal court by filing an appeal petition,
along with a filing fee of $15.00, with the municipal court clerk or a deputy clerk before the 31st calendar day
after the date the hearing officer's order is entered with the department. If the hearing officer's order is reversed,
the $15.00 filing fee will be returned by the city to the appellant.
(b) Upon receipt of an appeal petition, the municipal court clerk or deputy clerk shall schedule an appeal
hearing and notify all parties of the date, time, and location of the hearing. The enforcement officer or other
authorized person who issued the civil school bus stop arm citation is not required to be present at the appeal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/618
hearing unless requested by the vehicle owner charged. A vehicle owner's request to have the enforcement
officer, or other authorized person who issued the citation, present at the appeal hearing must be in writing and
made as part of the appeal petition. Failure to timely make this request constitutes a waiver of the vehicle
owner's right to require the presence of the enforcement officer or other authorized person at the appeal hearing.
(c) The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo in municipal court and is a civil proceeding. The decision of the
municipal court is final.
(d) Service of notice of appeal under this section stays the enforcement and collection of any civil fines,
penalties, and costs ordered by the hearing officer. An appeal petition must be accompanied by a notarized
statement in which the vehicle owner agrees to pay all civil fines, penalties, and costs ordered by the hearing
officer, if the person is still found liable by the municipal court upon appeal.
(e) At an appeal hearing, the civil school bus stop arm citation and the recorded images produced by the
photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system are prima facie proof of the school bus stop arm violation,
and the enforcement officer or other authorized person who issued the citation is not required to be present
unless requested by the vehicle owner.
(f) At an appeal hearing, the reliability of the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system used to
produce the recorded images of the school bus stop arm violation may be attested to by affidavit of an officer or
employee of the city, or of the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system, who is
responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that
alleges a school bus stop violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded images is admissible in a
proceeding under this article, is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit, and is prima facie evidence of
the violation alleged in the school bus stop arm citation.
Sec. 22.13.013 Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy; enforcement
(a) The imposition of a civil fine under this article is not a conviction or criminal offense and may not be
considered a conviction or criminal offense for any purpose. Failure to timely pay a civil fine may not result in
an arrest warrant being issued for the vehicle owner and may not be recorded on the vehicle owner's driving
record.
(b) A civil fine may not be imposed on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of the vehicle was arrested
or was issued a criminal citation by a law enforcement officer under section 545.066 of the Texas Transportation
Code, as amended, for the school bus stop arm violation recorded by the photographic school bus stop arm
enforcement system.
(c) The city attorney and administrator are authorized to file suit or take other action to collect any civil fines,
penalties, late fees and costs assessed under this article.
Sec. 22.13.014 Disposition of civil fines, penalties and costs assessed for violations
Civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed under this article must be used to fund the automated school bus stop
arm enforcement program, other programs designed to further student safety, or other traffic safety projects and
improvements.
(Ordinance 2014-06-08 adopted 6/9/14)
CHAPTER 24
UTILITIES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/618
ARTICLE 24.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 24.01.001 Connection to sanitary sewer required
(a) All owners and occupants of buildings situated in any section of the city where sanitary sewers now exist
or where they may hereafter exist within a distance within 200 feet of the owner's or occupant's property line,
and from which the city sanitary sewer is serviceable, are hereby required to connect the same with the city
sanitary sewer, and such connection shall be made in accordance with the requirements of all applicable
ordinances of the city.
(b) It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designated representative to notify the owner or occupant of
every property whose property line is located within two hundred (200) feet of a sanitary sewer to make
connection to such sanitary sewer within twelve (12) months after having been notified to do so. The owner or
occupant of the building having the duty to connect to the sanitary sewer system shall have the city water service
to such building disconnected in the event any building is used or occupied after the twelve (12) months'
notification period if such connection with the city sanitary sewer system has not been made.
(2002 Code, secs. 13.301–13.302)
Sec. 24.01.002 Installment payment of fees and assessments for water and sewer connections
(a) Authorized. The city manager shall be and is authorized to enter into an agreement with any owner of
improved property servable by water and sewer facilities of the city, providing for the payment of fees, charges
and assessments payable to the city therefor in monthly installments over a period of time not to exceed twelve
(12) months.
(b) Approval by council. Prior to entering into any such agreement under subsection (a) of this section, the
city manager shall submit the same to the city council for its approval.
(c) Terms of agreement. Any agreement entered into under subsection (a) of this section shall provide for an
express mechanic's lien against any property so served with water and/or sewer facilities, to secure sums agreed
to be paid in installments, and shall provide for the payment of interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum
from the date of any such agreement until paid in full, and further provide that, in the event of default in payment
of installments when due, the city may declare the entire balance due and payable, from which date the balance
will bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum, and that such property owner shall pay reasonable
attorney's fees if it should become necessary for the matter to be turned over to an attorney for collection.
(2002 Code, secs. 13.401–13.403)
Sec. 24.01.003 Pro rata agreements for construction of improvements or infrastructure
The city council may approve and authorize a development agreement with a landowner or development of land
located within the jurisdiction of the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction to provide for either on-site or off-site
improvements or infrastructure and to recover the proportionate cost thereof from other landowners and
developers who benefit from such improvements. (Ordinance 2008-08-30, sec. 1, adopted 8/11/08)
ARTICLE 24.02 SOLID WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 24.02.001 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/618
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Brush. Tree trimmings, hedge trimmings, plants or grass clippings and Christmas trees.
Bulk waste. Stoves, refrigerators which have CFCs removed by a certified technician, water tanks, washing
machines, furniture and similar waste materials that may be disposed of in a landfill.
Construction debris. Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition
operations.
Commercial. Any structure or business other than residential, including hotels, motels, structures containing
more than two dwellings, residential care facilities and churches.
Commercial containers/dumpsters. Containers of two-yard capacity or greater supplied by the company to
service commercial customers.
Commercial hand collect unit. A commercial type of business that generates refuse not to exceed the maximum
capacity of four polycarts (95-gallon capacity per cart) for collection one (1) time per week.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06)
Garbage. Solid waste that is perishable, animal and vegetable waste materials from handling, preparation,
cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling
and the sale of produce and other food products. (Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06; Ordinance 2010-03-
01, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/10)
Household hazardous waste. Leftover household products that contain corrosive, toxic, ignitable, or reactive
ingredients. Products such as paints, cleaners, oils, batteries, and pesticides that contain potentially hazardous
ingredients require special care when you dispose of them.
Industrial solid waste. All residue or waste as defined in section 361.003(2) and (3) of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended.
Polycart. A rubber-wheeled receptacle with a maximum capacity of 95 gallons, constructed of plastic, metal or
fiberglass, designed for automated or semi-automated solid waste collection systems, and having a tightfitting lid
capable of preventing animals from accessing the contents of the cart. The weight of the polycart and its contents
shall not exceed 175 pounds. Polycarts will be provided to each residential unit and commercial hand collect
unit, with ownership retained by the contractor.
Recycling container. An allowed receptacle designed for the purpose of curbside or alley collection of recycling
commodities. Recycling containers will be provided to each residential unit, with ownership retained by the
contractor.
Recyclable materials. All post-consumer products that qualify for reuse or reprocessing as another product.
Refuse. Bulk waste, construction debris and stable matter generated at a residential unit unless the context
otherwise requires, and commercial and industrial refuse.
Residential. Private residences and multifamily dwellings of not more than two units.
Solid waste. All material including unwanted or discarded waste material in a solid or semi-solid form, including
but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, kitchen and household waste, brush, appliances, furniture and
furnishings, ashes, food containers, sludge, and water supply treatment [sic]; provided that such material must be
of the type and consistency to be lawfully accepted at the sanitary landfill under applicable federal, state and
local laws, and as defined in section 361.003(35) of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/618
Sec. 24.02.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be subject to a fine
in accordance with section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances for all other violations [sic]. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 24.02.003 Use of service and payment of fee required; handling of waste generally
Every resident and commercial enterprise within the city shall be required to use a registered collection service
and pay the collection fee as established by the city and/or contractor. It shall be unlawful for any person
engaged in the removal, handling, transfer, or in any manner dealing with garbage, rubbish, manure, refuse, or
other waste matter, either in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to separate, unload, offer for sale, trade,
or exchange all or any part of such garbage, rubbish, waste, manure, refuse, or other waste material, within the
jurisdiction of the city, except at places designated by and in compliance with this article.
Sec. 24.02.004 Removal by unauthorized persons prohibited; interference with receptacles
No person except employees of the city, or its designated collection agency, shall remove from any solid waste,
garbage or waste material container, refuse of any kind, or in any way interfere with any such container or
receptacle; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to any owner or occupant of premises on which
such receptacle or container is located in accordance with a contract with the city or as otherwise authorized by
franchise.
Sec. 24.02.005 Compliance by collection permittees
Private persons or companies who may otherwise obtain permits to collect and remove garbage from the city
shall remove garbage and solid waste under the terms specified by the city.
Sec. 24.02.006 Junk dealers not to collect refuse
No permit issued to any junk dealer by the city shall authorize any such permittee to remove any such waste
material from any garbage container or receptacle or in any way interfere therewith.
Sec. 24.02.007 Containers
(a) Solid waste containers must meet the following requirements: (Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06)
(1) Residential containers.
(A) Unless otherwise authorized by the city, every owner, tenant, occupant or lessee using or
occupying any building, house, or structure within the city limits shall use a 95-gallon polycart
provided by the city's solid waste collection contractor or such other containers authorized in
this section. Each household will be issued one (1) polycart for solid waste and one (1) polycart
for recyclables. Up to three (3) additional polycarts per residence or commercial hand collect
unit are available at a monthly fee determined by the city and/or contractor. (Ordinance 2006-
05-16 adopted 5/22/06; Ordinance 2010-03-01, sec. 2, adopted 3/22/10)
(B) All garbage and trash mixed with water or other liquids shall be drained and placed in a
plastic bag before being placed in a polycart.
(C) The lids of the 95-gallon polycarts shall at all times be closed so that animals, rodents,
flies and other insects may not have access to the contents thereof.
(D) Every owner, tenant, occupant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or
structure within the city limits shall notify the city of any loss, theft or damage to the residential
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/618
garbage receptacles and shall be responsible for the replacement costs unless the damage is a
result of collection by the contractor.
(E) It shall be the duty of every residential customer to keep the 95-gallon polycart and other
approved receptacles in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06)
(F) Polycarts and other approved receptacles for street front collections shall be stored behind
the front building line except when placed out for collection. Polycarts or other approved
receptacles for rear alley collections shall be stored behind the rear property line except when
placed out for rear alley collection. (Ordinance 2010-03-01, sec. 3, adopted 3/22/10)
(2) Commercial containers. All commercial properties shall use a commercial container service
provided by a garbage and/or solid waste collection company with a valid franchise agreement with
the city.
(b) The city manager or designee shall cause regular inspections to be made to ensure compliance with the
terms of this section, and if any unsanitary receptacle or unauthorized receptacle is found, notice shall be placed
upon such receptacle informing the owner to clean or remove same within five (5) days. Failure to comply with
such notice shall constitute a violation of this section and is subject to removal of the receptacle by the city and
fines in accordance with section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06)
Sec. 24.02.008 General collection regulations
(a) Residential collection.
(1) There shall be collection one (1) time weekly for regular garbage and biweekly for recycling
materials for residential and commercial hand collect units.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06; Ordinance 2010-03-01, sec. 4, adopted 3/22/10)
(2) It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a residence, commercial hand
collect establishment or other building to place the garbage in the polycart at the curbline or alley
most accessible to the collection crew vehicle as determined by the contractor. (Ordinance 2006-05-
16 adopted 5/22/06)
(3) The polycart and other approved containers shall not be placed at the curb or in the alley before
8:00 p.m. prior to the designated day of collection and shall be placed at the curb or in the alley no
later than 7:00 a.m. on the designated day of collection. Polycarts and other approved containers shall
be removed from the roadway or alley point of collection within twenty-four (24) hours of collection.
(4) Materials intended for recycling shall be placed in the polycart designated for recycling
materials. Collection for recycling materials will occur biweekly on a date determined by the
contractor.
(5) All perishable waste must be bagged and placed inside polycarts.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06; Ordinance 2010-03-01, sec. 4, adopted 3/22/10)
(6) When a residential customer is physically unable to place their cart at the curb, special
assistance will be made available, as determined by the city and the contractor.
(b) Commercial collection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/618
(1) All commercial properties that exceed the requirements of commercial hand collect shall use a
commercial container service provided by a garbage and/or solid waste collection company with a
valid franchise agreement with the city.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06)
(2) All new and existing commercial properties shall provide a concrete dumpster pad and
approach to be visually screened by a solid fence or screening as required by the development code,
of sufficient height to conceal the container on all sides, except on the side used for garbage pickup
service such side shall not be required to be screened. Placement of the dumpster enclosure shall be
behind the front building line and exterior side yard building line adjacent to a street and shall have a
five-foot (5') rear property line setback and a five-foot (5') side yard setback line. When a condition
exists that a property cannot meet the setback requirements, review of the site plan by the planning
division will be required to determine a suitable location for the enclosure. Acceptable dumpsters
shall be constructed in compliance with city standards. All dumpster enclosures are required to be
maintained in conformance with an approved site plan and/or in a clean and safe manner. The
property owner must maintain the dumpster surroundings in a clean and sanitary condition, and is
responsible for removing and properly disposing of waste materials stacked outside the commercial
container/dumpster or causing the commercial container/dumpster to be overfilled. (Ordinance 2006-
05-16 adopted 5/22/06; Ordinance 2010-03-01, sec. 5, adopted 3/22/10)
(3) Commercial open top metal containers shall be based on volume or type of solid waste.
Commercial or industrial customers may utilize open top containers of ten (10) cubic yards or greater
as provided by a trash collection company with a valid franchise agreement with the city.
(c) Placement for collection from residences. It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant, occupant or lessee
using or occupying any building, house or structure within the city limits which is a private residence, and for
which a container for garbage is required, to place or cause to be placed such container at the location of such
premises for the removal of the contents of the container, at such time and in such manner as the city may direct,
which is as follows:
(1) Each polycart and recycling container shall be placed in the alley or at curbside for collection.
Curbside refers to that portion of the right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled city roadways
(including alleys.) Polycarts and recycling containers shall be placed as close to the roadway as
practicable without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or pedestrians. When
construction work is being performed in the right-of-way, polycarts and recycling containers shall be
placed as close as practicable to an access point for the collection vehicle. The contractor may decline
to collect any polycart or recycling container not so placed. Should the alleyway not be wide enough
to accommodate vehicles for polycart service, the contractor shall notify each affected residential unit
of the proper location for polycart service.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06)
(2) All solid waste must be placed within the polycart containers, with the exception of brush and
bulk items as prescribed in section 24.02.009. Nothing may be placed on top of or around the
polycart. The lid must be closed and secured. The city contractor shall dispose of any waste materials
left outside a polycart, and the property owner or resident shall be billed for the costs of the additional
disposal. Continued placement of solid waste materials outside the polycart could result in a citation.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06; Ordinance 2010-03-01, sec. 6, adopted 3/22/10)
Sec. 24.02.009 Collection of brush and bulk waste; disposal of tires
Brush and bulk waste collection shall be provided six (6) times per year to all residential properties. All brush
and bulk items shall be placed between the curbline and the sidewalk; however, if a curb and/or sidewalk is not
present, the brush and bulk items shall be placed immediately adjacent to the street, but shall not in any way
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/618
hinder or block passage of motor vehicles or pedestrians. The quantity of brush or bulk items shall be contained
to twelve (12) cubic yards. If the quantity of brush/bulk items exceeds the required size limitations, it is the
responsibility of the occupant to remove the brush/bulk at their own expense. It shall be unlawful to place brush
and bulk items out for collection prior to the Saturday before the scheduled collection week. Brush and bulk
items shall be stored in the rear yard and be kept out of public view until the Saturday before the scheduled
collection week. It shall be unlawful to place brush and bulk items on any property other than in an authorized
municipal solid waste or recycling location. It shall also be unlawful to place brush and bulk items on any other
property than your own. Failure to remove brush and bulk waste that is in violation of this section will result in
the city causing such to be removed and all costs assessed against the property. Tires are not considered bulk
waste and must be properly disposed of by the owner.
Sec. 24.02.010 Collection of wastes from tree-trimming operations
It shall be the duty of any person employing a contractor, tree-trimmer or other person to trim or prune trees or
shrubs to have said trimmings removed from the premises at his own expense if the amount exceeds the twelve
(12) cubic yards allowed for each residential property.
Sec. 24.02.011 Collection of construction refuse
Trash resulting from construction or major remodeling, or the same resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or
improved property just prior to its occupancy or otherwise resulting from sizable amounts of trees, brush, and
debris cleared from property in preparation for construction, will be removed by the city as a regular service if
the twelve (12) cubic yard allowance per residential property is not exceeded. Otherwise the owner will have
such debris removed at his own expense. If a building or demolition permit has been issued, then debris and
waste removal is subject to the requirements of the building inspections division.
Sec. 24.02.012 Disposal of bulk food refuse
Wastes from processing operations, including wastes from fruit and vegetable produce houses, poultry dressing
establishments, meat processing, and meat packing plants, must be disposed of by the owner or occupant of the
building, business, or premises where such wastes originate. The city reserves the right to further designate
appropriate solid waste, as provided in the regulations of the state commission on environmental quality, within
the above classification.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06)
Sec. 24.02.013 Disposal of animal carcasses
Carcasses of dogs, cats, or any other dead animals shall not be placed in garbage containers. The dead animal
pickup service of the animal services department of the city will, upon notice to do so, remove such small dead
animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or deposit any dead animal in any street or alley except in
such manner as shall be designated by the city. The disposal of deceased livestock is the responsibility of the
owner. (Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06; Ordinance 2010-03-01, sec. 7, adopted 3/22/10)
Sec. 24.02.014 Illegal deposits and accumulation
The following acts, among others, are declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article, and are declared to
be trespasses and subject to penalties prescribed in this code, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
(1) The throwing, placing, dumping or depositing of any solid waste, garbage, refuse, or animal or
vegetable waste matter of any kind on or in any gutter, street, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb,
alley, or any other public property of the city or in or on any lot, vacant or occupied, driveway or
other private property in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/618
(2) To cause or permit to be or remain in or upon any premises, private or public, garbage, any
animal, vegetable, or mineral matter, or any composition or residue thereof, which is in an unsanitary
condition or injurious to public health.
(3) The draining or discharging of pesticides, grease, petroleum products, paints, sewage, septic
tanks, grease trap waste, cooling towers, etc., and toxic chemicals onto any property, street, alley or
storm sewer.
Sec. 24.02.015 Windblown refuse, dust or ashes
It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or material in such a place or condition that it can be blown by
the wind so as to scatter or cause clouds of dust or particles, and it shall be unlawful to permit the escape of soot,
ashes, or other solid products or results of combustion so as to be windblown or scattered.
Sec. 24.02.016 Fees and charges
(a) The city currently contracts the removal of residential and commercial refuse. Rates for such services will
be determined in accordance with respective service contracts approved by the city council.
(b) The city reserves the right to determine whether refuse services will be commercial and/or residential.
Sec. 24.02.017 Franchise required for collectors; quality of service
Subject to the exceptions provided in this article, no person, firm or corporation shall use the streets, highways,
public thoroughfares and properties of the city, including its alleys and other public places, for the private
commercial gathering and hauling of garbage and trash for fee, except by ordinance duly passed under the
provisions of article III, section 17 [article X], of the home rule city charter or by contract duly authorized and
entered into between the city and a person, firm or corporation chosen as independent contractor for the
gathering and hauling of municipal solid waste in the city. Franchise holders shall assure quality of service by
monitoring character of workers, well-maintained equipment and timely response to and remediation of damage
and spillage complaints.
Charter reference–Franchises and special privileges, art. X.
Sec. 24.02.018 Burden of proof of exemption
In any complaint and in any action or proceedings brought for the enforcement of any provision of this article, it
shall not be necessary to negate any exception, excuse, proviso, or exemption contained in this article, and the
burden of proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso, or exemption shall be upon the defendant.
Sec. 24.02.019 Obstructing commercial container
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct commercial garbage or refuse containers.
Sec. 24.02.020 Depositing waste in container of another
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage, refuse or trash in a container other than one under his
control or ownership.
(Ordinance 2006-05-16 adopted 5/22/06)
Sec. 24.02.021 Recycling rewards program
The city contractor shall implement an incentive-based recycling program in the city, providing participating
customers with rewards based on the average weight of recyclables per household, calculated by dividing the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/618
weight of recyclables in a load by the number of recycling participants on the load. Rewards shall be redeemable
through the city contractor's program. (Ordinance 2010-03-01, sec. 8, adopted 3/22/10)
Secs. 24.02.022–24.02.060 Reserved
Division 2. Solid Waste Disposal Franchise*
Sec. 24.02.061 Authorized; rights granted
For and in consideration of compliance by each franchisee with the covenants and conditions herein set forth,
and the ordinances and regulations of the city governing the collecting and disposing of residential solid waste,
and upon application and approval as provided herein, the city hereby agrees to grant to each franchisee a
franchise to use the public streets, alleys and thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose
of engaging in the business of collecting and disposing of garbage and solid waste generated within the corporate
limits of the city. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1401)
Sec. 24.02.062 Application; duration
Each franchisee shall make application to the city manager or his designee to be considered for a franchise under
the covenants of this division. Said franchise, if granted, shall remain in effect for five (5) years, when each
franchisee shall renew its said franchise. No fee shall be charged for the application and franchise process. Each
application shall provide information including but not limited to company name, operation address, client
listing and standard operating procedures. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1402)
Sec. 24.02.063 Rights of city
This franchise shall not be taken or held to imply the relinquishment or waiver by the city of its power to make
reasonable requirements or regulations, and the city hereby expressly reserves the right to make all regulations
which may be necessary to properly secure, in the most ample manner, the safety, welfare and accommodation of
the public, including, among other things, the right to adopt and enforce regulations to protect and promote the
health and general welfare of the public from danger and inconvenience in the management and operation of
garbage and waste collections, and to provide such service as is contemplated by this franchise. (2002 Code, sec.
13.1403)
Sec. 24.02.064 Other regulations
Nothing herein contained shall constitute a waiver of any of the requirements of the rules and regulations
heretofore adopted by the city, including the right to make such changes and amendments of said rules and
regulations as the city may deem to be advisable and necessary to protect the public health and general welfare
of its inhabitants. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1404)
Sec. 24.02.065 Scope and nature of operation
It is expressly agreed and understood that each franchisee shall collect and deliver for disposal all garbage, brush
and limbs, bulky items and dead animals from residential sites, with the sole exception of hazardous wastes as
defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The franchisee shall, at its own expense, furnish
personnel to collect garbage and solid waste and will establish and maintain in an efficient and businesslike
manner such scheduled routes and special schedules as may be necessary to fulfill the solid waste service
requirements of the city. Unless otherwise established by contract or enactment of the governing body, collection
schedules shall be determined by the city. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1405)
Sec. 24.02.066 Performance standards
Each franchisee shall submit with its application a standard operating procedure for review by the council. The
city council shall review the application and procedure and award a franchise if they meet the requirements of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/618
this division. The city council shall act on the proposed procedure and application within sixty (60) days after
filing. Costs which may hereafter be incurred by each franchisee in conforming with any changes in standards of
performance shall at that time be negotiated between the parties thereto. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1406)
Sec. 24.02.067 Rates
The city shall have sole discretion regarding setting and implementation of rates. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1407)
Sec. 24.02.068 Billing and collection of payments
The city shall be responsible for billing its residential accounts and collecting payments from its customers.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.1408)
Sec. 24.02.069 Street use fees
In consideration of the grant contained in section 24.02.061 hereof, each franchisee agrees to pay to the city
seven (7) percent of the gross receipts collected by the city from contracted solid waste accounts for services
rendered under the provisions of this franchise, said fees to be paid monthly. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1409)
Sec. 24.02.070 Complaint handling
The franchisee shall, at its own expense, provide a telephone answering service or office to answer calls from
8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. daily, Monday through Friday, excluding such holidays as may be approved by city, for
the purpose of handling complaints and other calls regarding collection services provided by each franchisee.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.1410)
Sec. 24.02.071 Identification of vehicles
All vehicles and equipment used by each franchisee for the collection and transportation of residential garbage
and solid waste shall be clearly marked with the franchisee's name in letters not less than two (2) inches in
height. In the event the city shall at any time require, the franchisee shall also assign to each of its vehicles an
identifying number and shall mark the same upon said vehicles in figures not less than two (2) inches in height.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.1411)
Sec. 24.02.072 Disposal of waste
Each franchisee agrees to dispose all solid waste collected within the city at a sanitary landfill site approved by
the state. Each franchisee will be responsible for payment of all landfill fees. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1412)
Sec. 24.02.073 Termination for cause
If at any time the franchisee shall fail to perform any of the terms, covenants or conditions herein set forth,
provided such failure is not due to war, insurrection, riot, strike, act of God or any other cause beyond each
franchisee's control, the city may, after a hearing as described herein, revoke and cancel the grant given in
section 24.02.061 hereof and this franchise shall be null and void. The hearing prerequisite to such revocation
shall not be held until notice of such hearing has been given to each franchisee by registered or certified mail,
addressed to the franchisee at the address shown on the records of the city, and a period of at least ten (10) days
has elapsed since the receipt of such notice. The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing and shall
include the specific reasons for revocation of such franchise and this agreement. The hearing shall be conducted
in public by the city council and the franchisee shall be allowed to be present and given full opportunity to
answer such charges and allegations as are set out against him in the notice. If after the hearing is concluded the
city council shall determine that the charges and allegations set forth in this notice are affirmed by the facts
presented at the hearing, they may, by a two-thirds vote of all councilmembers, revoke and cancel the franchise,
and the same shall be null and void thirty (30) days thereafter. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1413)
Sec. 24.02.074 Records; audits
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/618
The city and each franchisee agree to maintain at their respective places of business, adequate books and records
relating to the performance of their respective duties under the provisions of this agreement. The records of both
parties applicable to the performance of this agreement shall and will be available when wanted for inspection by
any other party at any time during normal working hours. Each franchisee may at any time, and at the city's
option, be required to cause a formal audit to be made of that portion of such franchisee's books and records
representing the city's operation or any portion of its other operations which may be allocated or charged to the
city operation. Both parties agree that the expense of such audit will be paid for by the city if such audit is
required by the city. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1414)
Sec. 24.02.075 Indemnification of city; insurance
(a) Each franchisee assumes the risk of loss or injury to property or persons arising from any of its operations
under this agreement, with the exception of public streets and alleys to be trafficked by the franchisee's vehicles
in the normal course of business, and agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city from all claims, demands,
suits, judgments, costs or expenses, including expenses of litigation and attorney's fees, arising from any such
loss or injury. It is expressly understood that the foregoing provisions shall not in any way limit the liability of
the franchisee. Each franchisee agrees to carry insurance during the entire term of this agreement as follows:
(1) Worker's compensation insurance covering all employees of such franchisee engaged in any
operation covered by this agreement.
(2) Automobile and public liability insurance in amounts not less than those established as
maximum recovery limits under the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, or in accordance with
any contract with the city, whichever is higher.
(b) Such policies of insurance shall be issued by companies authorized to conduct business in the state, and
shall name the city as an additional insured. Certificates evidencing such insurance contracts shall be deposited
with the city. The policy limits provided herein shall change in accordance with the provisions for maximum
liability under the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code and the laws of the state relating to worker's
compensation insurance.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.1415)
Sec. 24.02.076 Modifications
This agreement constitutes the minimum required conditions and understanding between the city and the
franchisee, and it shall not be considered modified, altered, changed or amended in any respect unless modified
by ordinance of the city as provided herein, or unless a written contract provides additional requirements or
conditions. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1416)
Sec. 24.02.077 Right to require performance
The failure of the city at any time to require performance by each franchisee of any provisions hereof shall in no
way affect the rights of the city, nor shall any breach of any provisions hereof be taken or held to be a waiver of
any provision itself. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1417)
Sec. 24.02.078 Severability
If any provision of this agreement shall be declared illegal, void or unenforceable, the other provisions shall not
be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1418)
ARTICLE 24.03 EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER LINES
Sec. 24.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/618
Developer. Any person seeking extension of water and/or sanitary sewer service for two (2) or more platted lots
in an area in which sewer and water mains have not been extended.
Front footage.
(1) In the case of a lot not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth, the width of the
property facing on a public street; provided that, if any particular lot shall exceed one hundred fifty
(150) feet in depth and such lot is to be occupied exclusively for one (1) dwelling place, the
additional depth shall not affect the frontage, except that, if such property is later subdivided, the
terms of this article shall govern.
(2) In case of a lot extending from one street to another, facing both streets, the width of such
property facing each street.
(3) In case of lots which are irregular in size and shape, the equivalent of one (1) foot for each one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of area.
Individual user. Any person who is not a developer as defined herein.
New subdivision. Any two (2) or more lots, or any tract of land to serve, to which water and sewer mains have
not been extended at the time of the effective date hereof.
Person. Any individual, firm or corporation.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.201)
Sec. 24.03.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec. 13.218)
Sec. 24.03.003 Extension authorized
(a) Within city. The city may extend water and sanitary sewer mains within the city limits to serve persons
desiring and seeking water service and sanitary sewer service whenever it shall be determined that existing
facilities may be sufficient to take care of such extension, upon the terms, conditions, agreements and payment
of charges as are required hereby and set forth herein.
(b) Outside city. The city may extend water and sanitary sewer mains outside the city limits in accordance
with the terms, conditions, agreements and payment of charges as are required by this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.202)
Sec. 24.03.004 Payment of charges
Any person desiring to connect to the city water or sanitary sewer system shall pay to the city all charges in such
amounts as may be specified by city ordinance, regardless of the time when such water and sewer lines were
installed. No refunds of pro rata charges heretofore levied shall be made by the city. (2002 Code, sec. 13.203)
Sec. 24.03.005 Extension for individual users
Water and sanitary sewer mains may be extended to serve individual users:
(1) Upon application for such service, designating the lot or tract to be so served, where the
distance between existing mains is adequate to serve the needs of such user and such tract shall not
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/618
exceed one hundred (100) feet, except as hereinafter provided, plus the distance across the frontage of
such lot or tract necessary to provide such service; provided that the city council may permit such
extension more than one hundred (100) feet upon such terms and conditions as it may at the time of
granting such extension prescribe;
(2) And upon payment by such user of the charges as established by the city council;
(3) Provided that, if the user be an industrial or commercial customer using large quantities of
water and mains for water and sewer must be extended more than one hundred (100) feet, such
extension may be made if forty (40) percent of the estimated annual revenue from such user will
support interest and principal payments on the cost of the extension at eight (8.0) percent per annum;
(4) Further provided that, if the user is currently connected to a private water utility company and
connects to the city water system, there shall be no front footage water pro rata charge made,
provided such lot or tract of land is to be occupied exclusively for one dwelling or commercial
establishment, and provided a written request for city water service is received not later than thirty
(30) days from the date construction has commenced on the street where the lot or tract of land is
located. If such lot or tract of land is later subdivided, the terms of this article relating to the extension
of water mains and sewer lines shall govern;
(5) (A) Further provided that, if the front footage of any residential tract of land facing on a
public street is greater than two hundred (200) feet, the individual user may connect to the city's
water and sewer system upon the payment of the pro rata charges equal to one hundred (100)
feet front footage, provided the water service connection shall not exceed three-fourths (3/4)
inches or the sewer service connection shall not exceed four (4) inches, and the residential tract
of land is to be occupied exclusively for one dwelling place, and provided a written request for
city water and/or sewer service is made to the city, and upon payment of charges for water
and/or sewer service connection fees as established by the city council. If such tract of land is
later subdivided, the terms of this article relating to the extension of water mains and sewer
lines shall govern;
(B) If the front, rear, or side footage (depending on the location of the water or sewer main)
of any commercial/industrial tract of land is greater than five hundred (500) feet, the individual
user may connect to the city's water and sewer system upon payment of the pro rata charges
equal to five hundred (500) feet front, side or rear footage, and provided a written request for
city water and/or sewer service is made to the city, and upon payment of charges for water
and/or sewer service connection fees as established by the city council. If such tract of land is
later subdivided, the terms of this article relating to the extension of the water mains and sewer
lines shall govern;
(6) Provided that all customers outside the city limits will execute an application for water service
which will delineate the meter size, meter placement and all service conditions, and provided that pro
rata charges of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the current inside city limits rate per front foot per tap
for residential and agricultural property will be charged up to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150)
feet, and one and one-half (1-1/2) times current inside city limits rate per front foot per tap for
commercial and industrial property will be charged, regardless of length.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.204)
Sec. 24.03.006 Intervening property to pay front foot charge
Where extensions are made under the provisions of section 24.03.005 above, the pro rata charge as established
by the city council shall be assessed against the intervening property and paid at the time connections are
requested. (2002 Code, sec. 13.205)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/618
Sec. 24.03.007 Extension to new subdivisions
(a) Upon application therefor by the developer, designating the property sought to be served and complying
with the provisions of applicable sections hereof.
(b) And upon deposit by the developer with the city of the total cost of such extension necessary to serve
adequately the area sought to be served, or upon agreement by the developer to make such extensions or cause
same to be made at the developer's expense.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.206)
Sec. 24.03.008 Additional duties of developer
No water mains nor sewer lines shall be extended, nor any connections made thereto nor any laterals extended
from any extension of water mains or sewer lines, until the plans and specifications for same shall have been
approved by the city as being properly laid out to provide for future extension and adequate assurance is given
that satisfactory materials are to be used. It shall be the duty of the developer to install all valves, hydrants and
appurtenances as may be required by the ordinances of the city, including water and sewer taps and service
extensions and copper settler and meter box for each platted lot. The developer will bear the total cost of on-site
mains, with plans and specifications to be approved by the city, except that the city will refund the cost of mains
in excess of twelve (12) inches in diameter, providing the additional main capacity is designed to serve property
beyond the limits of the development. (2002 Code, sec. 13.207)
Sec. 24.03.009 Charge for new water meter installation
(a) Upon application for new water meter installation only on any lot or tract, there shall be paid to the city a
minimum installation fee as established by the city council.
(b) Such installation fees shall be paid at the time of application for each new water meter installation. If a
new water service connection is performed by the city, water service connection fees as established by the city
council shall be charged.
(c) Upon issuance of a building permit for new construction, the developer or builder shall make application
for temporary water service and be required to make the deposit as established by the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.208)
Sec. 24.03.010 Assessment against servable property
Where water mains and/or sewer lines shall be extended into new areas, there shall be assessed against all
property within the drainage area servable by such extension a charge as established by the city council per
utility per acre or part thereof, to be assessed and paid upon development of such property or at the time of
extension to and use by or upon such property of water and/or sewer service. (2002 Code, sec. 13.209)
Sec. 24.03.011 Reimbursement of charges to developers
(a) When a developer has at its cost extended water and sanitary sewer mains through a previously
undeveloped area to a new subdivision or development, and the owners of property servable by such extension
are subject to the pro rata charges provided in this article, the city will refund to the developer such portion of the
developer's cost as the city collects out of such pro rata charges received under the provisions of this article.
(b) No refund to the developer shall exceed its actual cost of construction calculated to the date of final
inspection and acceptance of the extensions by the city, nor shall any refund to the developer exceed the pro rata
charges collected under the provisions of this article from property owners connecting to any such water or
sewer main.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/618
(c) There shall be a maximum period of ten (10) years of eligibility for the original developer or its assigns to
request refunds of pro rata payments under this section. The period of eligibility shall begin as of the date of
final inspection and acceptance of the extensions by the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.210)
Sec. 24.03.012 Charges to be credited to water and sewer fund
All sums of money hereafter collected under provisions hereof shall be credited to the water and sewer fund of
the city. (2002 Code, sec. 13.211)
Sec. 24.03.013 Procurement of easements and rights-of-way
It shall be the duty of the developer to procure, provide and pay for the necessary easements and rights-of-way
along the lines for water and sewer extensions approved by the city; provided that the city shall, where such
easements and rights-of-way cannot be purchased or obtained voluntarily, at the expense of the developer,
condemn and acquire necessary easements and rights-of-way for water and/or sewer connections. All easements,
rights-of-way, lines, mains, valves, hydrants, laterals and appurtenances shall, upon installation and construction,
become the property of the city, free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances. (2002 Code, sec. 13.212)
Sec. 24.03.014 Extension at expense of city
Notwithstanding any of the provisions hereof, the city may, at any time it sees fit and when it would otherwise be
empowered to do so, extend water mains and/or sewer lines at its own expense. (2002 Code, sec. 13.213)
Sec. 24.03.015 Plat required
No water main and/or sewer line shall be extended into any property, nor any connections made on any property
through which any water mains and/or sewer lines may be extended, unless and until such property has been
platted and such plat has been filed and approved by the city. (2002 Code, sec. 13.214)
Sec. 24.03.016 No vested rights
The purpose of this article is to provide and establish procedures and requirements in connection with the
extension of water mains and sewer lines within the city in the event that the city should determine that facilities
are adequate to serve such additional extension or connection and to provide for payment and charges in
connection therewith. No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms of this article. (2002 Code, sec.
13.215)
Sec. 24.03.017 Charges for sewer laterals and connections
(a) The city shall install and maintain all house laterals from the sewer mains to the nearest property or
easement line, and shall assess and collect charges therefor as established by the city council. For business areas,
or where deep cut connections are involved, estimates of cost will be furnished upon request, such estimated cost
to be deposited with the city before the work is done.
(b) The above charges shall include the cost of tapping the city sewer main, the installation of wyes and
placing the lateral main to the nearest property or easement line. They shall include all costs incident to
necessary repairs to pavement of any kind or character involved in making the lateral connection. The city shall
make the pavement repairs as part of the installation job. Cost as set out herein shall apply for connections to
property inside the city. For connections outside the city limits, the actual cost of construction shall govern, with
a minimum according to the above schedule. Where sanitary sewer laterals have been installed ahead of paving,
the above cost for such shall include extensions of the lateral to the nearest property line, if not already thus
extended.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.216)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/618
Sec. 24.03.018 Charges for water service connections
(a) The city shall install and maintain all water service connections in streets, alleys or easements within the
city limits and shall charge the rate as established by the city council.
(b) An estimate of cost for all service connections larger than two (2) inches in diameter will be furnished by
the city. The cost for street cuts or street boring on a fixed fee per foot basis will be established from time to time
based on actual cost to the city as determined by the director of public works. A deposit for the estimated cost of
the service connection, including any street cuts or street boring, will be required before a permit will be issued.
The final cost of the service connection will based upon completion of the work to reflect actual cost to the city.
(c) The above charges shall include all costs incident to making the installation of the service connection
required, including the necessary repairs to pavement of any kind or character involved in making the
connection. The city shall make the necessary pavement repairs, the cost to be included in the above amount.
(d) The city will maintain, at its own expense, all services from the main to the meter, or from the main to the
property line, whichever is the shorter distance, until such service is abandoned by the consumer, at which time
the city's obligation to maintain the service shall cease.
(e) The city shall install and maintain all water service connections in streets, alleys, or easements outside the
city limits and shall charge therefor a tap fee consisting of the actual cost of installation, including all material
and labor for the installation of the tap and all related service line appurtenances. Size to be installed will be
determined by the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.217)
ARTICLE 24.04 WATER AND SEWER RATES AND SERVICE POLICIES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 24.04.001 Definition
For the purpose of this article, “multifamily” shall mean any dwelling unit other than an individually metered
residence. (2002 Code, sec. 13.501)
Sec. 24.04.002 Application for service
Written application shall be made for water and sewer service furnished by the city at the utility department at
the municipal center during normal business hours. The application shall state the name and address of the
applicant, the type of utility service desired, the purpose for which the application is made and other information
that the city shall request. Application for water and sewer service may be denied:
(1) If it is determined that the customer or a member of the customer's family residing in the same
service address is indebted to the city for water and sewer service charges incurred in the past;
(2) If inspectional or code requirements are not met; or
(3) If zoning violations exist.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.502)
Sec. 24.04.003 Deposit
After the application for water and/or sewer service is received, the applicant shall pay to the city a deposit in the
amount as established by the city council. (2002 Code, sec. 13.503)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/618
Sec. 24.04.004 Applicability of rates
The rates set forth in this article are applicable to each residential and commercial customer per month or for any
part of a month for which water is used at the same location. (2002 Code, secs. 13.506, 13.511)
Sec. 24.04.005 Changes to rates
The rates set forth in this article may be changed or amended as provided by law by the city as may be deemed
necessary to defray expenses. (2002 Code, secs. 13.507, 13.512)
Sec. 24.04.006 Collection of charges; delinquency; late charge
The charges for water and/or sewer services shall be billed and collected monthly as a utility charge payable to
the city. All monthly invoices provide information regarding delinquency and subjectivity to disconnection of
services. All charges not paid within twenty (20) days from the date that the bill is issued shall be delinquent. A
late charge penalty as established by the city council will be imposed upon delinquency. (Ordinance 2011-09-24
adopted 9/12/11)
Sec. 24.04.007 Discontinuance of service for nonpayment; reconnection charges; lien for unpaid charges
(a) In the event that payment of charges for water and/or sewer services furnished by the city is not made by
the date specified for cut-off in accordance with the notice sent pursuant to section 24.04.006, service shall be
discontinued. Any customer whose water and/or sewer services are discontinued due to nonpayment may have
services resumed by paying all accrued and overdue charges, including the late charge penalty and a
reconnection charge as established by the city council.
(b) In the alternative and in lieu of discontinuance of service for nonpayment, the city may take the necessary
action to require the water customer to pay the charges imposed for the water furnished to the premises or
property, including the imposition of a lien on the non-homestead real property to secure the payment of charges
for water supplied on that property to the owner, the owner's agent or the person in charge of the property,
subject to the exceptions hereinafter provided.
(c) If the owner, the owner's agent or the person in charge of the property fails or refuses to pay the charges
within ten (10) days after notice in writing, the city may cause the charges imposed for the water furnished to the
property to be assessed on the real estate on which such water has been supplied. Notice shall be given by letter
addressed to such owner, the owner's agent or the person in charge of the property at his post office address, by
personal delivery or by publication as many as two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days in the city's
official newspaper if personal service may not be had as aforesaid or if the address of the owner, the owner's
agent or the person in charge of the property be not known. Notice as provided in this subsection shall be
complete upon deposit of the notice in writing in the United States mail, postage prepaid, when personally
delivered, or upon the second publication in the city's official newspaper.
(d) The city's lien shall be perfected by recording in the real property records of the county where the property
is located a notice of lien containing a legal description of the property and the water department account
number for the delinquent charges. The notice of lien shall be a statement by the mayor of the city of the charges,
the delinquent charge provided herein, statutory interest allowed on an open account and collection costs
incurred by the city, if any. The statement shall be subscribed and sworn to by the mayor in the form usually
required for an affidavit, and, upon such recording, the city shall have a lien on such real property superior to all
other liens, including previously recorded judgment liens and any liens recorded after the city's lien, but inferior
to a bona fide mortgage lien recorded before the recording of the city's lien in such real property records.
(e) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the city shall have the right to institute suit for the foreclosure of such
lien and collection of such charges. The notice of lien so made or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie
proof of the amount of such charges.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/618
(f) The provisions of this section shall be subject to the following exceptions:
(1) No customer may be required to pay for utility service previously furnished to another
customer at the same service connection as a condition of connecting or continuing service.
(2) The city may not require a customer's utility bill to be guaranteed by a third party as a condition
of connecting or continuing service.
(3) No lien may be imposed on an owner's property which is homestead protected by the state
constitution.
(4) No lien may be imposed for charges incurred by a tenant after notice by the owner to the city
that the property is rental property. No lien may be imposed on real property for bills incurred by a
tenant prior to the effective date of this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.509)
Sec. 24.04.008 Tampering with water meter
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized employee of the city to tamper with any water
meter or water meter appurtenance. It shall be unlawful for any individual whose meter has been disconnected
for nonpayment to turn water service back on without paying all charges in full. Any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in
the municipal court shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2002 Code, sec.
13.510)
Secs. 24.04.009–24.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Water Rates
Sec. 24.04.041 Rates within city
(a) The rates for sales of water to residential, multifamily, and commercial customers within the city limits are
as established by the city council.
(b) A minimum monthly charge as established by the city council shall be charged to each dwelling unit of a
multifamily complex (no gallons).
(c) A variable rate volume charge as established by the city council shall be charged per each one thousand
(1,000) gallons usage above the minimum usage set out above.
(d) Calculation of charges for an apartment complex shall be as established by the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.504)
Sec. 24.04.042 Rates outside city
The rates for sales of water to customers outside the city limits will be determined by multiplication of the rates
by one hundred fifteen (115) percent. (2002 Code, sec. 13.505)
Secs. 24.04.043–24.04.070 Reserved
Division 3. Wastewater Treatment Services User Charge
Sec. 24.04.071 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/618
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this division shall be as
follows:
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
Capital charge. That portion of the total wastewater service charge that is levied for capital costs, investment in
plant facilities, depreciation and other costs, excluding operation, maintenance and replacement costs.
Commercial customer. Any customer that does not qualify as a residential customer.
Living unit. A residential unit providing complete independent living facilities for one family, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.
Normal sewage. Sewage that when analyzed shows a daily average concentration of not more than two hundred
fifty (250) mg/l of BOD and two hundred fifty (250) mg/l of SS and is otherwise acceptable for collection and
treatment.
Residential customer. Any customer who has not more than a single living unit served by a single lateral line
transporting wastewater to the collection system.
Surcharge. A charge added to the normal user charge when the BOD, SS or other pollutant concentration from a
user exceeds the range of concentration of these pollutants in normal domestic sewage.
Suspended solids (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other
liquids and that are removable by laboratory filtering.
User charge. That portion of the total wastewater service charge that is levied in a proportional and adequate
manner for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment and collection
system.
Wastewater treatment system. The facilities used to transport wastewaters from individual homes or buildings to
a plant or facility where treatment of the wastewater is accomplished and the plant or facility where treatment is
accomplished [sic]. The objective of such treatment is to remove pollutants and to dispose, recycle, or reuse the
treated wastewaters and residues that result from the treatment process.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.601)
Sec. 24.04.072 Conflicts with agreements or contracts
This division shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the city and
users, including commercial, industrial, special districts, or federal agencies or installations, which are
inconsistent with this division. (2002 Code, sec. 13.602)
Sec. 24.04.073 Disposition of excess revenues
The city will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and maintenance
attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rate accordingly. (2002 Code, sec. 13.603)
Sec. 24.04.074 Charges levied
There is hereby levied on all persons, firms, corporations, organizations, political units and political
subdivisions, and all other entities using the wastewater collection system of the city, a schedule of charges as
hereinafter provided. (2002 Code, sec. 13.604)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/618
Sec. 24.04.075 User classifications
Users connected to and served by the wastewater treatment system of the city shall be classified as either
residential or commercial. (2002 Code, sec. 13.605)
Sec. 24.04.076 Schedule of charges
The following schedule of charges for residential, commercial and multifamily complex customers shall be
effective with the first billing cycle of October 1992. The variable rate portion is to be used for the payment of
costs of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the wastewater collection and treatment system.
The monthly charges are as established by the city council. (2002 Code, sec. 13.606)
Sec. 24.04.077 Applicability of rates
The rates set forth in this division are applicable to each residential, multifamily and commercial customer per
month or for any part of a month for which water is used at the same location. (2002 Code, sec. 13.607)
Sec. 24.04.078 Determination of residential charges
(a) The rates for residential users of wastewater treatment services shall be as established by the city council.
(b) Except as hereafter provided, the monthly volume of wastewater generated by residential users shall be
assumed to be equivalent to ninety-five one-hundredths (0.95) of the average monthly water consumption for
that customer for the preceding December, January and February. If the customer has not had water service for
the preceding December, January and February, the monthly volume of wastewater shall be assumed to be four
thousand five hundred (4,500) gallons, and such assumption shall be used for the first ninety (90) days of
service. Thereafter, the average monthly water consumption for such ninety (90) days shall be assumed to be the
monthly volume of wastewater service, and such assumption shall be used until such customer shall have had
water service for the months of December, January and February. After the customer has had water service for
such months, the assumption set out in the first sentence of this subsection shall be used for the calculation of
user charges.
(c) If the actual monthly water consumption for any month is less than the average monthly volume as
determined by subsection (b) above, the customer shall be billed for the lesser amount.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.608)
Sec. 24.04.079 Determination of commercial charges
(a) The rates for commercial users of wastewater treatment services shall be as established by the city council.
(b) The monthly volume of wastewater generated by a commercial user shall be assumed to be ninety-one
one-hundredths (0.91) times the volume of water consumed, provided that any commercial premises having a
separate irrigation system and meter shall be assumed to have a monthly volume of wastewater equal to ninetyfive
one-hundredths (0.95) of the volume of water consumed.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.609)
Sec. 24.04.080 Reduction when water consumed does not reach sanitary sewer system
Upon a showing by a commercial user that the water consumed by the user does not reach the sanitary sewer
system of the city, a reduction shall be allowed for the water shown to the satisfaction of the city not to have
reached the sanitary sewer system of the city; provided, however, that the volume of water shown exceeds fifty
thousand (50,000) gallons per month or twenty (20) percent of the total water consumed by the user, whichever
is more, and provided further that no reduction be allowed to any commercial user where water consumption is
less than an average of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per month. (2002 Code, sec. 13.610)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/618
Sec. 24.04.081 Surcharge for waste other than normal sewage–Applicability
Every user who discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids other than normal sewage
shall be charged and pay a surcharge in addition to the charge for normal sewage. (2002 Code, sec. 13.611)
Sec. 24.04.082 Same–Computation
The following surcharge schedule, all of which is designated as a user charge, will be implemented:
Surcharge = Q ÷ 1,000,000 x 8.34 x [a (Biochemical Oxygen Demand -
250)] + [b (Total Suspended Solids - 300)] x 1.10
Where:
Q = Flow of wastewater in gallons.
8.34 = Weight in pounds of one gallon of water.
250 = Normal [limits] of biochemical oxygen demand or normal limits
of total suspended solids in domestic wastewater expressed in
milligrams per liter.
1.10 = Administrative overhead recovery factor.
a = Unit cost of treatment per pound of biochemical oxygen demand.
b = Unit cost of treatment per pound of total suspended solids.
This formula is based on a unit charge for BOD and a unit charge for SS as established by the city council.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.612)
Sec. 24.04.083 Annual review
The user charge portion of the rate structure will be reviewed annually to accomplish the following:
(1) Ensure that the extant user charge rate is adequate to cover operation, maintenance and
replacement costs;
(2) Ensure that operation, maintenance and replacement costs are being distributed proportionally
among users and user classes.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.613)
Sec. 24.04.084 Discharges requiring increased costs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/618
Any user discharging any toxic pollutants that cause an increase in operation, maintenance and replacement costs
shall pay for the increased costs. (2002 Code, sec. 13.614)
Sec. 24.04.085 User notification
The city shall annually notify each user in conjunction with a regular bill of the rate and that part of the user
charge attributable to wastewater treatment services. (2002 Code, sec. 13.615)
Sec. 24.04.086 Billing; delinquency
Bills for the service charges for the use of the wastewater collection and treatment system by the premises shall
be rendered to the person or legal entity designated by the owner, his agent, tenant or occupant. The bills for the
service charges shall be rendered monthly. When any wastewater service bill is fifteen (15) days in default, that
bill shall be deemed delinquent. Rendition of water service to such premises shall be discontinued until the bill is
paid following due notice as set forth in section 24.04.007. (2002 Code, sec. 13.616)
Sec. 24.04.087 Reduction or increase of rates
The rates shall never be reduced below an amount sufficient to provide for the operation and maintenance of the
wastewater treatment system and for the payment of the principal of and interest on existing bonds, and shall,
when necessary, be increased to provide for said operation and maintenance and for the payment of the principal
of and interest on existing bonds. (2002 Code, sec. 13.617)
Sec. 24.04.088 Free service prohibited
None of the facilities or services afforded by the wastewater treatment system shall be furnished without a
charge being made therefor. In the event the city or any instrumentality thereof shall avail itself of any of the
facilities or services so afforded, the reasonable value thereof shall be charged against the city or such
instrumentality, and shall be paid for as the charges therefor accrue. The revenues so received from the city shall
be deemed to be revenues from the operation of the wastewater treatment system and shall be used and
accounted for in the same manner as any other revenues derived from its operation; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the city or any instrumentality thereof to avail itself of the
facilities or services afforded by the wastewater treatment system. (2002 Code, sec. 13.618)
Sec. 24.04.089 Continuing prohibited discharge
(a) A person who continues discharging wastewater in violation of this division is guilty of misdemeanor, and
upon conviction is punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code.
(b) In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all
other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a
person continuing prohibited discharges.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.619)
Sec. 24.04.090 Industrial surcharge for class groups
(a) Commercial and industrial establishments hereafter described as class I, II or III which discharge
wastewater into the city sanitary sewer system shall be required to meet the requirements of this section.
Class Description
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/618
I Eating places: Includes restaurants, bars, lounges and other
establishments which engage in preparation of food or beverage which is
served directly to the consumer.
II Equipment service facilities: Includes establishments which perform or
provide washing, cleaning or servicing of automobiles, trucks, buses,
machinery or equipment. This class to include public facilities, facilities
limited to specific companies, attended and coin-operated establishments.
III Food and kindred products processing: Includes commercial
establishments which engage in the preparation, packaging, processing or
distributing of food, food [sic] other than those included in class I, and
which discharge less than 150,000 gallons of wastewater per month.
All industries falling within one or more of the above class groups shall be subject to and pay a surcharge as set
forth in subsection (g) below.
(b) A surcharge shall be charged the customers based on wastewater strength determination for that particular
class group. Strengths for biochemical oxygen demand and total suspended solids are determined for each class
group according to the table set forth in subsection (f).
(c) Flow determinations will be made by estimating flow from water consumption records or flow meters as
outlined in subsection (e), except that a permit will not be required. If an industry that falls under the
requirements of this section is located in a larger facility served by a master meter, then the director of public
works or his designee shall estimate the wastewater flow from that industry.
(d) If an industry contains operations from more than one class group and it is determined that the surcharge
rate for a particular class group would not adequately compensate the city for its costs of treatment, then the
director of public works or his designee may assess an additional charge based on a proportional average of the
class groups involved or he may require the industry to be billed for an industrial surcharge as outlined in
subsections (f) and (g).
(e) An industry placed into a class group may elect to have its surcharge determined from composite samples
in lieu of the class averages provided that:
(1) A request to do so is submitted to and approved by the director of public works or his designee.
(2) Install a manhole built to city department of public works specifications at the sole expense of
the requesting industry and approved by the director of public works or his designee.
(3) A self-monitoring procedure to include sampling and analysis as prescribed by the director of
public works or his designee is obtained and strictly followed. Such collections and analysis being at
the sole expense of the requesting entity, or the city may provide monitoring after placement of the
manhole as provided above, with the requesting industry compensating the city for its actual
expenses.
(4) The requesting entity agrees and understands that the city shall obtain check samples, either
grab or composite, from the monitoring site for the purpose of checking the accuracy of the selfmonitoring
procedures and analysis prescribed above and that, in the event of discrepancies, the city's
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/618
data or the normal average strengths of the appropriate class shall be used for determining the
surcharge.
(5) The laboratory employed by the requesting industry shall be approved by the director of public
works or his designee, prior to implementation of self-monitoring. Subsequent changes in the
laboratory shall require prior approval.
(6) At the option of the director of public works or his designee, the industry may be removed from
a class surcharge group and surcharges determined under subsections (f) and (g).
(f) The initial determination for BOD and TSS strength shall be based on the following levels:
(1) Class I:
BOD = 1,013 mg/l
TSS = 831 mg/l
(2) Class II:
BOD = 191 mg/l
TSS = 1,003 mg/l
(3) Class III:
BOD = 752 mg/l
TSS = 423 mg/l
These strengths may be revised from time to time based on samples collected as outlined in subsection (e).
(g) The formula for determining the surcharge for public utilities purposes shall be determined through the
following formula:
Surcharge = Q ÷ 1,000,000 x 8.34 x [a (Biochemical Oxygen Demand -
250)] + [b (Total Suspended Solids - 300)] x 1.10
Q = Flow of wastewater in gallons.
8.34 = Weight in pounds of one gallon of water.
250 = Normal limits of biochemical oxygen demand or normal limits
of total suspended solids in domestic wastewater expressed in
milligrams per liter.
1.10 = Administrative overhead recovery factor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/618
a = Unit cost of treatment per pound of biochemical oxygen
demand.
b = Unit cost of treatment per pound of total suspended
solids.
(h) Exception. Upon request by an industry, the director of the department of public works or his designee
shall conduct an on-site inspection for the purpose of determining whether or not the type of operation conducted
by the industry is likely to generate extra-strength sewage. On the basis of this inspection, the industry may be
excluded from the class surcharge. This exception shall become null and void if, upon subsequent investigation,
extra strength sewage is actually being generated by the industry or the operation of the industry changes, at
which time a redetermination shall be made.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.620)
ARTICLE 24.05 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE STANDARDS*
Sec. 24.05.001 General provisions; purpose and policy
(a) This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for
the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act
(33 United States Code 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations
part 403). The objective of this article is:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will
interfere with its operation;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass
through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise
be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
(3) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater
and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned
treatment works;
(5) To enable the city to comply with the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit
conditions of the city and the Trinity River Authority sludge use and disposal requirements, and any
other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
(b) This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This article authorizes the
issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; and requires user reporting.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.701)
Sec. 24.05.002 Administration
Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works (director) shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be
delegated by the director to other personnel. (2002 Code, sec. 13.702)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/618
Sec. 24.05.003 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd Gallons per day
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SIU Significant industrial user
TCEQ Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
TRA Trinity River Authority
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
U.S.C. United States Code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/618
(2002 Code, sec. 13.703)
Sec. 24.05.004 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated:
Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33
U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
Approval authority. The regional administrator of the EPA.
Authorized representative of the user.
(1) If the user is a corporation:
(A) The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making
functions for the corporation; or
(B) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing
more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding twenty-five (25) million dollars (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
(3) If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, a director or the highest official
appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.
(4) The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual
or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to the city.
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter [as determined] by standard methods.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer system or other place of disposal.
(Also called the building lateral or connection.)
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471.
Chemical oxygen demand or COD. A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic or organic matter
present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical
oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not
necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
City. The City of Lancaster or the city council of Lancaster, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/618
Composite sample. A sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing
discrete samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample, composed of discrete
sample aliquots collected at constant time in [intervals] providing a representative sample irrespective of stream
flow, or as a flow proportional composite sample, collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals
proportional to stream flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while
maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots.
Control authority. The Trinity River Authority of Texas.
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
Control point. The point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in
the public sewer.
Director of public works. The person designated by the city who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities, or a duly authorized representative.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the
publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act.
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and
over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
Industrial user. An industry that discharges wastewater into the wastewater system.
Industrial waste charge. A financial assessment made on those persons who discharge waste into the city's
sewage system.
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and
therefore is a cause of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations:
section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control
Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps,
body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). Means the same as parts per million and is weight-to-volume ratio; the milligrams
per liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/618
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of
the Act. (33 U.S.C. 1342).
National prohibited discharge standard or prohibited discharge standard. Any regulation developed under the
authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, section 403.5.
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
New source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards
are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
(A) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other
source is located;
(B) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(C) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(B) or (1)(C) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or
operator has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
(i) Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of
existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw
material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product.
Normal wastewater. Wastewater of the city for which the average concentration of suspended solids and five-day
BOD is established at and does not exceed 250 mg/l.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/618
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered
design capacity.
Pass-through. A discharge of pollutants through the POTW's wastewater system into waters of the United States
in quantities or concentrations which alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
is a cause in whole or in part of a violation of any discharge requirement of the POTW, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
Permit to discharge industrial wastewater or permit. A document issued to a specific user expressing the terms
and conditions whereby the user is authorized to discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer system.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
pH. A measure of acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater
(e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes,
or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a
user, other than a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pollutant concentration discharge limitation requirements or standards,
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. National pretreatment standard means any pretreatment
regulations containing pollutant discharge limits that have been established or will be established for industrial
users by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in sections 24.05.006 and 24.05.007 of this article.
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A “treatment works,” as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
1292), which is owned by the city and/or the control authority. This definition includes any devices or systems
used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both,
and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted waste are not intentionally passed.
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic
tanks.
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
Shall/may. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive or directory.
Significant. A change or deviation of twenty percent (20%) or more.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/618
Significant industrial user.
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
(A) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
(B) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant;
(C) Is designated as such by the director or the control authority on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement; or
(D) Is defined as subject to national categorical pretreatment standards by the United States
EPA.
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city and/or the
control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in section 24.05.006.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
State. The State of Texas.
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm, ground and surface waters and drainage, and into which
domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation, including snowmelt.
Superintendent. The water/wastewater superintendent of the city, the superintendent's designated representative
or the person conducting those activities usually assigned or designated to that office.
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or
other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
Total toxic organics (TTO). The sum of the masses or concentration of specific toxic organic compounds found
in an industrial user's discharge at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l. For non-categorical and categorical
SIUs the TTO list is 40 CFR 122 appendix D, table 2, unless specifically designated in a particular categorical
classification.
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
administration of the EPA under the provisions of the CWA, section 307(a), or other acts.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable waste or other harmful
substances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/618
Trinity River Authority (authority). A governmental agency of the state and a body politic and corporate created
as a conservation and reclamation district, including but not limited to the authority to operate sewage gathering
transmission and disposal service, to charge for such services and to make contracts in reference thereto with
municipalities, including the city.
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge.
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater service surcharge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes exceed in
strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater.
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide
treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
Watercourse. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs,
aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the
state or any portion thereof.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.704)
Sec. 24.05.005 Applicability; conflicting agreements or contracts
(a) All discharges shall conform to the requirements of this article.
(b) This article shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the city
and the users, including commercial, industrial, special districts or federal agencies or installations, which are
inconsistent with this article, and over the terms and conditions of any previous ordinance which is inconsistent
with this article.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.705)
Sec. 24.05.006 Prohibited discharges
(a) Generally. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater
which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or
not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
(b) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following
pollutants, substances or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to,
wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60ºC) using the test methods specified
in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/618
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65ºC), or which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40ºC);
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that
will cause interference or pass-through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the superintendent
and/or control authority in accordance with section 24.05.013(d);
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, is sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(10) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as
but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the applicable NPDES permit;
(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes in a manner that will permit a
transient concentration higher than 100 microcuries per liter, except in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations;
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff and subsurface
drainage, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent and/or the control authority;
(13) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(14) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent
to fail a toxicity test;
(15) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in
the POTW;
(16) Except where the superintendent and/or the control authority have determined that different
limits under an industrial waste permit are appropriate, wastewater exceeding 200 mg/l of oils, fats
and grease of the following types:
(A) Floatable grease of any origin;
(B) Free or emulsified grease of petroleum or mineral origin, or both, including but not
limited to:
(i) Cooling or quenching oil;
(ii) Lubricating oil;
(iii) Non-biodegradable cutting oil; and
(iv) Non-saponifiable oil;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/618
(17) A discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater or industrial waste which in quantity of
flow exceeds, for a duration of longer than fifteen minutes, more than four times the average twentyfour-
hour flow during normal operation;
(18) Insecticides and herbicides in concentrations that are not amenable to treatment;
(19) Polychlorinated biphenyls;
(20) Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an extent that all particles will be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle having greater
than a one-half-inch (1/2") cross-sectional dimension;
(21) Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the city, unless approval in
writing from the superintendent and the control authority has been given to the person discharging the
waste; or
(22) Without the approval of the superintendent and/or control authority, a substance or pollutant
other than industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet waste
that is of a toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of whether or not it is amenable to treatment,
including but not limited to bulk or packaged chemical products.
Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner
that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(c) Prohibited acts; requirements for specific facilities.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, tenant or employee, to commit such acts as
listed below that will adversely affect the quality of water in the storm drainage system and
watercourses within the city.
(2) No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with
other wastes may:
(A) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment process or facilities;
(B) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(C) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(3) Grease and sand traps from automotive centers, service stations and vehicle wash operations
shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
(4) Bus and truck lines which operate more than two (2) vehicles and perform vehicle wash
operations shall cause such effluent to be trapped and placed in the sanitary sewer in accordance with
the city plumbing code.
(5) Aircraft washing shall be trapped and effluent placed in a sanitary sewer in accordance with the
city plumbing code.
(6) Dumping of grass clippings, leaves, brush or any debris in or on a curb, gutter, storm inlet,
storm drain or watercourse is prohibited.
(7) No person shall permit crankcase drainings, vehicle engine wash or other oils, greases or like
material to go to any area that will drain to the storm system or watercourses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/618
(8) No liquid, semi-liquid or chemical waste shall be deposited in any area that will drain to the
storm system or watercourses. All such materials shall be disposed of at a site approved for the
disposal of such liquids.
(9) With the exception of clean untreated water, no cooling tower, compressor or boiler blowdown
water will be permitted to flow to the storm system or watercourses.
(10) Water from nurseries used to water plants is prohibited from flowing to streets and alleys to
the extent that a nuisance is created by standing water, damage to streets or alleys or affecting the free
passage of foot traffic.
(11) Filter backwash from swimming pools and fountains shall not drain to the sanitary sewer,
unless specifically authorized by the superintendent.
(12) Animal pens for kennels, animal hospitals, packing houses, poultry processing plants and
dairies shall be connected to the sanitary sewer in accordance with the plumbing code. Exceptions
shall be made when such establishment is issued a permit by the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the TCEQ,
the city department of public works, and the city health department.
(13) Ready-mixed concrete mortar and asphalt base material delivery trucks are prohibited from
dumping unused materials to any area that will drain to streams or watercourses. All residue shall be
disposed of and vehicles washed down at a site approved for that purpose.
(14) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.706)
Sec. 24.05.007 National categorical pretreatment standards
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-71 are hereby
incorporated.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the
concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the superintendent and/or the control authority may
impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not
regulated by the same standard, the superintendent and/or the control authority shall impose an
alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove,
pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net-gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.707)
Sec. 24.05.008 Local limits
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and interference. No person shall
discharge or cause or permit to be discharged wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous
maximum allowable discharge limits:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/618
(1) No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in
subsection (2) below.
(2) The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for
discharge to inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with
standard methods, are:
Metal Not to Exceed (mg/l)
(A) Arsenic 0.30
(B) Cadmium 0.10
(C) Chromium 4.00
(D) Copper 2.40
(E) Cyanide 1.71
(F) Lead 2.00
(G) Mercury 0.0002
(H) Molybdenum 3.74
(I) Nickel 4.94
(J) Oil and grease 200
(K) Selenium 0.27
(L) Silver 0.16
(M) Zinc 10.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/618
(N) Total toxic
organics
No person shall discharge or cause or permit to be
discharged wastewater containing in excess of an
instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit
being 2.13 mg/l.
(O) Fluoride Other than that contained in the public water
supply.
(3) No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a
permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes
and other applicable provisions.
(4) Prohibited hazardous materials include but are not limited to:
(A) Antimony;
(B) Beryllium;
(C) Bismuth;
(D) Cobalt;
(E) Molybdenum;
(F) Uranyl ion;
(G) Rhenium;
(H) Strontium;
(I) Tellurium;
(J) Herbicides;
(K) Fungicides; and
(L) Pesticides.
(5) The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.801)
Sec. 24.05.009 Impairment of facilities
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/618
(b) Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) include but are not limited to materials which exert or cause
concentrations of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, including but not limited to:
(A) Fuller's earth;
(B) Lime slurries; and
(C) Lime residues.
(2) Dissolved solids greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) mg/l, including but not limited
to:
(A) Sodium chloride; and
(B) Sodium sulfate.
(3) Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to:
(A) Dye wastes; and
(B) Vegetable tanning solutions; or
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(c) The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process;
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
(4) Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(d) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a)
above if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to:
(1) Ashes;
(2) Cinders;
(3) Sand;
(4) Mud;
(5) Straw;
(6) Shavings;
(7) Metal;
(8) Glass;
(9) Rags;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/618
(10) Feathers;
(11) Tar;
(12) Plastics;
(13) Wood;
(14) Unground garbage;
(15) Whole blood;
(16) Paunch manure;
(17) Hair and fleshings;
(18) Entrails;
(19) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
(20) Slops;
(21) Chemical residues;
(22) Paint residues; or
(23) Bulk solids.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.802)
Sec. 24.05.010 Unlawful discharge of waste
(a) Unless an exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used
by all persons discharging:
(1) Wastewater;
(2) Industrial waste; or
(3) Polluted liquids.
(b) Unless authorized by the approving authority/TCEQ, no person may deposit or discharge any waste
included in subsection (a) above on public or private property or into or adjacent to any:
(1) Natural outlet;
(2) Watercourse;
(3) Storm sewer; or
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive
suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and
local governments.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.803)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/618
Sec. 24.05.011 Right of revision
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent
standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (2002 Code, sec. 13.804)
Sec. 24.05.012 Dilution of discharge
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent and/or control authority
may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (2002 Code, sec. 13.805)
Sec. 24.05.013 Pretreatment of wastewater
(a) Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article
and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out
in this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, the control authority or the superintendent,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained
at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the superintendent before such facilities are constructed.
The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this
article.
(b) Additional pretreatment measures.
(1) Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge
during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers,
relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
user's compliance with the requirements of this article.
(2) The superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain,
on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization
of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
(3) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the superintendent
they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and
oil or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired
regularly as needed by the user at their expense.
(4) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and
maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(c) Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two (2) years, the superintendent and/or
control authority shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The
superintendent and/or control authority may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement
such a plan. Alternatively, the superintendent and/or control authority may develop such a plan for any user. An
accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/618
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent and/or control authority of any
accidental or slug discharge as required by this article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include but are not limited to inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including
solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
(d) Hauled wastewater.
(1) Septage waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the
superintendent and control authority, and at such times as are established by the superintendent and
control authority. Such waste shall not violate any other requirements established by the city. The
superintendent and/or control authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater
discharge permits.
(2) Every generator of septage waste shall produce a manifest for each load to be hauled. Septage
waste haulers must be provided with a copy of the manifest form for every load. This form shall
include at a minimum the name and address of the generator, the waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, disposal site and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type
of industry, known or suspected waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes. The generator shall retain a completed manifest in its business office for three (3) years after
disposal.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.806)
Sec. 24.05.014 Discharge permit required; application; issuance
(a) Wastewater analysis. When requested by the superintendent and/or control authority, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within ten (10) days of the request. The
superintendent and/or control authority is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require users to update this information.
(b) Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
(1) No SIU shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the superintendent and/or control authority, except that a SIU that has filed a
timely application pursuant to subsection (c) below may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein.
(2) The superintendent and/or control authority may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a
violation of this article and subject the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this
article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state and local law.
(c) Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges
in the future shall, within sixty (60) days after said date, apply to the superintendent and/or control authority for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/618
a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the
POTW to continue after sixty (60) days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a
wastewater discharge permit issued by the superintendent and/or control authority.
(d) New connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of
such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this article must be filed
at least thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(e) Application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application. The superintendent may require all users to submit as part of an application the following
information:
(1) All information required by this article;
(2) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all
raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production:
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor
drains and appurtenances by size, location and elevation and all points of discharge;
(7) Time and duration of discharges; and
(8) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the superintendent to evaluate the
wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
(f) Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports
must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: “I
certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or
supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate
the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting
false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(g) Issuance or denial. The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application,
the superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent may
deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.807)
Sec. 24.05.015 Conditions of discharge permit
(a) Duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed five (5)
years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/618
five (5) years at the discretion of the superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific
date upon which it will expire.
(b) Contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the superintendent and/or control authority to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the
quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(A) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event
shall exceed five (5) years:
(B) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to the city in accordance with subsection (d), and provisions for furnishing the new
owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(C) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
(D) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law; and
(E) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may contain but need not be limited to the following conditions:
(A) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(B) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
(C) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated or nonroutine discharges;
(D) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(E) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(F) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment;
(G) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit; and
(H) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent and/or the control
authority to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/618
(c) Modification. The superintendent and/or control authority may modify a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including but not limited to the following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or
requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater
volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination
of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel
or the receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application or in any required reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR
403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
(d) Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee gives at least sixty (60) days' advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the
new owner or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of
facility transfer.
(e) Revocation. The superintendent and/or the control authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including but not limited to the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the superintendent and/or control authority of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent and/or control authority of changed
conditions pursuant to this article;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/618
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the superintendent and/or control authority timely access to the facility
premises and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility;
or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater
discharge permit or this article.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership.
All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
(f) Reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with section 24.05.014 a minimum
of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.808)
Sec. 24.05.016 Reporting requirements
(a) Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in
subsection (2) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed
in subsection (2) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to
meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow
and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(2) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
(A) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(B) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
(C) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/618
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes.
(D) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams as
necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(E) Measurement of pollutants.
(i) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(ii) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or
mass, where required by the standard or by the superintendent, of regulated pollutants in
the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term
average concentrations or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set
out in this article.
(iii) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in this article.
(F) Pretreatment information. A statement reviewed by the user's authorized representative
and certified by a qualified professional indicating whether pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(G) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this subsection must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b) below.
(H) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with section 24.05.014(f).
(b) Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by subsection (a)(2)(G):
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include but are not
limited to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction and beginning and conducting routine
operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
(4) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the
superintendent.
(c) Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within ninety (90) days following
the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/618
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report containing the information
described in this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance
with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's
actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with section 24.05.014(f).
(d) Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the superintendent but in no
case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 24.05.014(f).
(2) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order
shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(3) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the superintendent using the procedures prescribed in this section, the
results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(e) Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the superintendent and/or control authority of any
planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of
its wastewater at least twenty (20) days before the change.
(1) The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed
necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge
permit application under section 24.05.014.
(2) The superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 24.05.014 or modify
an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 24.05.015 in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.
(3) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include but are not limited to flow
increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants.
(f) Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of a
nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the superintendent at 214-
227-6075 and the appropriate control authority at 214-225-3462 of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume if known and
corrective actions taken by the user.
(2) Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the
superintendent and/or control authority, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/618
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or
property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which
may be imposed pursuant to this article.
(3) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (1) above.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
(g) Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the superintendent as the superintendent may require.
(h) Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation,
the user must notify the superintendent and/or control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the superintendent and/or control authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the
violation. The user is not required to resample if the superintendent and/or control authority monitors at the
user's facility at least once a month, or if the superintendent and/or control authority samples between the user's
initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
(i) Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
(1) Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA
regional waste management division director and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any
discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth
in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or
other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in
the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications
must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any
notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (d) [(e)] above.
The notification requirement in this subsection does not apply to pollutants already reported by users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections
(a), (c) and (d) above.
(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (1) above during a calendar month
in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes
are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user
must notify the director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective
date of such regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/618
(4) In the case of any notification made under this subsection, the user shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(5) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be
discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.
(j) Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a
wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If
40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
(k) Sample collection.
(1) Except as indicated in subsection (2) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using
flow-proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow-proportional sampling is
infeasible, the superintendent and/or control authority may authorize the use of time-proportional
sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to
show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and volatile organic
compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(l) Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which
are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of
receipt of the report shall govern.
(m) Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain and make available
for inspection and copying all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by
this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by
the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed
the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the superintendent and/or control authority.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.809)
Sec. 24.05.017 Compliance monitoring
(a) Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The superintendent and/or the control authority or their authorized
representative shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying
with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall
allow the inspecting person ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties.
(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the inspecting person will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 528/618
(2) The superintendent and/or control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property
or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the
user's operations. Sampling performed by the POTW to monitor compliance shall be at the expense
of the user.
(3) The superintendent and/or control authority may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the
superintendent and/or control authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting person access to the user's premises shall be a
violation of this article.
(b) Search warrants. If the superintendent and/or control authority representative has been refused access to a
building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the superintendent and/or control
authority representative may seek issuance of a search warrant from an appropriate court.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.810)
Sec. 24.05.018 Confidential information
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications,
wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from the inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the superintendent and/or control authority, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law.
Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (2002 Code, sec.
13.811)
Sec. 24.05.019 Publication of names of users in significant noncompliance
The superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the
POTW is located, a list of the users which during the previous twelve (12) months were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance”
shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six
percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily
maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/618
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent
(33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month
period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
(3) Any other discharge violation that the superintendent and/or control authority believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's and/or control authority's exercise of his
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s) which the superintendent and/or control authority determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.812)
Sec. 24.05.020 Administrative enforcement remedies
(a) Notice of violation. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten
(10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction
and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the superintendent.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt
of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(b) Show cause hearing. The superintendent may order a user which has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement to appear before the superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action and a request that the user show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against or
prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
(c) Administrative orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the superintendent may issue an administrative order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/618
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Administrative orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer, and pretreatment or control of
the quantities and rates of discharge of wastewater to bring the discharge within the limits of this article. An
order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor
does an administrative order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of an administrative order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against
the user.
(d) Cease and desist orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the superintendent may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against
the user.
(e) Emergency suspensions. The superintendent and/or control authority may immediately suspend a user's
discharge after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The superintendent and/or control authority may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or
which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the superintendent and/or control authority may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection and/or water connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW or its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent
and/or control authority may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the superintendent and/or control authority that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (f) are initiated against
the user.
(2) A user that is responsible in whole or in part for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent and/or
the control authority, prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (b)
or (f) of this section.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this
section.
(f) Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 24.05.015, any user who violates the
following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/618
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and
characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or
sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 24.05.006.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show
cause under subsection (b) hereof why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
superintendent shall not be a bar to or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.813)
Sec. 24.05.021 Judicial enforcement remedies
(a) Injunctive relief. When the superintendent and/or control authority finds that a user has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city or control authority may petition the district court for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this article on activities
of the user. The city or control authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for
injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user.
(b) Civil penalties.
(1) A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article shall be liable to the
city for a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day, provided
that a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation per day may be
imposed for a violation of any point source effluent limitation of this article or the discharge of a
pollutant, other than from a non-point source, into the sewer system of the city.
(2) The city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude
and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice requires.
(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other
action against a user.
(c) Criminal prosecution; criminal responsibility.
(1) A user who violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, further
regulations and procedures established by the city and/or control authority or an administrative order
issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall upon conviction be guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code, per violation, per day.
(2) A user who introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property
damage shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalty. This
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/618
penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under state law.
(3) A user who makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application,
record, report, plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article
or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall upon
conviction be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code, per violation.
(4) Criminal responsibility. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this
article. A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if:
(A) The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits
another person to commit a violation; or
(B) The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the cause of the
illegal discharge under sections 24.05.006, 24.05.008, 24.05.013 and 24.05.014.
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The superintendent
may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the
superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the
superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
(e) Applicability of more stringent regulations.
(1) If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more stringent than the discharge
limits prescribed in this article are promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency for certain industries, the more stringent national pretreatment standards will apply to the
affected industrial user. A violation of the more stringent national pretreatment standards will also be
considered a violation of this article.
(2) An industrial user within the city who discharges industrial waste ultimately received and
treated by another governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale wastewater contract or a reciprocal
agreement with the city is subject to the following additional rules:
(A) If the governmental entity has more stringent discharge limits than those prescribed by
this article, or by a discharge permit issued hereunder, because the United States Environmental
Protection Agency requires the more stringent discharge limits as a part of the governmental
entity's wastewater pretreatment program, the more stringent discharge limits shall prevail.
(B) The superintendent is authorized to issue a discharge permit to an industrial user affected
by subsection (A) to insure notice of and compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. If
the industrial user already has a discharge permit, the superintendent and/or control authority
may amend the permit to apply and enforce the more stringent discharge limits. An industrial
user shall submit to the superintendent and/or control authority an expected compliance date
and an installation schedule if the more stringent discharge limits necessitate technological or
mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes.
(C) If the superintendent chooses not to issue or amend a permit under subsection (B), the
superintendent shall notify the affected industrial user in writing of the more stringent discharge
limits and their effective date. Regardless of whether or not a permit is issued or amended, an
industrial user shall be given a reasonable opportunity to comply with the more stringent
discharge limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/618
(D) The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply upon termination of the city's
wholesale wastewater contract or reciprocal agreement with the governmental entity or upon
modification or elimination of the limits by the governmental entity or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. The superintendent shall take the appropriate action to notify
the affected industrial user of an occurrence under this subsection (D).
(3) Variances in compliance dates. The superintendent may grant a variance in compliance dates to
an industry when, in the superintendent's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or
corrective measures. In no case shall the superintendent grant a variance in compliance dates to an
industry affected by national categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliance dates
established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(4) Authority to regulate. The superintendent may establish regulations not in conflict with this
article or other laws to control the disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater
system and to insure compliance of the city's pretreatment enforcement program with all applicable
pretreatment regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The
regulations established shall, where applicable, be made a part of any discharge permit issued to an
industrial user by the superintendent.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.814)
Sec. 24.05.022 Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
(a) Act of God.
(1) For the purpose of this section, “act of God” means an event that would otherwise be a
violation that is caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe is not a violation
[sic].
(2) An act of God shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (3) below are met.
(3) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of “act of God” shall demonstrate
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that:
(A) A violation occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the act of God;
(B) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(C) The user has submitted the following information within twenty-four (24) hours of
becoming aware of the act of God:
(i) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(ii) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or, if not corrected,
the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(iii) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
(4) In an enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an act of God,
war, strike, riot or other catastrophe shall have the burden of proof.
(5) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of an act of God only
in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/618
(6) In the event an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe has been established, the user
shall control production of all discharges to the extent possible until such time as the reduction, loss
or failure of its treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
(b) Bypass.
(1) For the purposes of this section:
(A) “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's
treatment facility.
(B) “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss
of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.
Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(2) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (3) and (4) of this section.
(3) (A) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to
the superintendent and/or control authority at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass if
possible.
(B) A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds
applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware
of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The superintendent may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within
twenty-four (24) hours.
(4) (A) Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless:
(i) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property
damage;
(ii) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods
of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment
should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and
(iii) The user submitted notices as required under subsection (3) above.
(B) The superintendent and/or control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent and/or control authority determines that it
will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (4)(A) of this section.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.815)
Sec. 24.05.023 Fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/618
(a) The city council may by appropriate resolution from time to time adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement
of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program, which may include:
(1) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such
applications;
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collecting
and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
(3) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(4) Fees for filing appeals; and
(5) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
(b) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties chargeable by the city.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.816)
ARTICLE 24.06 DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM*
Sec. 24.06.001 Adoption of state law
The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems (Act) (subchapter C of chapter 552, Local Government Code, V.T.C.A,
as amended) is hereby adopted and shall be fully implemented as provided therein and by the city council, and
the drainage of surface water within the city is hereby found to be a public utility within the meaning of the Act
and the entire city constitutes a service area. The city council hereby adopts the legislative findings and hereby
declares such findings as applicable to the city. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1501; Ordinance 2010-03-02, sec. 1, adopted
3/22/10)
Sec. 24.06.002 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this
section, except where the context indicates otherwise:
Benefitted property. An improved lot or tract to which drainage service is made available under this article.
Cost of service. As applied to a drainage system service to any benefitted property, means:
(1) The prorated cost of the acquisition, whether by eminent domain or otherwise, of land, rightsof-
way, options to purchase land, easements, and interests in land relating to structures, equipment,
and facilities used in draining the benefitted property;
(2) The prorated cost for the acquisition, construction, repair, and maintenance of structures,
equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefitted property;
(3) The prorated cost of architectural, engineering, legal, and related services, plans and
specifications, studies, surveys, estimates of cost and of revenue, and all other expenses necessary or
incident to planning, providing, or determining the feasibility or practicability of structures,
equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefitted property;
(4) The prorated cost of all machinery, equipment, furniture, and facilities necessary or incident to
the provision and operation of draining the benefitted property;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/618
(5) The prorated cost of funding and financing charges and interest arising from construction
projects and the start-up cost of a drainage facility used in draining the benefitted property;
(6) The prorated cost of debt service and reserve requirements of structures, equipment, and
facilities provided by revenue bonds or other drainage revenue-pledge securities or obligations issued
by the city; and
(7) The administrative costs of the drainage utility system.
Drainage. Bridges, catchbasins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts, detention ponds, ditches, draws, flumes,
pipes, pumps, sloughs, treatment works, and appurtenances to those items, whether natural or artificial, or using
force or gravity, that are used to draw off surface water from land, carry the water away, collect, store, or treat
the water, or divert the water into natural or artificial watercourses.
Drainage charge. The levy imposed to recover the cost of the city's service in furnishing drainage for any
benefitted property, and an amount in contribution to funding of future drainage system construction by the city.
Drainage system. The drainage owned or controlled in whole or in part by the city and dedicated to the service
of the benefitted property.
Facilities. The property, either real, personal, or mixed, that is used in providing drainage and included in the
system.
Improved lot or tract. A lot or tract that has a structure or other improvement on it that causes an impervious
coverage of the soil under the structure or improvement.
Public utility. The drainage service that is regularly provided by the city through municipal property dedicated to
that service to the users of benefitted property within the boundaries of the city.
Service area. The area within the city's municipal boundaries.
User. The person or entity who owns or occupies a benefitted property.
(Ordinance 2010-03-02, sec. 2, adopted 3/22/10)
Sec. 24.06.003 Provision of service
(a) The city will provide drainage for real property located within its boundaries upon payment of the drainage
charges, as defined under the state law and provided herein, excluding certain exempted real property, and the
fees, assessments and charges will be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms.
(b) The city hereby incorporates any existing drainage facility, materials and supplies into the utility drainage
system.
(2002 Code, sec. 13.1503)
Sec. 24.06.004 Billing; failure to pay charges
(a) The city is hereby authorized to bill the drainage charges incurred as a result of the adoption hereof
through the establishment of the municipal drainage utility system. The drainage charge shall be separately
identified from other public utility billings. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1504)
(b) Any drainage charge that is not paid when due may be recovered in an action by law by the city and, in
addition to any remedies or penalties provided at law, shall subject the user of the municipal utilities who failed
to promptly pay the charges when due to discontinuance of any utility services provided by the city. (Ordinance
2010-03-02, sec. 3, adopted 3/22/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 537/618
Sec. 24.06.005 Authority to levy charges
Upon the passage of this article, the city may levy a schedule of drainage charges upon satisfaction of the
procedural requirements provided in the Act. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1505)
Sec. 24.06.006 Exemptions
The city may exempt certain entities or persons from the provisions adopted in all ordinances, resolutions and
rules under state law which the city may adopt from time to time in connection with this article and the
establishment of its municipal drainage utility system. The city manager shall, based upon accepted engineering
principles, adopt reasonable exemptions from the requirements hereof, as provided in section 552.053 of the
Texas Local Government Code. (2002 Code, sec. 13.1506; Ordinance 2010-03-02, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/10)
Sec. 24.06.007 Establishment of charges; use of revenue
(a) The city council may charge a lot or tract of benefitted property for drainage service. In setting the
schedule of charges for drainage service, the city council may place benefitted properties into classifications
based on considerations of the lots and tracts within the service area, the land use of the benefitted property, and
the size, in area, number of water meters, and topography of a parcel of benefitted property. The rates and
charges must be equitable for similar services in all areas of the service area.
(b) The city council shall establish drainage charges by resolution, and such drainage charges shall be
collected pursuant to the requirements of subchapter C of chapter 552, Texas Local Government Code, V.T.C.A.,
including, without limitation, section 552.048, and other applicable laws. The city council may change, adjust,
and readjust by resolution the rates and charges for drainage service from time to time, in accordance with the
procedural requirements of chapter 552.
(c) The income from the drainage utility system shall be used for the cost of service. The city may also create
a reserve for future construction, repair, or maintenance of the drainage system.
(Ordinance 2010-03-02, sec. 4, adopted 3/22/10)
ARTICLE 24.07 WATER CONSERVATION, DROUGHT RESPONSE, AND EMERGENCY WATER
SYSTEM SITUATIONS*
Sec. 24.07.001 Plan adopted
(a) Adoption. The water conservation and drought contingency and water emergency response plan is hereby
adopted by reference as the official city policy for the conservation of water. The city commits to implement the
requirements and procedures set forth in the adopted plan. Unless deleted, amended, expanded or otherwise
changed herein, all provisions of each such plan shall be fully applicable and binding. One copy of each such
plan, together with the exceptions and amendments thereto, shall be kept at all times in the office of the city
secretary.
(b) Unlawful taking of water; penalty. For the purpose of this section it shall be presumed that a person who is
receiving economic benefit of public water has knowingly tampered with the tangible property of the city if the
communication of supply has been:
(1) Diverted from passing through a metering device;
(2) Prevented from being correctly registered by a metering device; or
(3) Activated by any device installed to obtain public water without a city authorized metering
device.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 538/618
A person violates this section if they knowingly tamper with public property as described above or otherwise
seek to take public water without proper payment, regardless of the amount of the pecuniary losses. Any person
failing to comply with this section shall be subject to a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and/or
discontinuance of water service by the city. Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of an
offense under this section. Each day a person fails to comply with the plan is a separate violation. The city's
authority to seek injunctive or other civil relief available under the law is not limited by this section.
(Ordinance 2014-04-06 adopted 4/28/14)
ARTICLE 24.08 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Sec. 24.08.001 General provisions
(a) Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has delegated the responsibility to local governments to
adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses and manage the floodplains in areas under their jurisdiction.
(b) Findings of fact.
(1) The drainageways, creeks and flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which may result in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses could be created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains that
increase flood heights and velocities and by placing structures and other improvements vulnerable to
floods in flood hazard areas.
(3) The development of land causes large quantities of soil to be displaced and transported to
downstream locations. This soil displacement can create significant soil erosion and sedimentation
problems. Although erosion is a natural process, excessive levels of erosion may result in potentially
destructive consequences. A buildup of sediment degrades water quality, destroys valuable
environmental resources and obstructs watercourses and storm drains which can cause flooding,
thereby damaging public and private lands and property. These problems result in a serious threat to
the health, safety and general welfare of the city. Streams and floodplain areas in the city are valuable
resources to the citizens in that they provide recreational opportunities, improve the aesthetics of the
community, convey stormwater runoff and filter out water quality pollutants.
(c) Statement of purpose. Stormwater management policies shall govern the planning, design, construction,
operation and maintenance of storm drainage and erosion control facilities within the city. This article sets forth
the minimum requirements necessary to provide and maintain a safe, efficient and effective drainage system
within the city and to establish the various public and private responsibilities for the provision thereof. Further,
the purpose of this article is the following:
(1) Protect human life, health and property.
(2) Minimize the expenditure of public money for building and maintaining flood control and
storm drainage projects and cleaning sediment out of storm drains, streets, sidewalks and
watercourses.
(3) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric service,
telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges and drainageways due to stormwater runoff and erosion.
(4) Help maintain a stable tax base and preserve land values.
(5) Provide assistance upon request to potential buyers if property is in an area of special flood
hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 539/618
(6) Manage stormwater runoff and the sediment load in that runoff from points and surfaces within
new and existing developments.
(7) Establish a reasonable standard of design for development which prevents potential flood and
erosion damage.
(8) Reduce the pollutant loading to streams, ponds and other watercourses.
(9) Minimize prolonged interruption of business and the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding.
(10) Preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community.
(11) Obligate those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard to assume responsibility for their
actions.
(d) Methods of reducing flood loss. In order to accomplish its purposes, this section uses the following
methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage.
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(e) Scope of authority. Except as exempted by section 24.08.010, any person, firm, utility, corporation or
business proposing to develop land or improve property within the jurisdiction of the city is subject to the
provisions of this article. This article also applies to individual building structures, subdivisions, excavation and
fill operations and similar activities.
(f) Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of land located within the
incorporated and extraterritorial jurisdiction limits of the city. Certain provisions of this article apply only to
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city, while other provisions exempt certain other tracts.
These limited areas of application are explained in section 24.08.008 and section 24.08.009. The erosion control
provisions of this article do not apply to land under active agricultural use. As soon as construction or
modification to the lands under active agricultural use is proposed so that the use of land will change from
agriculture to any other use, then the provisions of this article shall be applicable to the once-exempted land.
Section 24.08.010 explains this exemption in greater detail.
(g) Stormwater management ordinance and stormwater design manual. The city stormwater management
ordinance and the most current version of the stormwater design manual shall become part of the official
stormwater management plan for streams, channels, detention/retention facilities and pipe drainage systems.
Deviations shall not be permitted unless the following criteria are met: (1) it can be clearly shown by approved
procedures that the deviation will not adversely affect conditions either upstream or downstream of the point of
deviation, and (2) the owners directly affected by the deviation are in written agreement, and (3) the deviation is
not in conflict with any other regulations adopted by the city, the state or federal agencies. Requests for deviation
are subject to approval by the public works director. The public works director will have the authority to update
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 540/618
the stormwater design manual as needed in response to changing conditions, design methodologies, regulations,
etc.
(h) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard, identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in the most current “Flood Insurance Study” with the accompanying
“Flood Insurance Rate Maps” and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this article. The flood insurance study is on file with the city.
(i) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another municipal ordinance,
easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever ordinance imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(j) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state or federal statutes.
(k) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degrees of flood, storm drainage, and erosion protection required
by this article are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and are based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This article does not imply that land outside the areas of flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas shall
be free from flooding or flood damages. In addition, this article does not imply that erosion controls will survive
inundation by runoff from storms greater than the design flood for erosion controls. This article shall not create
liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(l) Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be judged invalid or
held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part or provision
thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional; nor shall such unconstitutionality or
invalidity have an effect on any other ordinances or provisions of ordinances of the city.
(m) Regulatory permits. It shall be the developer's responsibility to secure all regulatory permits associated
with development of drainage improvements. These include but are not limited to U.S. Corps of Engineer 404
Permits, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality section 401 permits, Federal Emergency Management
Agency floodplain revision permits, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Texas Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permits and any city permits.
(n) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the public works director may appeal from any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the public works director to the city manager. The aggrieved person
shall file an appeal in writing with the city manager within seven (7) days from the date of the decision. If no
resolution of the appeal can be reached with the city manager within twenty-eight (28) days, the aggrieved
person may appeal in writing to an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(o) Variance.
(1) Deviations from the provisions of this article shall not be permitted unless the following criteria
are met:
(A) It can be clearly shown by approved procedures that the deviation will not adversely
affect conditions either upstream or downstream of the point of deviation.
(B) The owners directly affected by the deviation are in written agreement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 541/618
(C) The deviation is not in conflict with any other regulations adopted by the city, the state or
federal agencies.
(D) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(E) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant.
(F) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local, state, or federal laws or
regulations.
(2) Requests for deviation shall be approved by the public works director. Variances for any type of
permit or storm drainage facilities shall be issued only upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard, drainage problems and soil loss.
Variances concerning development permits may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of
historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section provided the
proposed work shall not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance for building or renovating in a floodplain is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below
the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(p) Penalty clause.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article may be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a penalty or fine. Each and every
day such an offense is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense. In addition, the violator
shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(2) Any developer, owner or builder who fails to obtain a development permit before beginning the
subject project is in violation of this article. No building permit, plat, site plan, certificate of
occupancy or other use permit may be issued for any construction, reconstruction or development
upon any land where such construction, reconstruction or development is not in conformity with the
requirements of this article. It shall be an offense for a responsible party or a third party performing
work on a project to violate any of the requirements of this article.
(q) Maintenance. Public drainage improvements dedicated (in right-of-way or by fee simple dedication to the
public) and accepted by the city shall be maintained and operated by the city or by the property owner if a
separate private maintenance agreement is executed.
(r) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 24.08.002 Stormwater management policy
(a) General.
(1) Stormwater management policies shall govern the planning, design, construction, operation and
maintenance of stormwater management facilities within the city's jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 542/618
(2) It is the policy of the city to adopt and maintain design standards that protect and provide for
the safety and general welfare of the community.
(3) It is the policy of the city to implement drainage and erosion control standards to minimize
flood damage and soil erosion to private and public facilities within the community.
(4) It is the policy of the city to implement stormwater control standards to be used during design,
construction and post-construction that provide for water quality pollution prevention.
(5) These stormwater management policies are defined by stormwater management Ordinance
2004-07-21, adopted on July 26, 2004 and amendments thereto. All amendments, additions or
modifications to this article are considered effective upon the date of acceptance, in whole or in part
by the city. These stormwater management policies shall apply to any stormwater management
system improvement not having plans released for construction on or before the date of city council
approval of revised ordinance provisions.
(b) Stormwater management ordinance and stormwater design manual. The city stormwater management
ordinance and the most current version of the stormwater design manual shall become part of the official
stormwater management plan for streams, channels, regional detention/retention facilities and pipe drainage
systems. Deviations shall not be permitted unless the criteria in subsection (o) (Variance) of section 24.08.001
are met. The city manager or designee will have the authority to update the stormwater design manual as needed
in response to changing conditions, design methodologies, regulations, and other relevant factors.
(c) Planning.
(1) Stormwater management site planning. The following principles of stormwater management
site planning shall be encouraged within the city:
(A) Preserve the natural features of the site which can be used to help manage stormwater
runoff from new development.
(B) Fit the new development to the terrain and minimize land disturbance.
(C) Reduce the impervious surface areas as much as possible.
(D) Preserve and utilize the natural drainage systems wherever possible.
(E) Design structural controls, if required, as low maintenance, multi-purpose and
aesthetically pleasing facilities.
(F) Conduct downstream assessments to demonstrate the impact of new development on
downstream drainage systems.
(2) Utilization of natural floodplains. Utilization of natural floodplains shall be the preferred
consideration in providing stormwater management control within the city. Natural floodplains for
major streams as defined in section 24.08.003 of this article shall be maintained to provide regional
flood control measures, enhance water quality and mitigate regional erosion. Where maintaining
natural floodplains is deemed impractical by the city, structural improvements and drainage systems
shall be designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts on the floodplain.
(3) Review and permit process. The review and permit process established in the stormwater
management ordinance shall be utilized by the city to provide control of development activities
related to erosion control and stormwater runoff through natural and constructed facilities.
(4) Relocation and reclamation. To implement stormwater control measures in existing areas of
private ownership, the city may consider the acquisition of private land, the relocation of property
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 543/618
owners and the reclamation of existing developed areas to their natural condition.
(5) Development around regional detention/retention facilities. The city shall control future
development upstream, downstream and in the watershed of all regional detention/retention facilities.
A detailed engineering study shall be performed on all future development that impacts or is
impacted by regional detention/retention facilities. This study will provide a technical basis for future
development and meet either of the following requirements, as appropriate:
(A) Dam and spillway will be designed to meet state commission on environmental quality
(TCEQ) dam safety requirements.
(B) Development and improvements will be restricted within the floodplain as established by
a dam breach analysis from the dam to the downstream limit of the dam breach impact.
(6) Drainage of lots. Existing drainage between developed lots shall remain the responsibility of
the affected property owners. Future developments less than one acre in area may drain surface runoff
from an individual lot to no more than one additional lot before entering a public right-of-way or
drainage system contained in a public drainage easement. Surface runoff from future developments of
lots one acre or larger must immediately enter a public right-of-way or drainage system contained in a
public drainage easement.
(7) Dedication of drainage easements. Public drainage systems designed to convey the design
storm runoff shall be contained within a drainage easement or a floodplain/floodway easement.
Developed flows from the site must be contained in a drainage easement to a point of entry into the
public drainage system.
(8) Platting of property along drainage channels. Future platting along streams and drainage
channels within the 100-year floodplain, based on fully developed watershed conditions, shall require
compliance with one of the following:
(A) Dedication of a floodplain easement;
(B) Dedication of a floodway easement if floodplain reclamation is approved;
(C) Dedication of the floodplain for use as a park, common open space or environmental
preservation area as mutually agreed upon by the developer and the city.
(9) Erosion hazard setbacks. Erosion hazard setback determinations shall be made for every stream
in which natural channels are to be preserved. Erosion hazard setbacks shall be required to protect
structures and lot improvements from erosion hazards.
(d) Engineering/design.
(1) Design of drainage systems. Stormwater runoff determinations for drainage systems shall be
based on the designated design storm frequency. The design storm frequencies for drainage systems
for the city are provided in the stormwater design manual.
(2) Fully developed watershed conditions. All drainage systems, whether upstream, downstream or
on site, shall be designed for fully developed watershed conditions based on the city's most recent
land use map.
(3) Limitation of runoff/downstream assessment.
(A) Stormwater runoff, based on fully developed watershed conditions, shall be allowed from
all future developments provided that the receiving drainage systems and/or natural channels
can adequately convey the design storm runoff so that there are no adverse impacts to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 544/618
structures, property or receiving water quality and there is no significant increase in shear stress
or erosion potential. Calculations to verify downstream adequacy shall be performed:
(i) To the nearest major receiving stream; or
(ii) Downstream to the point where the developed property is no more than ten percent
(10%) of the total drainage area for each proposed development (the ten percent rule). The
stormwater design manual provides detailed instructions for conducting a downstream
assessment using the ten percent rule.
(B) If the receiving drainage systems and/or natural channels cannot adequately convey
stormwater runoff based on fully developed conditions, runoff from the site shall be limited to
the flow that can adequately be conveyed in downstream drainage systems and/or natural
channels. All downstream improvements must be in accordance with the city's stormwater
master plan and/or with the approval of the public works director in order to avoid increasing
downstream flooding or erosion problems.
(4) Erosion and sediment control during construction. Guidelines for controlling erosion resulting
from development or construction activities shall be identified in the stormwater management
ordinance and stormwater design manual. Developers and/or builders must provide a detailed erosion
control plan for approval prior to the start of construction activities for entire developments and for
individual lots.
(5) Stream bank erosion. Erosion control methods identified in the stormwater design manual shall
be utilized for erosion control along streams and drainage channels. On-site, upstream and
downstream erosion control impacts shall be evaluated during design.
(6) Regional detention/retention facilities. The regional detention/retention facilities shall maintain
their original design to collect sediment from stormwater runoff and to provide regional flood control.
Detailed engineering and technical analysis shall be performed for each watershed containing an
existing regional detention/retention facility prior to development activities. If the dam and
spillway(s) do not meet state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) dam safety requirements,
the following restrictions shall apply:
(A) No construction shall be allowed within the downstream flood area of a dam determined
by a breach flow analysis.
(B) Development upstream shall not be allowed that adversely impacts the integrity of the
dam and/or spillway structure.
(C) Development upstream shall not be allowed that would increase the downstream flood
area of a dam determined by a breach flow analysis.
Design for upgrading dams shall comply with TCEQ dam safety requirements, this article, and
the stormwater design manual.
(7) Structural and non-structural improvements. Stormwater control may be achieved by structural
(physical) improvements, non-structural (natural/regulatory) means or a combination of both. Design
of improvements shall comply with the stormwater design manual guidelines.
(8) Regional detention/retention of stormwater runoff. Existing regional detention/retention
facilities provide stormwater retention. This retention volume was considered in establishment of the
design flood and shall be maintained.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 545/618
(9) Reclamation of floodplains. Portions of the 100-year floodplain, based on fully developed
conditions, may be reclaimed provided there is no increase in the water surface elevation and
acceptable velocities are maintained. In addition, for major streams an equivalent volume of valley
storage must be provided within the floodplain.
(e) Financing. Financing of improvements is possible through various mechanisms depending on the
circumstances of the improvements. The developer shall be responsible for financing on-site and off-site
improvements when the existing system is inadequate as a result of the development activities. Cost-sharing
opportunities between developers and between the city and developers, city contributions derived from
stormwater utility fees, drainage impact fees and erosion deposit accounts per this article are also potential
funding sources.
(f) Construction.
(1) Erosion control. Development activities shall comply with state and federal erosion control
permit requirements for construction activity and regulated industrial facilities, erosion control
guidelines in this article and with methods and procedures in the North Central Texas Council of
Governments (NCTCOG) Design Manual for Construction or revisions thereof. The city must be
provided access to inspect the adequacy and maintenance of erosion control measures on the site.
(2) Stream bank erosion. Stream bank erosion shall be minimized by utilizing procedures,
guidelines and mitigation measures provided in the stormwater design manual and NCTCOG Design
Manual for Construction or revisions thereof.
(3) Protection/replacement of trees. The protection of trees and vegetation shall be maximized to
the extent practicable without adverse impacts to drainage improvements during all development
activities. Replacement of trees along natural channels destroyed by stormwater improvements is
encouraged. All protection and mitigation of trees shall comply with other city tree requirements.
(4) Water quality pollution prevention. All construction activities shall comply with the Texas
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) stormwater permit program for construction
activities as administered by the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ).
(g) Operation and maintenance. Public drainage improvements dedicated to and accepted by the city shall be
maintained and operated by the city as required to maintain flow in the system.
(1) Floodplain and drainage easements shall be maintained by the city or a private maintenance
agreement shall be executed defining maintenance responsibility.
(2) Operation and maintenance of regional detention/retention facilities shall have a maintenance
agreement executed defining responsibility for each entity. The city shall coordinate and cooperate
with these entities to provide maximum protection for the citizens of the city.
Sec. 24.08.003 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application:
Active agricultural use. The presently ongoing use of land for cropping or livestock.
Angle of flare. The angle between the direction of a wingwall and the centerline of a culvert or storm drainage
outlet or inlet.
Appeal. A request for review or interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 546/618
Applicant. Any firm, entity, partnership, company, public utility company or individuals, who plan to clear, grub,
fill, excavate, grade or otherwise remove the vegetative cover of land, or who plan to either subdivide land and
install the appropriate infrastructure or renovate existing structures, shall become applicants for a development
permit upon submission of the appropriate application materials.
Apron. A floor or lining to protect a surface from erosion, for example, the pavement below chutes or spillways
or at the toes of dams.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map. The base flood depths
range from one to three feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, and the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year.
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, determined
based upon the FEMA guidelines and as shown in the current effective flood insurance study. This 100-year
mean recurrence interval storm event is based on existing watershed conditions (also see “design flood”).
Base flood elevation. The water surface elevation resulting from the base flood.
Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good
housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater,
receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
Builder. A person, partnership or corporation engaged in clearing, grubbing, filling, excavating, grading,
constructing a pad, installing service utility lines and/or constructing or placing a building(s) or other structure(s)
on a lot or other type of tract of land that is owned by the person, partnership or corporation, and that will not be
further subdivided into other lots.
City. The City of Lancaster, Texas, or any authorized person acting on its behalf.
Channel. A natural or artificial stream that conveys water. Channels are often further classified by their size and
purpose. For example, there are primary and secondary channels based on size, but diversions, waterways and
chutes are also channels.
Channel improvement. The improvement of the flow characteristics of a channel by clearing, excavating,
realigning, lining or other means in order to increase its capacity. The term is sometimes used to mean channel
stabilization.
Channel stabilization. Erosion prevention and stabilization of velocity distribution in a channel using jetties,
drops, revetments, vegetation and other measures.
Check dam. A small dam constructed in a gulley or other small watercourse to decrease the streamflow velocity,
minimize channel scour and promote deposition of sediment.
City-maintained land. Any land in actual ownership of the city; it does not include any type of easements that
remain in private ownership.
Common plan of development or sale. A construction activity that is completed in separate stages, separate
phases, or in combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development or sale is identified
by the documentation for the construction project that identifies the scope of the project, and may include plats,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 547/618
blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or other
similar documentation and activities.
Conduit. Any closed device for conveying flowing water.
Construction activity. Activities including clearing, grading, and excavation that are subject to TPDES general
construction permits. It does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of a ditch, channel, or other similar stormwater conveyance.
Additionally, it does not include the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the
routine clearing of existing rights-of-way, and similar maintenance activities.
(1) Small construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating
that result in land disturbances of equal to or greater than one acres but less than five acres. Small
construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is part
of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb
equal to or greater than one acre of land.
(2) Large construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating
that result in land disturbances of equal to or greater than five acres. Large construction activity also
includes the disturbance of less than five acres of total land area that is part of a larger common plan
of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than five
acres of land.
Cover, vegetative. All plants of all sizes and species found on an area, irrespective of whether they have forage
or other value, but especially used to refer to vegetation producing a mat on or immediately above the soil
surface. Temporary vegetative cover refers to the use of annual plants for the cover, while permanent vegetative
cover refers to the use of perennial plants.
Crest. The top of a dam, dike, spillway or weir, frequently restricted to the overflow portion.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood-protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Design basin. A dry basin or depression constructed for the purpose of temporarily storing stormwater runoff
and discharging all of that water over time at a rate reduced from the rate that would have otherwise occurred.
Design flood. When in the context of floods, floodplains or flood hazards, the design flood is that flood having a
one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, based upon fully developed watershed
conditions (also see “base flood”).
Developer. A person, partnership or corporation who owns a tract of land and who is engaged in clearing,
grubbing, filling, mining, excavating, grading, installing streets and utilities to be dedicated to or accepted by the
city and/or otherwise preparing that tract of land for the eventual division of the tract into one or more lots on
which building(s) or other structure(s) will be constructed or placed.
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, adding
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, grading,
clearing or removing the vegetative cover.
Discharge (hydraulics).
(1) Rate of flow; specifically, fluid flow.
(2) A volume of fluid passing a point per unit time, commonly expressed as cubic feet per second.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 548/618
Disturbance. Any operation or activity, such as clearing, grubbing, filling, excavating, mining, cutting and
grading, or removing channel linings, which results in the removal or destruction of the protective cover of soil,
including vegetative cover, channel linings, retaining walls, and slope protection.
Disturbed areas. Any area or tract of land in which a disturbance is occurring or has occurred but that has not
been stabilized.
Drainage area. The land area from which water drains to a given point.
Elevated building. In the case of FEMA-designated zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D,
“elevated building” includes a building elevated by means of fill, so that the lowest finished floor of the building
is at least two feet above the water surface elevation of the design flood.
Emergency spillway. A spillway built to carry runoff in excess of that carried by the principal spillway.
Entrance head. The head required to cause flow into a conduit or other structure; it includes both entrance loss
and velocity head.
Entrance loss. The head lost in eddies or friction at the inlet to a conduit, headwall or structure.
Equal conveyance. The principle of reducing stream conveyance for a proposed alteration with a corresponding
reduction in conveyance to the opposite bank of the stream. The right of equal conveyance applies to all owners
and uses and may be relinquished only by written agreement.
Erosion. The wearing away of land by action of wind and water.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date (January 31, 1978) of Ordinance 1046. “Existing construction” may also be
referred to as “existing structures.”
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency which administers the National Flood
Insurance Program.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study. The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided
flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary/floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland waters; and/or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of “flooding”).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 549/618
Floodway. The channel of the river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to pass the base flood discharge without increasing flood depth.
Flume. Any open conduit on a prepared grade, trestle or bridge.
Freeboard. The distance between the design flood elevation and the top of an open channel, dam, levee or
detention basin to allow for wave action, floating debris or any other condition or emergency without
overflowing the structure.
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities.
Gabion. A galvanized wire basket filled with stone for structural purposes. When fastened together, they may be
used as retaining walls, revetments, slope protection and similar structures.
Grading. Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling or combination thereof which modifies the existing land
surface contour.
Grass. Any member of the botanical family Gramineae; herbaceous plants with bladelike leaves arranged in two
ranks on a round to flattened stem. Common examples are fescue, Bermuda grass and Bahia grass. The term
“grass” is sometimes used to indicate a combination of grass and legumes grown for forage or turf purposes.
Hazardous materials. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR
part 261, and also includes any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Hydraulic gradient. A line representing the pressure head available at any given point within the drainage
system.
Hydrograph. A graph showing, for a given point on a stream or drainage system, the discharge, stage, velocity or
other property of water with respect to time.
Illicit connection. Any manmade conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to a municipal separate
storm sewer.
Illicit discharge. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not entirely composed of stormwater,
except discharges authorized under an NPDES or TPDES permit and discharges resulting from emergency
firefighting activities.
Inlet (hydraulics).
(1) A surface connection to a closed drain;
(2) A structure at the diversion end of a conduit;
(3) The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 550/618
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Letters of map change.
(1) CLOMA. A conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA) is FEMA's comment on whether a
proposed project would be excluded from the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the
effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. There is no appeal period. The letter
becomes effective on the date sent. This letter does not revise an effective NFIP map, it indicates
whether the project, if built as proposed, would or would not be removed from the SFHA by FEMA
if later submitted as a request for a letter of map amendment.
(2) CLOMR. A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is FEMA's comment on a proposed
project that would affect the hydrologic and/or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus
result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway or effective base flood elevations. There
is no appeal period. The letter becomes effective on the date sent. This letter does not revise an
effective National Flood Insurance Program map, it indicates whether the project, if built as
proposed, would or would not be removed from the special flood hazard area by FEMA if later
submitted as a request for a letter of map revision.
(3) CLOMR-F. A conditional letter of map revision based on fill (CLOMR-F) is FEMA's comment
on whether a proposed project involving the placement of fill would exclude an area from the special
flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. There is no
appeal period. The letter becomes effective on the date sent. This letter does not revise an effective
NFIP map, it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would or would not be removed from
the SFHA by FEMA if later submitted as a request for a letter of map revision based on fill.
(4) LOMA. A letter of map amendment (LOMA) is an official amendment, by letter, to an effective
National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMA establishes a property's location in relation to the
special flood hazard area. There is no appeal period. The letter becomes effective on the date sent.
(5) LOMR. A letter of map revision (LOMR) is an official revision, by letter, to an effective
National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMR may change flood insurance risk zones, floodplain
and/or floodway boundary delineations, planimetric features, and/or base flood elevations. See the
LOMR effective chart to determine when a LOMR becomes effective.
(6) LOMR-F. A letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) is an official revision, by letter, to
an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the base flood elevation and
excluded from the special flood hazard area. The letter becomes effective on the date sent.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of FEMA 60.3.
Major streams. The major streams in the city, as defined in this article, are Bear Branch, Deep Branch, Halls
Branch, Floyd Branch, Keller Branch, Keller Tributary, Mills Branch, Newton, Branch, Runyon Springs, Ten
Mile Creek, and any other stream within the city limits with a FEMA-defined floodplain.
Manning equation. The uniform flow equation used to relate velocity, hydraulic radius and energy gradient slope
and roughness characteristics of the flow path.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 551/618
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For
floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term
“manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance
rate map are referenced.
Mulching. The application of plant or other suitable materials on the soil surface to conserve moisture, reduce
erosion and aid in establishing plant cover.
Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4. The system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, alleys, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains)
owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not
used for collecting or conveying sewage.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES. A national permitting program for the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
basis. In the state of Texas, the EPA retains authority for permitting oil and gas exploration activities and Indian
Country land through the NPDES program.
Natural drainage. The dispersal of surface waters through ground absorption and by drainage channels formed
by the existing surface topography which exists at the time of adoption of this article or formed by any manmade
change in the surface topography.
Natural floodway. The effective area of a channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the “design flood” without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation. This floodway differs from the “regulatory floodway.”
New construction. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the adoptive date of
this article.
Open channel. A channel in which water flows with a free surface.
Other municipal ordinances. Ordinances such as, but not limited to, zoning, subdivision and construction
specifications.
Outfall. A point source at the point where a municipal separate storm sewer discharges to water in the state and
does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels, or other
conveyances that connect segments of the same stream or other waters of the U.S. and are used to convey waters
of the U.S.
Peak discharge. The maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a specific location.
Permanent erosion controls. Stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by the use of means or
techniques that will provide protection against erosion losses for an indefinite time period.
Permissible velocity (hydraulics). The highest velocity at which water may be carried safely in a channel or
other conduit (see the stormwater design manual).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 552/618
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to:
paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations,
so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
Pollution. (From Texas Water Code, section 26.001(14)) The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or
biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental,
or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs
the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Principal spillway. Generally, is constructed of permanent material and designed to regulate the normal water
level, provide flood protection and reduce the frequency of operation of the emergency spillway.
Probable maximum flood. The upper limit of a flood likely to occur as determined by the Corps of Engineers'
criteria.
Public erosion nuisance. A situation in which erosion of or sediment from one location is causing a bothersome
or unsightly condition on another property owned by a different individual or entity. A bothersome or unsightly
condition or burden includes sediment, mud or similar debris originating from one property but being deposited
onto a second off-site property in which that off-site owner may have to remove or clean up the deposit due to
liability, statutory, aesthetic, drainage or property damage concerns. The adversely affected off-site property
owner could be a private citizen, corporation, government or other entity.
Rainfall intensity. The rate at which rain is falling at any given instant, usually expressed in inches per hour.
Rational formula. The means of relating runoff with the area being drained, the characteristics of the land use
and the intensity of the storm rainfall.
Redevelopment. Alterations of a property that changed the “footprint” of a site or building in such a way that
there is a disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre of land. This term does not include such activities
as exterior remodeling.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the “base flood,” as calculated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. This floodway is
used by FEMA to determine compliance with its regulations.
Retention basins. A pond or other water body which has been designed to have both a conservation pool for
holding some water indefinitely and a flood storage pool for storing stormwater runoff on a temporary basis for
the purpose of reducing the peak discharge from the basin.
Riprap. Broken rock, cobbles, boulders, or concrete placed on earth surfaces, such as the face of a dam or the
bank of a stream, for protection against the action of water.
Runoff. That portion of the precipitation that makes its way toward stream channels or lakes as surface or
subsurface flow. When the term “runoff” is used alone, surface runoff usually is implied.
Sediment. Solid soil material, both mineral and organic, that is being moved or has been moved from its original
site by wind, gravity, flowing water or ice. Also sometimes referred to as “silt” or “sand.”
Sheet flow. Water, usually storm runoff, flowing in a thin layer over the ground surface. Synonymous with
“overland flow.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 553/618
Significant rise. Any rise in the design floodwater surface elevation at a particular stream location.
Soil. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth that serves as a
natural medium for the growth of plants.
Special flood hazard area. Areas inundated by the design flood and/or floodplain areas designated on the current
flood insurance rate maps.
Stabilized. To be protected from possible erosion losses, usually by the use of vegetative cover.
Standard project flood. A flood that has a magnitude of approximately one-half of the probable maximum flood,
as determined on a case-by-case basis using the Corps of Engineers' current criteria.
Start of construction. For a structure, “start of construction” includes substantial improvement and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction of a structure does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure.
Storm frequency. An expression or measure of how often a hydrologic event of given size or magnitude should,
on an average, be equaled or exceeded.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or after any form of natural precipitation, including rainfall runoff,
snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Structural control (or practice). A pollution prevention practice that requires the construction of a device, or the
use of a device, to capture or prevent pollution in stormwater runoff. Structural controls and practices may
include but are not limited to: wet ponds, infiltration basins, stormwater wetlands, silt fences, earthen dikes,
drainage swales, sediment traps, check dams, stabilized construction entrances, subsurface drains, storm drain
inlet protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent
sediment basins.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a substation or a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground. When used in the context of stormwater, the term means a drainage improvement,
such as dams, levees, bridges, culverts, headwalls, flumes, etc.
Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction or improvements of a structure, the
cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the initial market value of the structure either:
(1) Before the first improvement or repair is started; or
(2) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure. Incremental improvements over a period of time, the cumulative cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value at the time of the first improvement, shall be considered
a substantial improvement. The term does not, however, include either of the following:
(1) Any project for the improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 554/618
(2) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state
inventory of historic places.
Temporary erosion protection. The stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas for a specific time
period, usually during a construction job.
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or TCEQ. The state commission on environmental quality, any
duly authorized official of said agency, or any successor agency. The permitting authority for stormwater
discharges to the state including industrial, construction and MS4 permits.
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or TPDES. The state permitting program enforced by the state
commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Time of concentration. The estimated time in minutes or hours required for a drop of water to flow from the most
remote point in the drainage area to the point at which the discharge is to be determined.
Use. Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended,
maintained or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried
on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
Use permit. The permit required before any use may be commenced.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article. A variance, therefore, permits
construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article.
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this article. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence, as required by the
public works director, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.
Watershed. The area drained by a stream or drainage system.
Sec. 24.08.004 Administration
(a) Duties of city officials. The floodplain administrator shall administer and implement the provisions of this
section and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management. The duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Review and approve or disapprove all development permits to determine that the requirements
of this article have been met.
(2) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article, including
floodproofing certifications.
(3) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state commission on environmental
quality prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submitting evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, as mandated by state and federal
requirements.
(4) Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 555/618
and actual field conditions).
(5) Inspect sites to determine compliance with the erosion control guidelines.
(6) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites, including the
placement of manufactured homes shall be reasonably safe from flooding.
(7) Review permits for proposed development to see what permits have been obtained from those
federal, state, or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(8) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(9) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this article, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
this article.
(10) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must
require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other developments (including fill)
shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation on the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(11) Under provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, the floodplain administrator may approve certain development in zones A1-30,
AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by
more than one foot, provided that an application and approval for a conditional FIRM revision is
made and received from FEMA.
(12) For structures built on fill in or near the floodplain, require a minimum setback distance of 20
feet from the floodplain in accordance with guidelines in FIA-TB-10 issued by FEMA.
(b) Responsibilities of property owners.
(1) The owner or developer of a property to be developed shall be responsible for managing all
storm drainage flowing through or abutting such property. This responsibility also includes drainage
directed to that property by ultimate development as well as the drainage naturally flowing through
the property by reason of topography. The owner, builder or developer of a property shall be
responsible for any silt or soils from his property transported downstream from the property by
drainage. It is the intent of this article that provisions be made for managing storm drainage and
preventing erosion and sedimentation problems.
(2) Where the improvement or construction of a storm drainage facility is required along a property
line common to two or more owners, the owner hereafter proposing the development of the property
shall be responsible for obtaining the necessary city permits, making the required improvements at
the time of development and acquiring or dedicating the necessary rights-of-way or easements to
accommodate the improvements. The initial developer may recover a portion of the cost from the
adjacent developer in accordance with a developers' agreement. Also, the cost of oversized drainage
structures may be participated in by the city in accordance with provisions of this article, or any
subsequent amendment thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 556/618
(3) Where an applicant proposes development or use of only a portion of the property, provisions
for storm drainage and erosion control shall only be required in that portion of the property proposed
for immediate development, except as construction or improvements of a drainage facility or erosion
controls outside that designated portion of the property are deemed essential to the development of
that designated portion.
(4) The owner or developer of a property must provide sufficient evidence that all necessary, local,
state and federal permits have been obtained.
(c) Plat review and approval process. The city has several approval processes and permits in place which
relate to stormwater drainage and floodplains. These processes and permits include but are not limited to:
(1) Platting process. In accordance with the city's subdivision regulations, a construction plan and
profile sheets for all public improvements, including drainage facilities, shall be submitted with the
final plat. All on-site and off-site drainage easements to be utilized by the development must be
submitted with the construction plans. Requirements for preliminary and final plat submission are
outlined in the stormwater design manual of the city.
(2) Dedication of drainage easement. Public drainage systems designed to convey the design storm
runoff shall be contained within a drainage easement or a floodplain/floodway easement or property
dedicated to the public. In addition to completely containing the design storm runoff, these easements
shall be widened ten (10) feet on either side for maintenance access.
(3) Platting of property along drainage channels. Platting along streams and drainage channels
within the 100-year storm event floodplain, based on fully developed watershed conditions, shall
require compliance with one of the following conditions:
(A) Dedication of a floodplain easement;
(B) Dedication of a floodway easement if floodplain reclamation is approved;
(C) Dedication of floodplain land for use as a park, common open space or environmental
preservation area.
(4) Erosion hazard setbacks.
(A) Erosion hazard setbacks shall be utilized to provide stream bank protection for the major
streams, as defined in this article, within the city which are to be maintained as natural
floodplains. Erosion setbacks may also be required for other streams within the city where a
future determination is made that the stream shall be maintained as a natural floodplain.
(B) Natural channel banks shall be protected by use of the determined setbacks unless a plan
to stabilize and protect streambanks is approved. Where setbacks are established, no building,
fence, wall, deck, swimming pool or other structure shall be located, constructed or maintained
within the area encompassing the setback.
(C) The setback requirement for each stream shall be determined as described in section 2.12
of the stormwater design manual and shown on the final plat.
(5) Development permits (floodprone areas). All developers, owners or builders shall obtain a
building permit before beginning any projects in floodplain areas, including but not limited to:
constructing new buildings and infrastructure, filling land, altering waterways, substantially
improving existing structures located in flood hazard areas or channelizing, impounding, realigning,
deepening or other altering of a natural drainageway. A construction or renovation project cannot
begin until the city has issued a building permit for the project. Approval or denial of a building
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 557/618
permit by the city shall be based on the applicant's adherence to provisions of this article, including
each of the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(F) The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems;
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transportation of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(H) The necessity for the facility to have a waterfront location, where applicable;
(I) The availability of an alternative location, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for
the proposed use;
(J) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(6) Proceeding without approval. Any developer, owner or builder who fails to obtain a building
permit before beginning the subject project is in violation of this article. In addition to the penalties
outlined in section 24.08.001(p), no building permit, plat, site plan, certificate of occupancy or other
use permit shall be issued for any construction, reconstruction or development upon any land where
such construction, reconstruction or development is not in conformity with the requirements and
intent of this article. Anyone who violates any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be
denied the use permit until the violation is corrected. The city shall also not forward application
materials for altering the federal flood insurance maps to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency until the application materials are in compliance with the terms of this article.
(d) Deviations from permit terms.
(1) Permits may be revoked by the city if, upon periodic inspection, it is determined that the work
is not progressing in accordance with specifications of the approved plan and permit, or if it is
determined that erosion from a building or construction site is not being controlled in a satisfactory
manner.
(2) Field changes to drainage system plans can be made upon approval by the city. Record
drawings of the drainage system shall be submitted to the city at the completion of the project.
(e) Plan requirements. Application materials and plan requirements for drainage systems or floodplain
alterations are listed below. All engineering plans for storm drainage and floodplain alteration projects shall be
sealed by a professional engineer (P.E.) who is licensed in the state and experienced in civil engineering work.
The total cost for preparing the engineering plans and implementing the plans shall be borne by the applicant.
(1) Storm drainage plans. As part of the development process, storm drainage reports and plans
shall be prepared and submitted with construction plans. These reports and plans shall include
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 558/618
drainage systems and easements for both off-site and on-site drainage, so that the proper transition
between the two can be maintained. Criteria for on-site development shall also apply to off-site
improvements. The construction of all improvements shall be in accordance with the current
specifications and regulations adopted by the city. Storm drainage plans shall be prepared in
accordance with the stormwater design manual.
(2) Application materials.
(A) Owners or builders who are planning to renovate existing structures or construct new
structures shall apply for a building permit. If it is determined during the permit review that the
proposed project is located in a floodprone area, then the building permit applicant shall also be
required to submit to the floodplain administrator for review copies of the appropriate materials
listed below.
(B) Owners or developers who are proposing to build or expand subdivisions shall submit a
building permit application form. If the city staff determines the proposed work to be in flood
hazard areas, then the applicant shall submit duplicate copies of the additional appropriate
materials outlined below.
(C) It is recommended that applicants coordinate the application materials listed below with
those needed with other city permits and with the data requirements of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Such coordination will facilitate staff review, and drawings could be
combined to save the applicant from making multiple drawings.
(i) Projects involving an existing structure located in floodprone areas:
a. Plan view to scale, showing existing and proposed locations, dimensions,
lowest finished floor elevations (FFE) (including basements) and extent or elevation
of the base flood and the design storm event;
b. A cost estimate of the proposed improvements or a copy of the contract amount
for making the improvements;
c. One of the following:
1. Plans, sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the state, of any
floodproofing techniques and elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
2. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect, stating that
the floodproofing techniques used on nonresidential structures meet the
requirements of this article;
3. Elevation certificate tied to city benchmark.
(ii) All subdivisions and new construction in floodprone areas:
a. An engineering report with the following recommended format, as applicable:
1. Project description;
2. Description of the hydrologic and hydraulic analyses used, including the
method used to determine historic rainfall and stream data, soils reports used to
determine erosive velocity values and discharges and water surface elevations for
both the base flood and the design flood;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 559/618
3. Vicinity map;
4. Table of values for existing and proposed water surface elevations and
velocities;
5. Documentation that the principle of equal conveyance has been achieved;
6. Engineering calculations for existing and proposed conditions for both the
design flood and 100-year storm event discharges;
7. Evaluation of the natural floodway and floodplain limits for the design flood.
The natural floodway differs from the FEMA regulatory floodway. The natural
floodway is established to allow the city to effectively manage floodplain areas.
FEMA requirements for the regulatory floodway must also be met by applicants.
b. Engineering drawings consisting of the following recommended elements, as
applicable:
1. Water surface profile, including channel flow line, existing and proposed
water surface elevations and location and number designation of cross sections;
2. Delineation of the base flood elevations (BFE) as shown in the latest FEMA
flood insurance study, if available;
3. Plan view on 24-inch by 36-inch paper, including:
A. Scale and north arrow;
B. Title block;
C. Boundary lines and nearest street intersections;
D. Existing and proposed contours;
E. Existing and proposed floodplain limits, and limits of the natural floodway and the regulatory floodway;
F. Area to be removed from the floodplain or area to be altered;
G. Top and toe of fill and/or side slopes and the numerical slope of the fill and/or side slopes labeled;
H. Location, dimensions, etc., of all other associated improvements or alterations to the creek and/or
floodplain, such as check dams, swales, channel modifications, existing structures, etc.;
I. Location of cross sections;
J. Location of all existing and proposed easements and dedications;
K. Site vicinity map;
4. Plots of cross sections, including:
A. Scale;
B. Title block;
C. Existing and proposed ground elevations;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 560/618
D. Cut and/or fill areas labeled;
E. Limits of and numerical values for existing and proposed “n” values;
F. Equal conveyance removed from both sides.
Sec. 24.08.005 Drainage studies
(a) General. It is the policy of the city to require a drainage study on industrial, commercial, or multiple lot
residential developments to be developed in the city. If a final drainage study was not completed on an area that
was previously platted, a final drainage study may be required at the time of permitting for improvements.
(b) Preliminary drainage study.
(1) When required. It is the policy of the city to discuss and conceptually resolve drainage issues of
a development at the preliminary plat stage. The applicant shall submit a preliminary drainage study
with the submittal of any preliminary plat of a proposed development. A preliminary drainage study
may also be required by the city when reviewing the merits of a change in zoning, especially when
the proposed use is more intense than the current land use. Approval of the preliminary plat or zoning
change may be contingent on the acceptability of the solutions proposed by the preliminary drainage
study.
(2) Qualification to prepare the study. The preliminary drainage study shall be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the state, experienced in civil engineering, and having a thorough
knowledge of the study of drainage issues. The preliminary drainage study shall be signed, sealed,
and dated by the person preparing the study.
(3) Requirements. The requirements for a preliminary drainage study shall be established and
periodically updated. These requirements are found in the stormwater design manual.
(4) Exemptions. The city may waive the requirement of the preliminary drainage study or may
limit certain requirements where the public works director determines that such requirements are not
necessary for a proper review of the development.
(c) Final drainage study.
(1) When required. It is the policy of the city to resolve drainage issues of a development at the
final plat stage. The applicant may be required to submit a final drainage study with the submittal of
the final plat, replat or construction permitting phase, if a final drainage study has not been previously
completed for the proposed development or conditions have been modified. Approval of the abovementioned
plats or construction may be contingent on the acceptability of the solutions proposed by
the final drainage study.
(2) Qualification to prepare the study. The final drainage study shall be prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the state, experienced in civil engineering, and having a thorough knowledge of
the study of drainage issues. The final drainage study shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the person
preparing the study.
(3) Requirements. The requirements for a final drainage study shall be established and periodically
updated by the city. These requirements are found in the stormwater design manual.
(4) Exemptions. The city may waive the requirement of the final drainage study or may limit
certain requirements where the public works director determines that such requirements are not
necessary for a proper review of the development.
Sec. 24.08.006 Runoff calculations and limitations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 561/618
(a) General.
(1) The selection of an appropriate method for calculating runoff depends upon the size of the
drainage area contributing runoff at a most downstream point of a project. The rational method is
acceptable for situations in which the drainage area is generally less than 160 acres. A unit
hydrograph method is required for situations with larger drainage areas. These methods are described
in the stormwater design manual.
(2) Runoff computations shall be based upon fully developed watershed conditions in accordance
with the city's latest land use projections.
(b) Drainage improvements required for development.
(1) All developments shall provide for any new drainage systems, the improvement of any existing
drainage systems, channel improvements or grading, driveway adjustments, culvert improvements or
any other improvement, drainage facility, or work which is necessary to provide for the stormwater
drainage needs of the development and the downstream areas impacted. Sheet flow into drainage
channels or creeks shall be limited to non-erosive velocities as determined in the stormwater design
manual.
(2) No proposed development shall be constructed which impedes or constricts runoff from an
upstream watershed based on fully developed conditions.
(3) It shall be the developer's responsibility to determine the type, sizes, grades and capacities of all
downstream drainage systems that convey runoff from the proposed development. The developer
shall verify that the capacities of these systems are not exceeded as a result of the proposed
development, and if off-site improvements are required as a result of the proposed development, the
developer shall be responsible for constructing the needed improvements.
(4) If no stormwater master plan for a given watershed addressing downstream drainage systems
has been prepared or the factors upon which a previous stormwater master plan was based have been
substantially changed, as determined by the public works director, the developer shall, at the
developer's sole cost and expense, have a downstream analysis prepared in accordance with the
stormwater design manual criteria by a licensed professional engineer. The downstream analysis shall
be performed to the point where the developed property is no more than 10% of the total drainage
area. The downstream analysis shall determine:
(A) The necessary future capacities of the drainage systems to adequately convey the 100-
year design flows from the watershed at full development;
(B) The existing 100-year flows and runoff coefficients within the watershed prior to the
proposed development;
(C) The 100-year flows and runoff coefficients generated by each undeveloped tract within
the watershed at full development based on current zoning or proposed zoning;
(D) The existing 100-year flows in excess of the existing system's capacities within the
watershed, if any;
(E) The various facilities and total cost of construction to provide downstream drainage
systems with adequate capacities for the 100-year full development flows within the watershed;
and
(F) The proportionate share of increased runoff attributable to the development of each
undeveloped tract within the watershed. This will be based upon the incremental increase in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 562/618
stormwater runoff from each undeveloped tract at full development compared to the total
increase from full development in the entire watershed above the existing 100-year flows.
(5) Portions of the watershed which lie outside the city limits shall be analyzed and accommodated
as if fully developed.
(6) Financing of on-site and off-site drainage facilities shall be in accordance with section
24.08.013 (Funding of improvements) of this article.
(c) Limitation of runoff. Calculations to verify downstream adequacy shall be performed to the nearest major
receiving stream or downstream to the point where the developed property is no more than 10% of the total
drainage area for each proposed development. The stormwater design manual details the procedure to identify
the downstream point for the 10% drainage area analysis (ten percent rule). The city may also require additional
downstream analysis if, in the opinion of the public works director, other downstream areas are prone to flooding
or erosion. Runoff from that development shall be limited as follows:
(1) If the downstream analysis demonstrates that there is adequate capacity for the fully developed
watershed conditions the developer may proceed with site discharge equivalent to the maximum
developed for the site in the drainage analysis.
(2) If the downstream analysis demonstrates there is not adequate capacity for fully developed
watershed condition, the developer shall be required to either:
(A) Limit discharge to predevelopment conditions or less; or
(B) Improve downstream structures to handle the entire fully developed watershed conditions
and proceed with site discharge equivalent to the maximum developed for the site in the
drainage analysis.
(d) Procedure for drainage areas less than 160 acres. Computation of stormwater runoff for drainage areas less
than 160 acres shall be by the rational method, which is based on the principle that the maximum rate of runoff
from a given drainage area for an assumed rainfall intensity occurs when all parts of the area are contributing to
the flow at the point of discharge. The rational method formula and design parameters for utilizing the formula
for runoff calculation are contained in the stormwater design manual.
(e) Procedure for drainage areas greater than 160 acres.
(1) For drainage areas in excess of 160 acres where the use of the rational method does not provide
reliable results, a unit hydrograph method shall be used. The use of a unit hydrograph calculation
shall be based upon standard and accepted engineering principles normally used in the profession,
subject to the approval of the public works director. Acceptable methods and parameters for the unit
hydrograph method are contained in the stormwater design manual.
(2) The unit hydrograph method shall be based upon fully developed watershed conditions. The
detention effects of large regional detention facilities can be taken into account in unit hydrograph
methods.
(3) Circumstances that may require the use of a unit hydrograph method include sizing open
channels, reclaiming floodplains, creating lakes or building other types of drainage-related facilities
on major drainage courses. Design engineers of these types of facilities should be aware that the
requirement of designing for fully developed watershed conditions will mean that they will have to
calculate these fully developed flows, instead of using the flows calculated in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) flood insurance studies. FEMA's flows shall not be used, because the
flows are based upon existing watershed conditions. (For more information, see section 24.08.008
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 563/618
(Special drainage facilities) on the sizing of channels and other major drainage facilities, and section
24.08.009 (Floodplain guidelines) for floodplain alteration procedures.)
Sec. 24.08.007 Design of local drainage systems
(a) Design storm frequencies.
(1) The calculations of runoff quantities that must be accommodated in drainage systems require
the selection of the design storm frequency. The design flood levels for various drainage facilities are
found in the stormwater design manual.
Drainage Facility Design Recurrence Interval
Roadway ditches 25-year with 100-year spread of water not to
extend beyond 1 open lane of traffic in
residential estates type subdivisions.
Closed storm drain systems 25-year with 100-year positive overflow for
inlets on grade in streets, such that the depth
of flow in the street does not exceed the top
of the curb. Inlet bypass flows shall be in
accordance with the stormwater design
manual.
Closed storm drain systems and
inlets at street low point, sag or
sump
100-year
Culverts and bridges 100-year
Concrete-lined channels 100-years
Earthen channels 100-years
Levees Standard project flood
Dams above natural
ground/spillways
Spillway design flood varies with the class of
structure (see stormwater design manual)
100-year
(2) The approved drainage system shall provide for positive overflow at all low points. The term
“positive overflow” means that, when the inlets do not function properly or when the design capacity
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 564/618
of the conduit or roadway ditch is exceeded, the excess flow can be conveyed overland along an open
course. Normally, this would mean along a street or alley, but it can be constructed on private
property within the dedication of a special drainage easement.
(b) Storm drain design standards. Storm drain design standards are found in the stormwater design manual,
including street and alley capacity, inlets and manholes capacity and placement, pipe and culvert design, and
other standard methods and formulas for calculation of flow and depth.
(c) Drainage easements for enclosed storm drains. All storm drain conduits to be dedicated to the city shall be
located in the right-of-way (R.O.W.) or in a drainage easement dedicated to the city at the time of final recording
of a plat. Easement widths shall be determined in accordance with the stormwater design manual.
Sec. 24.08.008 Special drainage facilities
(a) Channels.
(1) Channel design. If the drainage area is less than 160 acres, runoff shall be contained within an
underground closed system, unless otherwise approved by the public works director. Open channels
may be approved by the public works director for water quality protection purposes or to protect the
environmental and aesthetic benefits of trees, springs, exposed channels and other significant natural
features. Criteria for the design of open channels are found in the stormwater design manual.
(2) Starting water surface condition. When performing hydraulic analyses for channel or
drainageway design, the starting water surface shall be based on the criteria found in the stormwater
design manual.
(b) Lakes and dams.
(1) General. In the event that a property owner or developer desires to create or modify an existing
pond or lake or desires to impound stormwater by filling or constructing an aboveground dam,
thereby creating a lake, pond, lagoon or basin as part of the development of that property, the criteria
listed in the stormwater design manual shall be met before city approval of the impoundment can be
given. Ponds or lakes created by excavation of a channel area without erecting a dam above natural
ground elevation or instream low water check dams are also subject to the criteria. The dam safety
requirements of the state must also be met for the construction of dams, lakes and other
impoundments.
(2) Maintenance and liability.
(A) The owner or developer shall retain their private ownership of the constructed lake, pond,
or lagoon or basin and shall assume full responsibility for the protection of the general public
from any health or safety hazards related to the lake, pond or lagoon constructed.
(B) The owner or developer shall assume full responsibility for the maintenance of the lake,
pond or lagoon or basin constructed. The owner or developer shall keep the public works
director advised, in writing, of the currently responsible agent for this maintenance.
(c) Levees. In the event that developers or owners wish to build levees to protect an area from flooding,
applicable FEMA guidelines, state dam safety guidelines and the criteria listed in the stormwater design manual
shall apply.
(d) Detention and retention facilities.
(1) Detention/retention facilities to reduce runoff rates may be required due to inadequate storm
drainage systems or a change in land use resulting in a significant increase in runoff. Inadequate
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 565/618
storm drainage systems to be considered include downstream structures, channels, and identifiable
floodprone areas.
(2) Detention/retention facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable design requirements of
all local, state or federal ordinances, laws or regulations, including the regulations for dam safety of
the state commission on environmental quality. Detention/retention pond design criteria is outlined in
the stormwater design manual.
(e) Flumes. Flumes are not recommended for widespread use. Flumes shall not be permitted when the purpose
of a permanent flume is to carry runoff down the sides of earthen channels. A flume may be used to direct
overflow runoff along property lines until the runoff can be intercepted by streets or conduit flows. Flumes
crossing sidewalks shall be covered or bridged, so as to minimize danger to pedestrians. Applicants shall
dedicate drainage easements for flumes. Those easements shall have sufficient width to allow future
maintenance accessibility, and in no case shall the easement be less than 15 feet wide.
(f) Connections from buildings to storm drains. Drainage from areas such as roof tops should be allowed to
flow overland before joining the storm drain system. Seepage into basements that is pumped to ground level,
seepage from springs and runoff from roof drains on nonresidential buildings that would flow onto or across
driveways, sidewalks or other areas commonly crossed by pedestrians or vehicles that create a public hazard or
nuisance shall be tied directly to the nearest storm drain. Pumped lines from basements shall have backflow
prevention devices.
Sec. 24.08.009 Floodplain guidelines
(a) Lands to which this section applies. Applicants shall comply with the requirements of this section and the
stormwater design manual for special flood hazard areas before making substantial improvements to or
increasing the outside dimensions of an existing structure or developing land within the design flood line of a
creek or stream, whether or not the land has been formally designated as a special flood hazard area. Special
flood hazard areas shall also include all areas inundated by the design flood and the floodplain areas shown in
the latest flood insurance study and on the flood insurance rate maps and subsequent amendments thereto.
(b) General floodplain regulations.
(1) Regional detention/retention of stormwater runoff. Existing regional detention/retention
facilities provide stormwater retention as a design feature. This retention volume was considered in
establishment of the design flood and shall be maintained. Natural floodplains for major streams shall
be maintained to provide regional flood control measures, enhance water quality and mitigate
regional erosion. Major streams for the city are defined in section 24.08.003.
(2) Reclamation of floodplains. Portions of the 100-year floodplain, based on fully developed
conditions, may be reclaimed provided there is no increase in the water surface elevation and
acceptable velocities are maintained. In addition, for major streams, an equivalent volume of valley
storage must be provided within the floodplain.
(3) Permitted uses of floodplain areas.
(A) To minimize possible losses of life and property, the following uses are permitted in a
floodplain area, provided they are also permitted in the underlying zoning district:
(i) Farm or ranch;
(ii) Local utilities, electrical substation, water reservoir or pumping station and water
treatment plant;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 566/618
(iii) Public park or playground, private recreation club or area, private community
center and golf course;
(iv) Parking lots in accordance with this article;
(v) Outside commercial amusement, approved by a specific use permit;
(vi) Helistop, approved by a specific use permit;
(vii) Radio, television or microwave tower and amateur communications tower with a
special permit;
(B) Structures customarily associated with the above uses may be constructed within a
floodplain area only if the proposed structure meets the same engineering requirements
applicable to filling in a floodplain.
(C) Open private recreation clubs or areas and private community centers without exterior
walls are permitted in floodplain areas. Private facilities listed above, with enclosed walls that
would incur damage, are not permitted in floodplain areas.
(D) Uses and structures other than those mentioned above shall not be permitted in floodplain
areas.
(c) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage.
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding according to established design flood elevations.
(5) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into the floodwaters.
(6) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(d) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to a minimum of one foot (1')
above the design flood (i.e., fully developed conditions 100-year) elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or registered professional land surveyor (RPLS) shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 567/618
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at a minimum of one foot (1') above the design flood level or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A
record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) All manufactured homes to be placed within a special flood hazard area shall be installed
using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within a special flood
hazard area must be located in one of the following:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood,
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated to one foot (1') above the design flood elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles.
(A) Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within special flood hazard areas either:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 568/618
(i) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(iii) Meet the permit requirements of this article and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes.
(B) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
(6) Streets, parking lots and bridges. The top of the curb or street crown of all new streets to be
built in reclaimed floodplain areas shall be at least one foot (1') above the design flood elevation. The
low beam of all new bridges to be constructed across floodplains shall be a minimum of one foot (1')
above the design flood elevation. All new private bridges to individual homes shall have their low
beams at one foot above the design flood elevation. Parking lots associated with residential uses in
reclaimed floodplain areas shall be at least at the design flood elevation. Parking lots for commercial
and industrial uses may be built at one foot below the design flood elevation. Parking lots for public
parks or playgrounds, private recreation clubs or areas, private community centers and golf courses
may be located below the design flood elevation if approved by the public works director.
(7) Utilities. All new and replacement water supply systems, sanitary sewer facilities and other
public utilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
(8) Fences. In any floodplain or positive overflow areas, fences (private and public screening) shall
be constructed such that blockage of surface water flow does not occur.
(9) Trees. The planting of trees in existing drainage channels, designated floodways, floodplain or
floodway easements, hazard setback zones, or positive overflow areas shall not be allowed if it will
impede the natural flow of the drainage channels designated floodway, floodplain or floodway
easement, hazard setback zone or positive overflow area.
(10) Fill areas. Where fill is proposed for placement to raise the ground surface to at least one foot
(1') above the design flood elevation, design engineers proposing the reclamation shall demonstrate
that the fill will not settle below the design elevation of the fill; and that the fill will be adequately
protected from erosion, scour or differential settlement. Fill slopes shall be permanently protected
from erosion losses by grassing, establishing vegetative cover approved by the public works director
or installing channel linings when allowed by the other provisions of this article. A qualified
geotechnical analysis certifying compaction of the fill to no less than 95 percent of the standard
proctor densities is required. For structures built on fill in or near the floodplain, a minimum setback
distance of 20 feet from the floodplain will be required in accordance with guidelines in FIA-TB-10
issued by FEMA.
(11) Additional construction standards for structures. All substantial improvements and new
construction permitted in a floodplain area must comply with the following requirements:
(A) Structures must be securely anchored to the foundation to prevent flotation and collapse
during inundation and designed to prevent damage to nonstructural elements during inundation.
(B) Thermal insulation used below the first floor elevation must be of a type that does not
absorb water.
(C) Adhesives must have a bonding strength that is unaffected by inundation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 569/618
(D) Doors and all wood trim must be sealed with a waterproof paint or similar product.
(E) Mechanical, electrical and utility equipment shall be located a minimum of one foot (1')
above the design flood elevation.
(F) Water heaters, furnaces, electrical distribution panels and other critical mechanical or
electrical installations must not be placed in basements. Electrical circuits for basements shall
be separate from circuits serving floors above the basement, and circuits for basements shall be
installed lowered from above.
(G) Basements are permitted for nonresidential structures only if they are designed to
preclude inundation by the design flood elevation, either by:
(i) The elimination of exterior openings below the design flood elevation; or
(ii) The use of watertight closures, such as bulkheads and flood shields.
However, no basements are permitted in soil whose permeability meets or exceeds the
minimum local standards of permeability established for the installation of individual
sewer disposal systems.
(H) Plywood used at or below the lowest floor elevation must be of an “exterior” or “marine”
grade and of a water-resistant or waterproof variety.
(I) Wood flooring used at or below the lowest floor elevation must be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without
incurring structural damage to the building.
(J) Basement ceilings for nonresidential structures must be of sufficient wet strength and be
so installed as to survive inundation.
(K) Paints or other finishes used at or below the lowest floor elevation must be capable of
surviving inundation.
(L) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the lowest floor elevation
must be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
(M) Tanks must be vented at a location above the design flood elevation.
(e) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of this article.
(2) Design flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development including manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than either 50
lots or 5 acres, if not otherwise provided pursuant to this article.
(3) All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(4) All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 570/618
(f) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazard associated with base flood
depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. The
following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2')
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads or effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section are satisfied.
(4) Within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures, are required.
(g) Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice by a
licensed professional engineer or architect that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the design and base flood
discharges, and approval of the public works director is obtained.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of this article.
(h) Verification of floodplain alterations.
(1) Certified minimum proposed finished floor elevations (FFEs). Prior to final acceptance by the
city of utilities, street or other public construction for projects involving floodplain alterations or
adjacent to defined floodplains, creeks, channels and drainageways, a certified statement shall be
prepared by a registered professional land surveyor or licensed professional engineer, showing that all
lot elevations, as developed within the subject project, meet or exceed the required minimum finished
floor elevations (FFEs) shown on the plans and plat. This certification shall be filed with the city.
(2) Certified elevations of constructed finished floor. In addition, at any time in the future when a
building permit is desired for existing platted property which is subject to flooding or carries a
specified or recorded minimum finished flood elevation, a registered professional land surveyor or a
licensed professional engineer shall prepare a certified statement that sites are built to the design
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 571/618
elevations. The certified survey data showing the property to be at or above the specified elevation
shall be furnished to the floodplain administrator for approval. A certificate of compliance with the
provisions of this article, pertaining to specified finished floor elevations, shall be required.
(3) Issuance of development permits. The applicants shall furnish, at their expense, to the
floodplain administrator the above certifications and any other certified engineering and surveying
information requested by the floodplain administrator to confirm that the required minimum floor and
pad elevations have been achieved. Development permits shall not be issued until a conditional letter
of map revision or amendment has been issued by FEMA.
Sec. 24.08.010 Erosion control guidelines
(a) Lands to which this section applies. Private property owners, developers or builders shall be accountable
for any erosion of their property or construction site which results in accumulation of sediment in dedicated
streets, alleys, any waterway or other private properties. Any accumulation or deposit of soil material beyond the
limits of the property or in city streets, alleys or drainage facilities in an amount sufficient to constitute a threat
to public safety and comfort as determined by the city shall constitute a violation of this article. The only
exceptions to this provision are lands under active agricultural use. As soon as construction or modification to
the exempted land is to begin so that the use of the land will change from agriculture to any other use, then the
land shall lose its exemption and become subject to the provisions of this article.
(b) General guidelines.
(1) Maximum use shall be made of vegetation to minimize soil loss.
(2) Natural vegetation should be retained wherever possible.
(3) Where inadequate natural vegetation exists or where it becomes necessary to remove existing
natural vegetation, temporary controls shall be installed promptly to minimize soil loss and reduce
erosion and sedimentation to the greatest degree practicable.
(4) Wherever possible during construction, erosion controls and best management practices shall
be used on hillsides to slow drainage flow rate.
(5) Erosion control elements and best management practices must be installed prior to the start of
construction activity in accordance with applicable TCEQ stormwater general permit requirements.
(6) Waste or disposal areas and construction roads should be located and constructed in a manner
that shall minimize the amount of sediment entering streams.
(7) Frequent fording of live streams shall not be permitted; therefore, temporary bridges or other
structures shall be used wherever an appreciable number of stream crossings are necessary.
(8) When work areas or material sources are located in or adjacent to live streams, such areas shall
be separated from the stream by a dike or other barrier to keep sediment from entering a flowing
stream. Care shall be taken during the construction and removal of such barriers to minimize the
sediment transport into a stream.
(9) Should preventative measures fail to function effectively, the applicant shall act immediately to
bring the erosion and/or siltation under control by whatever additional means are necessary.
(10) Erosion control devices shall be placed to trap any losses from stockpiled topsoil.
(11) The selection and timing of the installation of erosion controls shall be based upon weather
and seasonal conditions that could make certain controls not practicable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 572/618
(12) Vegetation used for vegetative cover shall be suitable for local soil and weather conditions.
Ground cover plants shall comply with listings from the Texas Agricultural Extension Service for
North Central Texas.
(13) Runoff shall be diverted away from construction areas as much as possible.
(14) Stripping of vegetation from project sites shall be phased to the degree practicable so as to
expose the minimum amount of area to soil erosion for the shortest possible period of time. Phasing
shall also consider the varying requirements of an erosion control plan at different stages of
construction.
(15) Final acceptance shall also be contingent upon having all necessary erosion control measures
installed to minimize off-site sediment. A site may be accepted without erosion control measures if
perennial vegetative cover is actively growing.
(c) Erosion control required.
(1) State requirements.
(A) The state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) regulates stormwater discharges
from construction sites. Prior to initiating any construction project, the state requirements
should be reviewed to determine the current requirements. TCEQ requirements for stormwater
protection from construction activity must be followed. For construction activity that disturbs
one or more acres, a stormwater pollution prevention plan must be developed and erosion
control measures must be implemented throughout construction activity. To obtain coverage
under the general permit for construction activities which disturb more than five acres, a notice
of intent (NOI) must be prepared and submitted to the TCEQ. The NOI must include
certification that a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) has been prepared in
accordance with the requirements of the general permit.
(B) For stormwater discharges from construction sites five acres or larger into the city's storm
sewer system, a copy of the completed NOI must be submitted to the city engineer. For
stormwater discharges from construction sites between one and five acres into the city's storm
sewer system, a copy of the construction site notice must be submitted to city engineer.
(2) Application of section. A responsible party engaging in any land disturbing activity or any
construction activities shall prepare an erosion control plan and submit that plan to the city engineer
for approval. This article shall apply regardless of whether a responsible party is required to obtain a
permit from the city in order to conduct such land disturbing or construction activity. The responsible
party shall also be held liable for violations of this article committed by third parties engaging in
activities related to the responsible party's project.
(3) Erosion control plan implementation and compliance. Each responsible party shall implement
and maintain the erosion control measures shown on its approved erosion control plan in order to
minimize the erosion and the transport of silt, earth, topsoil, etc., by water runoff or construction
activities, beyond the limits of the responsible party's site onto city streets, drainage easements,
drainage facilities, storm drains or other city property prior to beginning any land disturbing activity.
(4) Off-site borrow, spoil and staging areas. Where applicable, off-site borrow areas, spoil areas
and construction staging areas shall be considered as part of the project site and shall be governed by
this article.
(5) Related land areas. The erosion control requirements of this article shall apply to all related
land areas. Additionally, when land disturbing activity occurs on a project, all disturbed land areas
related to the project shall have permanent erosion control established before final occupancy of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 573/618
structures located thereon or final acceptance of the subdivision may be obtained. This section applies
whether or not a building permit is required.
(6) Belowground installations. All discharges resulting from belowground installations shall be
passed through city-approved erosion control devices or removed from the site for proper disposal.
(d) Erosion control plans. Each erosion control plan required by this article shall clearly identify all erosion
and sediment control measures to be installed and maintained throughout the duration of the project for which
that plan is submitted. The responsible party shall install and maintain erosion control devices in accordance
with the city-approved erosion control plan as required by this article.
(e) Development compliance.
(1) When construction or land disturbing activities are conducted as part of a construction project,
permanent erosion control shall be established prior to the occupancy of any structure. Phased
occupancy shall be allowed only when there are no outstanding erosion control violations for the
project for which the request is made.
(2) In addition to the other requirements of this article, when construction or land disturbing
activities are conducted as part of a project, the following shall apply:
(A) Erosion control deposit account. Prior to the preconstruction meeting, the developer shall
submit an erosion control plan for approval by the city and shall pay an erosion control deposit
to the city in the amount of $500.00 per acre with a maximum of $20,000.00 and a minimum of
$1,000.00. If a developer has more than one subdivision under construction, a deposit account
shall be established for each development. The deposit(s) shall be posted to compel the
developer to implement and maintain the city-approved erosion control plan. At no time shall a
deposit balance fall below $5,000.00, or the initial deposit amount, whichever is less. If the fund
has less than $5,000.00, work on the project shall stop until additional funds are deposited to
bring the balance above $5,000.00. No inspection of any type may be performed on a project or
portion thereof until a city-approved erosion control plan is implemented by the responsible
party.
(B) Final acceptance. Permanent erosion control devices and when applicable, temporary
erosion control devices, as specified in the approved erosion control plan shall be installed and
maintained prior to final acceptance of a subdivision. The developer for such subdivision shall
continue to maintain all temporary erosion control devices until permanent erosion control has
been established on all those lots within the subdivision for which a building permit has not
been issued.
(C) Transfer of property by developer. If the developer sells all of the lots in a subdivision to
one purchaser, that purchaser:
(i) Becomes the responsible party for the subdivision;
(ii) Is liable for violation of this article; and
(iii) Shall post an erosion control deposit as required by this article.
The balance remaining in the original developer's account shall be released as provided
herein upon the submission of written proof of transfer of lots and a new erosion control
deposit by the purchaser. As required by this article, the purchaser shall post an erosion
control deposit with the city.
(D) Deductions from erosion control deposit account/stop work orders/citation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 574/618
(i) The city shall inspect the erosion control devices located at a site for compliance
with the approved erosion control plan submitted by a developer. If a developer fails to
implement or maintain erosion control devices as specified in his approved erosion control
plan, the city shall provide such party with written notice of noncompliance identifying
the nature of the noncompliance. Such notice shall also inform the developer of the
circumstances under which a deduction from his deposit account will be made and the
time frame for the filing of an appeal of such action by the city. The developer shall have
twenty-four (24) hours to bring his erosion control devices into compliance with the
approved erosion control plan for the site to which notice of noncompliance was issued.
Correction shall include sediment clean-up, erosion control device repair, erosion control
device maintenance and/or installation of additional erosion control devices to prevent
reoccurrence of the violation. The twenty-four-hour cure period may be extended for
inclement weather or other factors at the discretion of the city.
(ii) At the end of the twenty-four-hour cure period, the city shall reinspect the site and
shall deduct a reinspection fee in the amount established by city council from the
developer's erosion control deposit account. If at the time of such reinspection, the erosion
control devices at the site have not been brought into compliance with the approved
erosion control plan, the city may issue a stop work order and issue a citation for each
violation of this article.
(iii) If a violation is not resolved within the twenty-four-hour cure period, the city may,
at its sole discretion, cause erosion control devices to be installed or repaired, sediment to
be removed, or take other actions necessary to correct the problem. Costs for such work,
an administration fee, and reinspection fees shall be charged against the erosion control
deposit account. Stop work orders shall be issued until the total amount of charges is
refunded by the developer into the erosion control deposit account. A citation shall also be
issued for each violation in which the city acts to cure the violation. The responsible party
shall have the right of appeal as set forth in this article.
(E) Erosion control deposit account balance–Deposit refund. After building permits have
been issued for ninety percent (90%) of the lots within the development, the developer may
request the return of the remainder of his deposit by submitting a written request to the city
engineer. However, the developer shall continue to maintain temporary erosion control devices
on those remaining lots for which building permits have not been issued and for any other areas
upon which permanent erosion control has not been established. The balance of the deposit
remaining in an account after deductions for all violations have been made shall be refunded
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written request for refund along with a list of all
deductions made from the deposit account. The responsible party shall have the right of appeal
as set forth in this article.
(F) Erosion control deposits. Erosion control deposits posted pursuant to the requirements of
this article shall not accrue interest.
(f) Residential lots with a building permit. When land disturbing activities are conducted on a residential lot
for which a building permit must be issued, the responsible party shall comply with the following:
(1) Erosion control plan. Prior to approval of a building permit for a residential lot by the city, the
builder/contractor of other responsible party obtaining the building permit shall submit an erosion
control plan for approval by the city. No construction may be performed on a project until a cityapproved
erosion control plan is implemented.
(2) Stop work order/citation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 575/618
(A) The city shall inspect the erosion control devices located at a site for compliance with the
approved erosion control plan submitted for such site. If a responsible party fails to implement
or maintain erosion control devices as specified in the approved erosion control plan, the city
shall provide such party with written notice of noncompliance identifying the nature of such
noncompliance. The responsible party shall have twenty-four (24) hours to bring the erosion
control devices into compliance with the intent of the approved erosion control plan for the site
where the violation occurred. Modifications to the approved erosion control plan may be
required to maintain all sediment on site. Correction shall include sediment clean-up, erosion
control device repair, erosion control device maintenance, and/or installation of additional
erosion control devices to prevent reoccurrence of the violation. The twenty-four-hour cure
period may be extended for inclement weather or other factors at the discretion of the building
official. If the intent of the approved control plan (maintaining sediment on site) is not met, then
the responsible party shall take action within twenty-four (24) hours to control soil eroding from
the site and clean up any sediment and shall have one week to submit a new erosion control
plan. Work may continue during the review period. Implementation of this plan shall be
required within twenty-four (24) hours of plan approval by the city. If no plan is submitted
within one week, then construction activities shall be halted until a new plan is submitted and
approved.
(B) At the end of the twenty-four-hour cure period, the city shall reinspect the site and may
assess a reinspection fee. If at the time of such reinspection, the erosion control devices at the
site have not been brought into compliance with the approved erosion control plan, the city may
issue a stop work order and issue a citation for each violation of the city's erosion control
requirements. When a stop work order has been issued, a reinspection fee shall be assessed. To
obtain a reinspection for removal of the stop work order, a request must be submitted therefor
and a reinspection fee in the amount established by city council shall be paid.
(3) Removal of erosion control devices. Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy or upon
establishing permanent ground cover on a lot, all temporary erosion control devices shall be removed.
(g) Enforcement.
(1) Violations. It shall be an offense for a responsible party or a third party performing work on a
project to violate any of the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) Conducting any land disturbing or construction activity without an approved erosion
control plan for the location where the violation occurred;
(B) Failing to install erosion control devices or to maintain erosion control devices
throughout the duration of land disturbing activities, in compliance with the approved erosion
control plan for the location where the violation occurred;
(C) Failing to remove off-site sedimentation that is a direct result of land disturbing activities
where such off-site sedimentation results from the failure to implement or maintain erosion
control devices as specified in an approved erosion control plan for the location where the
violation occurred;
(D) Allowing sediment laden water resulting from belowground installations to flow from a
site without being treated through an erosion control device;
(E) Failing to repair damage to existing erosion control devices, including replacement of
existing grass or sod.
(2) Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be given to the responsible party or his job
site representative as identified in the erosion control plan for a site. Such notice shall identify the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 576/618
nature of the alleged violation and the action required to obtain compliance with the intent of the
approved erosion control plan.
(3) Class C misdemeanor. Any person, firm, or corporation performing land disturbing activities
and violating any of the provisions or terms of this article and not complying within the time periods
stated in this document shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense, and
each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(h) Appeals.
(1) Appeal to public works director. Upon notice of noncompliance, a responsible party may
appeal the city's decision to take deductions from his erosion control deposit pursuant to subsection
(e)(2) of this section, by filing a written appeal to the public works director within seven (7) days of
the city's written notice of its intent to make such deduction for costs as allowed herein. An appeal
filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the basis for the aggrieved party's challenge to the
city's authority to take deductions under this article.
(2) Standard for appeals. When reviewing an appeal filed pursuant to this section, the public works
director shall evaluate all evidence submitted. The burden of proving that a violation of this article
occurred shall be on the city. The city shall provide evidence sufficient to reasonably support a
determination that the responsible party failed to comply with the requirements of this article as
alleged by the city.
(3) Issuance of opinion by director. Decisions of the public works director shall be issued within
twenty (20) days of the city's receipt of the written appeal. Decisions of the public works director
shall be final.
(i) Stream bank erosion. Erosion control shall be provided along streams and drainage channels. This article
provides for erosion hazard setback zones along streams for which natural channels are to be preserved. Where
bank stabilization or other erosion protection measures are required to protect streams and channels, the
practices provided in the stormwater design manual for the city shall be utilized as approved by the city.
Sec. 24.08.011 Illicit discharge prohibition and elimination
(a) General. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) and Texas Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (TPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
by stormwater discharges by any user;
(2) To prohibit illicit discharges and illicit connections to the municipal separate storm sewer
system;
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this article;
(4) To provide appropriate enforcement procedures and actions for ordinance violations.
(b) Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or
watercourses any material that is not composed entirely of stormwater, including but not limited to pollutants or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 577/618
waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards,
other [than stormwater]. Illicit connections to the storm sewer system are prohibited, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm
drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing
at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
(c) Allowable non-stormwater discharges. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following allowable non-stormwater discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless it is determined that the discharges adversely impact stormwater
quality:
(A) Water line flushing that contains no harmful quantity of total residue chlorine (TRC) or
any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(B) Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation
using potable water groundwater, or surface water sources;
(C) Discharges from potable water sources not containing any harmful substance or material
from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or container;
(D) Diverted stream flows, rising groundwater and springs;
(E) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 C.F.R., section 35.2005(20));
(F) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(G) Foundation or footing drains;
(H) Air-conditioning condensation;
(I) Water from crawl space pumps;
(J) Non-commercial washing of vehicles;
(K) Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
(L) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, not including drainage from swimming pool
filter backwash;
(M) Cold water used for pavement and exterior building washing conducted without the use
of detergents or other chemicals; and
(N) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges specified by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 578/618
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge with authorization from the city prior to the time of the
test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES or
TPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or state commission on environmental
quality, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver,
or order and other applicable laws and regulations.
(d) Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm
drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing
at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
(4) Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if
necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon
approval of the city.
(5) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which
may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that
property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or
conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary
sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary
sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be
documented and provided to the city.
(e) Sampling, inspections, and investigations.
(1) The control authority may randomly sample and analyze the stormwater runoff from any
facility within the city and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of
information supplied by the person or persons, occasional and continuing noncompliance with
stormwater requirements of the state or this article.
(2) The control authority shall investigate instances of noncompliance with stormwater
requirements, as indicated in required reports, analytical results, and surveillance activities.
Noncompliance investigations may require that the control authority conduct an inspection of the
person or facility in noncompliance.
(3) Collection of information by the control authority shall be performed with sufficient care to
produce evidence admissible in enforcement proceedings or in judicial actions.
(4) All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA administrator pursuant to section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act and 40 CFR, part 136 and
amendments thereto.
(5) The control authority may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine stormwater or
non-stormwater constituents. Chain of custody procedures shall be followed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 579/618
(f) Suspension of MS4 access.
(1) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city may, without prior notice,
suspend water service, sanitary sewer service and/or MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in
an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to the
environment or to the health or welfare of persons.
(2) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in
violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement personnel will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency
for a reconsideration and hearing.
(3) Reinstatement of suspended service. The city shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4
access to the violator until:
(A) The violator provides proof, satisfactory to the director, that the noncomplying discharge
has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected;
(B) The violator pays the city for all the costs the city incurred in responding to, abating and
remediating the discharge or threatened discharge; and
(C) The violator pays the city for all the costs the city will incur in reinstating service or
access.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service, sanitary sewer service,
and/or MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of
the director.
(4) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this
article. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action
against a violator.
(g) Submission of documents. All persons required by federal or state regulations or this article to submit
documents, pertaining to discharges of stormwater or accidental discharges into the local MS4, shall submit all
applicable documents to the following mailing address:
City of Lancaster
Department of Public Works 1425 N. Dallas Avenue
Lancaster, Texas 75134
(h) Spill containment and accidental discharges.
(1) Spill containment. The city may require any person to implement spill containment measures
for storage and use of any substance it deems a potential threat to the MS4 or the environment should
such substance be accidentally discharged. Such spill containment measures shall be provided and
maintained at the person's own expense. Upon notification from the city that containment measures
are required, the person shall develop and submit detailed plans to the city for review and approval
prior to installation or implementation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 580/618
(2) Notification of spills. In the event of any accidental or unavoidable discharge into the MS4 or
water in the state, it is the responsibility of the responsible party to notify the city within 24 hours of
the incident, in addition to the appropriate federal and state agencies and emergency response
agencies. The notification shall include location of the discharge, type of material discharged,
concentration and volume, and corrective action. Within five days following an accidental discharge,
the person shall submit to the control authority a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the person of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the MS4, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property, nor shall such notification
relieve the person of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article
or other applicable law. The initial notification shall be made using the following contact information:
Public works (during normal business hours): (972)218-1200.
After hours reporting: (972)780-4900.
(3) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the person's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(i) Industrial facilities and monitoring of discharges.
(1) Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated
with industrial activity, including construction activity. Any person subject to an industrial or
construction activity NPDES or TPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions
of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a farm acceptable to the city
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(2) Notice of intent. The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have a
NPDES or TPDES stormwater discharge permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the city at the same time the operator
submits the original notice of intent to the EPA or the TCEQ, as applicable. The copy of the notice of
intent may be delivered either in person or by mailing it to:
City of Lancaster
Department of Public Works
1425 N. Dallas Avenue
Lancaster, TX 75134
(3) Compliance with permit. A facility shall be operated in strict compliance with the requirements
of its NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity.
(4) Offense. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility in violation of a
condition of the facility's NPDES or TPDES permit or if the person operates a facility that is
discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the
notice of intent to do so to the city.
(5) Access to facilities.
(A) The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 581/618
has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry
into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access.
(B) Facility operators shall allow the city personnel ready access to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(C) The city personnel shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as
are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(D) The city has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(E) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral
request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
(F) Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility is a violation of a
stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a
NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits
an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article.
(G) If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community,
then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction.
(6) Access to records. The city shall have access to, and the right to inspect and copy, any and all
person's records which pertain to that person's discharge to the MS4, disposal and/or generation of
hazardous waste and discharges into the environment. The person shall be required to retain records
of all information resulting from any monitoring or reporting activity required by these regulations
for a minimum of three years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the person or MS4 or when requested by the permitting authority or
control authority.
(j) Best management practices to reduce stormwater pollutants. The city will adopt requirements identifying
best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or
operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at
said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES or TPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 582/618
extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES or
TPDES permit.
(k) Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of
water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
(l) Enforcement and appeals.
(1) Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to
meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement personnel may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(A) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(B) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(C) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(D) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
(E) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(F) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set
forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice
shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(2) Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within 10
days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority
or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
(3) Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the
decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement personnel,
then authorized enforcement personnel shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set
forth above.
(4) Cost of abatement of the violation.
(A) Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified
of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written
protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 583/618
within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
(B) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city
by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments.
Interest at the rate of percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 31st
day following discovery of the violation.
(5) Class C misdemeanor. Any person, firm, or corporation that has violated or continues to violate
the terms of this article and not complying within the time periods stated in this document shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in
accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense, and each and every day such violation
shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 24.08.012 Post-construction controls and guidelines
(a) General.
(1) Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic
response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition. Post-construction stormwater runoff also
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants. Stormwater rates and pollution from
developments can be controlled and minimized through the proper planning, design, implementation
and long-term operation and maintenance of post-construction stormwater best management practices
(BMPs).
(2) The city establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies to provide reasonable
guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects
for the purpose of protecting the MS4 and local water resources.
(b) Lands to which this section applies. This section shall be applicable to all land development or
redevelopment applications for both small and large construction activities, as defined by the TCEQ, unless
eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the director of public works/development services or his/her
appointee. Development that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale is exempt.
(c) Stormwater design manual development.
(1) The city may provide additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and
standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this section and may provide such
information in the form of a stormwater design manual.
(2) The stormwater design manual may be amended from time to time based on improvements in
engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices
that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design criteria will be presumed to meet
the minimum water quality performance standards.
(d) Withholding of permits. No owner, developer, or other applicant subject to these requirements shall be
issued any building, grading or other land development permits for land disturbance activities without first
satisfying the requirements of this section prior to commencement of the proposed activity.
(e) Planning and design for post construction runoff control.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 584/618
(1) All applicable land development sites shall be designed according to the specific performance
criteria outlined in the city stormwater design manual or in conformance with the regional integrated
stormwater management (iSWM) manual. The site design shall be performed by a professional
engineer licensed by the state.
(2) The owner, developer, and/or design engineer shall be required to consult with the public works
department during the planning stages, prior to design of any post-construction BMPs, in order to
evaluate the intended BMP performance criteria and related long-term maintenance requirements.
(3) Post-construction stormwater runoff control BMPs and the long-term operation and
maintenance agreements shall be submitted for review and approved by the public works department
with the construction documents for any new development or redevelopment project.
(4) All stormwater management practices shall be designed so that the specific stormwater design
criteria (design storm conveyance, channel protection, runoff volume reduction, etc.) as identified in
the current stormwater design manual are met. If predevelopment hydrologic or topographic
conditions warrant greater control than that provided, the director of public works/development
services or his/her appointee may impose any additional requirements deemed necessary to control
the post-construction discharge volume, timing, and rate of runoff.
(5) Site planning and feasibility. Stormwater management site planning techniques are strongly
encouraged. Post-construction stormwater practices for a site shall be selected giving consideration to
the natural features and drainage characteristics of the site. Among the factors that should be
considered:
(A) Topography;
(B) Natural resources (streams, ponds, tree locations, etc.);
(C) Drainage areas and drainage patterns;
(D) Depth to water table;
(E) Soils;
(F) Slopes; and
(G) Terrain.
Applicants shall consult the stormwater design manual for guidance on the factors that
determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice.
(6) Conveyance issues. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey
stormwater and allow for maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities, which
shall include, but are not limited to:
(A) Use of structural and nonstructural best management practices (BMPs) and controls;
(B) Maximizing of path flow distance from inflow points to outflow points;
(C) Protection of inlet and outfall structures; and
(D) Elimination of erosive flow velocities.
(7) Post-construction BMPs. Owners and developers are required by the city to implement postconstruction
BMPs to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4 and to reduce runoff
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 585/618
volumes, channel erosion and sediment transport. The following structural and non-structural controls
shall be considered for post-construction BMPs:
(A) Grassed swales and channels;
(B) Floodplain and channel buffers;
(C) Low impact development site planning;
(D) Stormwater treatment ponds and wetlands;
(E) Detention and retention facilities;
(F) Energy dissipaters;
(G) Infiltration trenches;
(H) Rain gardens;
(I) Open space and parkland dedication;
(J) Native and drought tolerant landscaping;
(K) Tree preservation and tree planting;
(L) Porous surfaces; and
(M) Rainwater reuse (rain harvesting, etc.)
(8) Post-construction landscaping and stabilization requirements.
(A) Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or
wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall be revegetated within ten (10)
calendar days from substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The following
criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts:
(i) Reseeding must be done with a perennial, non-winter season cover crop
accompanied by placement of matting or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control
erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over ninety (90) percent of the
seeded area.
(ii) Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by
placement of matting, mulch or an equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion
until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion.
(iii) Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy (70)
percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation.
Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum seventy (70) percent
survival for one (1) year is achieved.
(B) It is the responsibility of the design engineer to verify the adequacy of the postconstruction
BMP for mitigation of the runoff effects from the proposed project. The design of
post-construction BMPs shall be per the city's current stormwater design manual. Additional
guidelines for the selection and design of post-construction BMPs may be found in the North
Central Texas Council of Government's iSWM Technical Manual, Site Development Controls.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 586/618
(9) Use of other or new stormwater controls.
(A) New and innovative technologies shall be evaluated and are encouraged for use
providing that there is sufficient documentation as to their effectiveness and reliability.
(B) Alternately, new structural stormwater practices will not be accepted for inclusion in the
city until independent performance data shows that the structural control conforms to local
and/or state criteria for treatment, conveyance, maintenance and environmental impact.
(f) Operation and maintenance agreements. All stormwater management and/or treatment practices shall have
an enforceable long-term operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed for
the lifetime of the structure. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access
and inspect the stormwater practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper
functioning of the stormwater practice. Maintenance agreements shall be provided to the city public works
department for review and approval prior to approval of the construction plans.
(g) Privately owned control requirements.
(1) Stormwater system responsible party.
(A) For privately owned stormwater controls including drainage systems and/or water quality
devices used for residential, commercial or other areas, the developer shall be responsible for all
of the maintenance and repair of such stormwater drainage systems and/or water quality devices
serving that residential or commercial area until the developer or owner no longer has an
ownership interest in any property served by the stormwater drainage system and/or water
quality device.
(B) Once a homeowners' association (HOA) is organized and becomes active for a residential
area served by a stormwater drainage system and/or water quality device, the HOA shall be
responsible for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater drainage system and/or water
quality device.
(C) Maintenance of a storm drainage system and/or water quality device shall include such
items but not be limited to:
(i) Mowing of tall weeds and grass;
(ii) Regular and routine removal of floatables and debris;
(iii) Dredging of silt and removal off site;
(iv) Correcting failures of inlet or outlet control structures;
(v) Implementation of erosion mitigation measures;
(vi) Repair and maintenance of aeration equipment; and
(vii) Maintaining optimal operation of underground and aboveground detention.
(2) Disclosure of HOA information to the MS4.
(A) Upon the organization and formation of a homeowners' association, the HOA should
provide updated contact information to the city for compliance and reporting communications.
The minimum information to be provided by the HOA to the city includes:
(i) Name of subdivision and homeowners' association;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 587/618
(ii) Name, address, telephone number and email address of any management company
involved with activities related to the HOA (if applicable);
(iii) Name, address, telephone number and email address of a direct contact person
representing or authorized to act on behalf of the HOA;
(iv) Date of formation of the HOA;
(v) Current listing of stormwater drainage structures and/or water quality devices over
which the homeowner's association has control; and
(vi) Dates when any changes were made to the HOA board, structure or the storm
drainage system and/or water quality device over which the HOA has control.
(B) Any changes to the contact information regarding the HOA must be reported immediately
to the city planning department.
(C) The HOA is required to annually contact the city planning department to ensure that all
information is up to date.
(3) Authorization to inspect, adopt and impose BMPs.
(A) The city has the authority to conduct stormwater inspections to require implementation of
BMPs where appropriate.
(B) The selection, application and maintenance of BMPs must be sufficient to prevent or
reduce the likelihood of pollutants entering the receiving storm drainage system.
(C) The city may adopt and impose requirements identifying specific BMPs for any activity,
operation or facility, which may cause a discharge of pollutants to the storm drainage system.
Where specific BMPs are required, every person undertaking such activity or operation or
owning or operating such facility shall implement and maintain BMPs at the person's own
expense.
(h) Inspection. Inspections and inspection programs by the city may be conducted or established on any
reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon
complaints or other notice of possible violations, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair
records, sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in BMPs, and evaluating the
condition and operational performance of BMPs.
(i) Failure to maintain practices.
(1) In the event that a stormwater management facility, stormwater drainage system and/or water
quality device is deemed by the city to be in need of maintenance or repair or is determined a danger
to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the responsible party in writing for maintenance
of the stormwater management facility. The responsible person shall have thirty (30) days after
receipt of notice to affect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner.
(2) If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the stormwater facility maintenance requirements
of this article, the director of public works/development services or his/her appointee, after
reasonable notice, may cause the necessary work to be done to correct a violation of the design
standards or maintenance and assess the responsible party for all incurred costs and expenses.
Sec. 24.08.013 Funding of improvements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 588/618
(a) Developer responsibilities.
(1) On-site improvements.
(A) The on-site drainage system improvements required by a proposed development shall be
identified in the preliminary drainage study and final drainage study for that development and
located completely within the limits of the proposed development, unless otherwise authorized
by the city as part of an executed agreement.
(B) The cost of any on-site drainage system improvements required by this article or
proposed by the developer shall be financed entirely by the developer.
(C) If the city determines that enlargement of the on-site drainage improvements beyond the
requirements of this article is beneficial to the city, the city shall fund the difference between the
enlarged drainage improvements and the on-site drainage improvements required by this article,
if adequate funds are available.
(2) Off-site improvements.
(A) If the preliminary drainage study or final drainage study demonstrates that off-site
drainage improvements are not required due to adequate downstream capacity for the fully
developed watershed conditions, the developer may proceed with site discharge equivalent to or
less than the maximum developed for the site in the preliminary or final drainage study.
(B) If the preliminary or final drainage study identifies necessary off-site drainage system
improvements due to only partially adequate downstream capacity for the fully developed
conditions, the developer must conduct the following with the approval of the city and the
affected downstream property owners:
(i) Improve downstream structures to handle the development's impact at the fully
developed watershed condition and proceed with site discharge equivalent to or less than
the maximum developed for the site in the drainage study;
(ii) Improve downstream structures to handle the flow of fully developed discharge of
the site under development and the discharge for existing conditions on other areas in the
watershed; or
(iii) Limit the post-development discharge to predevelopment discharge or less.
(C) The developer shall be responsible for financing the developer's equitable share of
improvements to off-site drainage systems that are not adequate to convey the design runoff
from the proposed development.
(3) Developer-proposed improvements that exceed ordinance requirements. If the developer
proposes drainage system improvements that exceed the requirements of this article, the developer
shall be responsible for financing the entirety of the improvements.
(4) Regional detention/retention facilities. For regional detention/retention facilities proposed by a
developer, the engineering analysis to evaluate the upstream and downstream impacts shall be
financed by the developer and approved by the city.
(b) City participation.
(1) If enlargement of off-site drainage improvements beyond the requirements of this article is
determined to be beneficial to the city, the city may fund the difference between the enlarged drainage
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 589/618
improvements and the off-site drainage improvements required by this article, if adequate funds are
available.
(2) Where the city is requested to participate in the construction of drainage improvements, the city
may participate in the cost of such drainage improvements in an amount not to exceed the difference
in the total cost of the drainage improvements and the cost of the drainage improvements required for
the developer as specified in the stormwater ordinance.
(3) Where the city agrees to participate in the construction of drainage improvements, and adequate
city funds are not available, the developer may elect to provide for financing of improvements.
(A) Upon prior execution of an agreement with the city for reimbursement, the developer is
entitled to recover from the city the portion of the improvements attributable to the city once
city funds become available.
(B) Where city funds are not available, the developer may elect to finance the entire
improvements.
(4) City financing mechanisms.
(A) The city may establish a stormwater utility fee to provide funding for drainage- related
activities, including but not limited to the construction, operations, and maintenance of drainage
facilities.
(B) The city may establish a drainage impact fee for an entire watershed or sub- watershed(s)
to finance the cost of drainage improvements.
(C) The city may require developers and/or builders to establish and maintain an erosion
control deposit account to implement and provide for continued maintenance of the site erosion
control plan submitted to and approved by the city.
Sec. 24.08.014 Applicability
Whereas, the present stormwater management ordinance of the city does not provide for adequate storm
drainage facilities, flood control, erosion control and water quality pollution prevention in the developed and
developing areas within the jurisdiction of the city, and that the inadequacy constitutes an urgency in the interest
of public health, safety, and welfare, this article shall become effective on July 26, 2004, except that documents
meeting at least one of the following conditions shall be exempted from provisions of this article exceeding
requirements of the previously adopted stormwater management ordinance:
(1) Buildings or subdivision phases for which a complete preliminary plat has been accepted but
not recorded prior to the effective date of this article and for which construction of such subdivision
phase or building is underway within one year of the effective date of this article.
(2) Buildings for which a complete site plan has been accepted prior to the effective date of this
article and for which construction is underway within one year of the effective date of this article.
(3) Buildings for which a plat has been recorded prior to the effective date of this article but for
which a complete site plan has not been accepted prior to the effective date of this article, and for
which construction is underway within one year of the date of recording of the final plat.
(4) Subdivisions recorded prior to the effective date of this article for which a replat is filed.
(5) Subdivisions recorded prior to the effective date of this article for which a replat is being filed,
provided that the number of lots is not being increased through the replat and provided that no other
substantive changes to the subdivision design are proposed; except that it is expressly provided that
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 590/618
no developments shall be exempted from provisions of sections 24.08.009 and 24.08.010 of this
article relating to floodplain guidelines and erosion control guidelines, respectively.
(Ordinance 2012-07-11 adopted 7/23/12)
ARTICLE 24.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Division 1. Standards
Sec. 24.09.001 Thoroughfare and circulation design standards
Ordinances concerning the establishment of engineering design standards and construction design requirements
in effect at the time of adoption of this code, as amended, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 24.09.002 Construction standards for paving and drainage facilities
Ordinances concerning general construction standards for paving and drainage facilities, in effect at the time of
adoption of this code, as amended, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 24.09.003 Exclusive control of streets
No entity, including other political subdivisions of the state, may extend a street into the city's corporate limits or
connect a street to an existing city street without the prior written approval of the city council.
Secs. 24.09.030–24.09.031 Reserved
Division 2. Right-of-Way Management
Sec. 24.09.031 Administration
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall appoint a right-of-way manager, who is the principal city official
responsible for the administration of the right-of-way, right-of-way permits, the regulation of same and
ordinances related thereto. The right-of-way manager may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. The rightof-
way manager shall have the duties, responsibilities and authority as specified for the right-of-way manager
stated herein.
Sec. 24.09.032 Definitions
The following definitions apply in this article. The terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations
shall have the same meanings herein. When not inconsistent with the context words used in the present tense
include the future; words in plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the
plural. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely permissive.
Abandoned facilities. Facilities no longer in service or physically disconnected from the operating facilities, or
from any other facilities, or from any other facilities that are in use or that still carry service.
Administration fee. The fee charged by the city to recover its costs incurred for right-of-way management;
including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying
right-of-way permit applications; inspecting jobsites and restoration improvements; determining the adequacy of
the right-of-way restoration; revoking right-of-way permits and other costs the city may incur in implementing
the provisions of this article.
Applicant. An owner (or authorized agent of an owner) who submits an application for a permit under the
provisions of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 591/618
Area of influence. That area around a utility excavation where the pavement and sub-grade is impacted by the
excavation and is subject to more rapid deterioration due to the trench excavation.
Backfill. The following:
(1) The placement of new dirt, fill, or other material to refill an excavation; or
(2) The return of excavated dirt, fill or other material to an excavation.
Certificated telecommunications provider or CTP. A person who has been issued a certificate of convenience
and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas
Public Utility Commission or “PUC” to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides voice
service as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283 or “the Act.”
City. The City of Lancaster, Texas and the city's officers and employees.
City project. The construction, location, maintenance, relocation, alteration, improvement, repair, removal or
other work performed by the city, or its designee, in the public right-of-way or on any city utilities or city
facilities.
City utilities. Any water, sewer or drainage line or services owned and operated by the city.
Compaction. Refers to consolidating backfill material in a trench to prevent future settlement.
Comprehensive plan. The city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be amended.
Construction. Boring, the breaking of pavement, or the installation, modification, upgrade, maintenance,
removal, or similar activities, within the right-of-way. The definition includes, but is not limited to, providing
primary service, restoration, or maintenance of existing facilities within the right-of-way.
Contractor. Any public or private person, subcontractor or organization, other than the city.
Day. Business day unless otherwise specified.
Department. The city department of development services or a successor department that is responsible for
management of the right-of-way and roadway infrastructure.
Emergency operations. Are defined as those operations and repairs necessary to prevent damage or injury to the
health or safety of the public or any person and the work necessary to address or prevent an immediate service
interruption. Upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood improvement projects are not
emergency operations.
Excavation. Any activity that removes or otherwise disturbs soil, pavement, driveways, curbs, or sidewalks in
the right-of-way and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity removes or disturbs the paved
portion of the right-of-way.
Facilities. The equipment, and property, including but not limited to, lines, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, ducts,
cables, valves, manholes, handholes and wires located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the
right-of-way, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of utility services.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Governing body. The mayor and the city council of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Governmental entity. Any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road district,
drainage or levee district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasi7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 592/618
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state or of any other state of the United States and any
agency or instrumentality of the state or of any other state of the United States.
Holiday. Shall refer to days in which city offices are closed in observance of a holiday.
Main line. Shall refer to lines other than service connections used to convey the right-of-way user's product.
Major project. Any project, which includes 300 or more linear feet of excavation or any excavation under
pavement.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and
a communication network.
Network provider. A wireless service provider, or a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not
an electric utility but builds or installs, on behalf of a wireless service provider, network nodes or node support
poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node.
Pavement. Shall refer to streets containing Portland cement, asphalt, brick or other rigid or semi-rigid material
that covers the surface of a street and their underlying subgrade and base.
Permit. A permit issued under this article authorizing excavation in the right-of-way.
Permittee. Any person or right-of-way user to whom a permit is issued to excavate a right-of-way.
Perpendicular excavations. Any trench with a centerline that, when projected toward the centerline of the street,
the two lines intersect at an angle of 90 degrees.
Person. Any person, company, partnership, contractor, subcontractor, agency or other public or private entity,
excepting the city.
Provider. A person, including any certificated telecommunications utility and excluding network providers, as
defined herein, that delivers telecommunications service within the city to person(s) by way of a network and
that places facilities in, on, or over public rights-of-way. A provider does not include persons who are authorized
by the city to occupy the public rights-of-way in specifically approved routes within the city, unless they also
have a municipal consent under this chapter. To the extent allowed by law, provider also means a person that
does not deliver telecommunications service within the city, but who uses, constructs, or maintains facilities or
transmission media within the public rights-of-way.
Public inconvenience penalty. Shall refer to a penalty assessed to the right-of-way user who denies the public the
use of public property for a time period greater than allowed by this article.
PUCT. The Public Utility Commission of Texas.
Registration. The annual application process of the right-of-way user to use any portion of the right-of-way.
Registration certificate. Shall refer to the document provided by the city, annually, upon approval of the
application for registration.
Repair. The temporary or permanent construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable.
Repair area. That area around excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by an excavation.
Restoration. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including, but not limited to,
pavement and foundation structures, ground cover, landscaping, and monuments are returned to the same
condition, or better than that which existed before the commencement of the work.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 593/618
Resurfacing. Any repaving, overlay, seal or reconstruction which creates a new pavement surface over the entire
width of the street, excluding crack seals and localized base and pavement repairs.
Right-of-way or public right-of-way. The surface of, and the space above and below, any street, road, highway,
freeway, tollway, lane, path, drainageway, channel, fee interest, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, boulevard,
parkway, drive, fire lane or other easement now or hereafter held by the city or over which the city exercises any
rights of management or control and shall include, but not be limited to, all easements now held, or hereafter
held, by the city, but shall specifically excludes private property.
Right-of-way manager. The right-of-way manager of the city, or his designee.
Right-of-way user. A person, its successors and assigns, that uses the right-of-way for purposes of work,
excavation, provision of services, or installing, constructing, maintaining, or repairing facilities thereon,
including, but not limited to, landowners and service providers.
Routine service operation. A work activity that makes no material change to the facilities and does not disrupt
traffic.
Service. A commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery system that is comprised of facilities located
or to be located in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television, Internet
services, open video systems, alarm systems, steam, electric, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum
pipelines, or sanitary sewage.
Service connection. Shall refer to the line that serves no more than two individual customers or two meter banks.
Street. The paved portion of the right-of-way, whether fee or easement, that has been constructed, reconstructed,
or resurfaced with concrete or asphalt or some other surface.
Surface mounted markers. Refers to any sign, post or other marker, which rises above the surface of the ground
to show the location of an underground utility.
Thoroughfare. All roadways and streets classified on the city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be
amended, including but not limited to as a highway, tollway, major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare, major
collector, minor collector or local collector.
TMUTCD. The Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, as it exists or may be amended.
Traffic-control representative. Shall refer to the designated representative of the right-of-way user who is
responsible for work zone safety and compliance with TMUTCD. The right-of-way user shall ensure such
person has adequate training, knowledge and authority to perform the responsibilities listed above.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line
from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
Trench. Shall refer to excavation deeper than 12 inches. This shall include linear trenches, holes, pits and etc.
Underground Facility Damage Protection Safety Act. Shall refer to the V.T.C.A., Utilities Code sec. 251.001 et
seq. as it exists or may be amended.
Utility. Any privately or publicly owned entity which uses right-of-way to furnish the public any general public
service, including, without limitation: sanitary sewer, gas, electricity, water, telephone, petroleum products,
telegraph, heat, steam or chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances belonging to
such entity and located within and near the right-of-way. Poles are regulated herein only as specifically set forth
in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 594/618
White lining. Marking the excavation site with white washable marking paint or flags prior to requesting a utility
location in order to further identify the site.
Wireless service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether
at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless services to the public.
Sec. 24.09.033 Utility coordinator
Each utility and right-of-way user shall name a utility coordinator who shall be the representative and point of
contact for all communications from the city and who shall meet with the right-of-way manager when so
requested.
Sec. 24.09.034 Field utility coordination
(a) The right-of-way user shall notify the department at each of the following times during a project:
(1) Forty-eight (48) hours before the start of construction;
(2) Upon completion of the initial backfill; and
(3) Upon completion of the project.
The right-of-way user shall make a request for a utility locate in compliance with the Underground Facility
Damage Prevention and Safety Act.
(b) The use of markers, stakes, poles, barricades or other devices shall be used in such a way to avoid damage
to adjoining property. The use of “nonwashable” markers is prohibited.
(c) Compliance with the Texas Utilities Code, as amended, is required at all times.
(d) All barricades, plates, cones, traffic directional equipment and all other traffic-control devices owned,
leased or used by the right-of-way user and used on or near any excavation shall be clearly and visibly marked
with the name of the permittee and/or right-of-way user or subcontractor, as applicable, at all times such
equipment is used on or near the right-of-way. An exception to the marking requirement may be made in the sole
discretion of the right-of-way manager in the event the traffic-control equipment is not owned by the permittee
or right-of-way user.
Sec. 24.09.035 Maps and records of registrants
(a) Within 30 days of passage of this article, each right-of-way user shall provide the city an accurate map of
their service area. The map shall be in electronic format overlaid over the Dallas County and North Central
Texas Council of Governments digital map, as applicable. In dual coverage areas, the city may request additional
information to enable identification of right-of-way users.
(b) Each right-of-way user must maintain accurate maps and records of its facilities. If available, the city's
road network may be provided in digital format upon request. The right-of-way user is encouraged to maintain
their system maps geo-referenced to the city's geodetic network, which is on the Dallas County digital map or
the North Central Texas Council of Governments digital map, as applicable. The map should include true
bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments, which shall be accurately
described on the map. The right-of-way user will provide the city with digital information within 90 days of a
request for maps from the city for any user with less than 50 miles of utilities within the city. All other right-ofway
users shall provide the digital information within one year of the request. Thereafter, the data is to be
provided to the city on an annual basis by January 1st.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 595/618
(c) If the maps and records submitted in response to any request by or requirement of the city include
information expressly designated by the right-of-way user as a trade secret or other confidential information
protected from disclosure by state law, the city and its agents, employees, or other representatives may not
disclose that information to the public without the consent of the right-of-way user, unless otherwise compelled
by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or by a court
having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize a
right-of-way user to designate all matters in its maps and records as confidential or as trade secrets.
Sec. 24.09.036 Notice
Notice for purposes of this article shall be made to the city via electronic message (e-mail), overnight courier
(generally used carrier with tracing available) or hand delivery with signed receipt, facsimile to the department,
or United States mail return receipt required.
Sec. 24.09.037 Registration
(a) Nothing in this section relieves a right-of-way user and/or utility from obtaining a permit under this article
to perform work in the right-of-way.
(b) In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, a utility maintaining or operating existing
facilities in the right-of-way must register with the right-of-way manager in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) The registration must be on a form furnished by the right-of-way manager and made in the
name of the right-of-way user that owns the facilities.
(2) Registration expires December 31st of the following year after the first registration occurs. If
the utility fails to renew registration by that date, the city will send by certified mail a notice of
noncompliance to the address listed on the registration. If the utility fails to renew registration within
30 calendar days after the date of sending the notification, the facilities of the utility will be deemed
to have been legally abandoned.
(3) If information provided as part of the registration changes, the utility must inform the right-ofway
manager, in writing, not more than 30 days after the date the change occurs.
(4) The utility shall also include the following registration:
(A) The name of the utility using the right-of-way, including any business name, assumed
name, or trade name the utility operates under or has operated under in the city within the past
five years.
(B) If the utility is a CTP, the certificate number issued by the Texas Public Utility
Commission.
(C) The ordinance number of any franchise or license issued by the city that authorizes the
utility to use the right-of-way.
(D) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two persons who will be general,
day-to-day contacts for the utility. At least one of the addresses must be within the Dallas/Fort
Worth metropolitan area.
(E) The name and mailing address of the officer or agent designated as the person authorized
to receive service of process on behalf of the utility.
(F) The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor who will be
working in the right-of-way on behalf of the utility. This list may be amended as needed by the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 596/618
utility; however, no work shall be performed in the right-of-way by a contractor or
subcontractor that is not on the list, regardless of whether a permit is required.
(G) The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons serving as emergency contacts
who can be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The telephone numbers
should be accessible without the city having to pay long distance telephone or toll charge.
(H) Proof of existing insurance that complies with division 4.
(c) Upon completion of registration, the city will provide the right-of-way user a registration certificate valid
until the end of the calendar year during which the registration was completed. The right-of-way user may make
as many photocopies of the registration certificate as necessary. The right-of-way user is responsible for ensuring
that all contractors, listed in accordance with subsection (b)(4)(F) above have a copy of the registration
certificate on site when work is being conducted under the provisions of the registration certificate.
Sec. 24.09.038 Traffic handling training
The right-of-way user is responsible for work zone safety including, but not limited to, traffic-control through
the designated traffic-control representative. The representative is responsible for compliance with the
TMUTCD and the traffic-control plan (if required) at all work zone sites. The traffic-control representative shall
ensure employees on the jobsite have adequate training.
Sec. 24.09.039 Reporting obligations
All right-of-way users shall, upon request, provide proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant,
registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any governmental entity, including, but
not limited to, the city, state, or federal government, or railroad or pipeline company, including a description of
the right-of-way user's intended use of the right-of-way, information sufficient to determine whether the right-ofway
user is subject to franchising or licensing by the city, and information to determine whether the right-of-way
user has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the PUCT. The information provided
shall be sufficient enough to determine whether the right-of-way user has applied for and received any permit or
other approvals required by the FCC. Right-of-way user shall provide all such other information as may be
reasonably required by the city to complete the registration statement.
Sec. 24.09.040 Surface mounted markers
Where surface mounted markers are needed, curb mounted medallions shall be used whenever possible.
Sec. 24.09.041 Relocation of facilities for city projects and public improvements
(a) In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all uses of the right-of-way. The
city reserves the right to, among other things, lay water, sewer, drainage, and other pipelines or cables and
conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes in street
facilities in across, along, over, or under a public street, alley or right-of-way occupied by an agency or right-ofway
user, and to change the curb, sidewalks, or the grade of streets.
(b) The right-of-way user must relocate its facilities, at its own expense and in accordance with section
24.09.076, prior to the start of construction of a city project. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject
the right-of-way user to the enforcement provisions contained herein.
(c) A permit will be required when making facility adjustments in preparation for city projects.
Sec. 24.09.042 Permit required
It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to dig, plow, blast, make cuts, openings, bore,
tunnel, excavate or close lanes on a thoroughfare without first having made application and obtained a permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 597/618
therefor in compliance with the public right-of-way permitting and construction general design manual,
promulgated and amended by the right-of-way manager, except for as allowed by this section. It is unlawful for
any person, its agents, servants or employees to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface
of any right-of-way for the installation, repair or removal of any facilities, or for any other purpose without first
obtaining from the right-of-way manager a permit in compliance with this article.
(1) Before issuing a permit, the right-of-way manager shall have been provided a written
application, on a form furnished by the right-of-way manager, setting forth the name and residence or
business address of the applicant; the location and approximate area of the excavation, including its
approximate length and width, and, if the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse
to the direction of the travel lanes; and, the purpose of the excavation. The application form shall
include plans prepared in accordance with city specifications. Plans shall be drawn at a reasonable
scale that legibly and accurately show all existing improvements and proposed work. All proposed
work must be shown in heavy or bold type lines and fonts. If proposed work is in phases or part of
another overall drawing, show all existing and future work in lighter or faded out lines and fonts. If
right-of-way user cannot show distinctive line weights, the plans shall clearly label the above
information using text. When required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as amended, the plans
must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state.
(2) At the time the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee
in an amount as provided for in the master fee schedule of the city.
(3) The proposed location, depth and other characteristics of any facilities for which the permit is
issued shall be subject to approval of the right-of-way manager, and all backfilling, compaction and
pavement restoration performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of this article.
During the construction phase, the right-of-way manager has the right to request field verification of
the location for the planned improvement to ensure they meet the approved plans.
(4) No fee or requirement authorized or imposed pursuant to this article shall be construed to affect
or alter in any way any obligation of public and/or private utilities with facilities installed in any
right-of-way to relocate the facilities, at no cost to the city, subject to state law, if applicable, in the
event that relocation is required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of the rightof-
way.
(5) Combinations of permits shall be permitted at the sole discretion of the right-of-way manager.
Fees shall be assessed based on the excavations permitted.
(6) Subdivision monuments, historical markers, and any other signs or structures with foundations
in the right-of-way, excluding billboards, are subject to this article.
Sec. 24.09.043 Exceptions to required permit
(a) The right-of-way manager reserves the right in his discretion to require a right-of-way permit on service
connections. Unless otherwise required by the right-of-way manager, service connections do not require a permit
if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The service connection excavation shall not exceed four feet inside the right-of-way to property
line;
(2) All excavation shall be in accordance with service connection drawings;
(3) The address for the service connection is on the city provided form, which is submitted to the
right-of-way manager via e-mail. Work shall not begin until the electronic form is transmitted to the
right-of-way manager;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 598/618
(4) The excavation required is less than 12 inches in depth;
(5) The excavation is no wider than two inches or is hand dug; and
(6) The service connection does not require boring.
(b) Irrigation system installation requires a permit per existing city codes.
Sec. 24.09.044 Permit application
(a) Application for a permit shall be addressed to the right-of-way manager and made on a form furnished for
that purpose, stating the extent, dimensions, character and purpose of the cut or excavation to be made, the
location, by street and number if possible, where the work is to be done, and the time in which it is to be
completed. The application form shall be accompanied by maps of the existing facilities in the area, to the extent
available, and the location of the proposed facilities, methodology of construction, and proposed start and
completion dates. When the work includes excavating, which will exceed five feet in depth, a trench safety
design sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall also accompany the application, unless otherwise
provided by law.
(b) A permit shall only be valid for the area of the right-of-way specified within the permit. No permittee may
cause any work to be done outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee
who determines that an area is greater than that which is specified in the permit must apply for and receive a new
right-of-way permit.
(c) Fees shall apply to all right-of-way users unless governed by an existing agreement with the city.
Applicants may apply jointly for permits to excavate the right-of-way at the same time and place. Applicants
who apply jointly for a right-of-way permit may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree
among themselves as to the portion each shall pay. The city will recognize only one point of contact.
(d) Permits will be issued or denied within ten (10) days of the city receiving a complete application. Permits
shall be valid for the dates specified in the permit. The applicant may request (but is not guaranteed) that the
permit be valid for such longer period as may be necessary under the circumstances, in advance, as part of the
application. The city may approve or deny the application for such extended permit period. No permittee may
commence work before the permit start date and, except as provided herein, no permittee may continue working
after the end date. If a permittee does not complete the work by the permit end date, the permittee must apply for
and may receive a new right-of-way permit or a permit extension for additional time. This supplementary
application must be submitted to the city prior to the permit end date. Applicants are encouraged to request a
pre-submission meeting for large projects.
(e) An expedited permit may be requested, and shall be issued or denied within five (5) days of application
upon a showing of good cause, as solely determined by the right-of-way manager.
Sec. 24.09.045 Issuance of permit
Every person making application for a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article, and having
complied with all such provisions and requirements, shall be entitled thereto, and, after such application has been
properly filed with the right-of-way manager and all conditions precedent to issuance have been verified, it shall
be the right-of-way manager's duty to issue the permit, but only when the provisions of this article have been
complied with.
(1) Upon receiving a written application for a permit and a plan prepared in accordance with the
city specifications, the right-of-way manager's designee shall set forth all requirements, approve or
disapprove the application, sign and return it to applicant. Excepting only emergency excavations, at
least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the start of work, the applicant shall notify the right-of-way
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 599/618
manager the date the work will commence when traffic-control devices are necessary on a
thoroughfare.
(2) No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the excavation to be made
pursuant thereto is commenced within the time stated therein and the work diligently completed.
(3) Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done hereunder. The
right-of-way manager may, in his sole discretion, grant extensions of time.
(4) No person in violation of any requirement of this article shall be issued an excavation permit,
nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued a permit on the person's behalf, until the
outstanding violation is/are corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the right-of-way
manager. The foregoing requirement is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be
imposed or sought by the city at law or equity.
(5) No work shall be done under any permit issued under this article except as stated in the permit.
If the permit is allowed to expire, the right-of-way user shall procure a new permit, paying the
applicable fee, prior to proceeding with any such work.
Sec. 24.09.046 Posting of signs
The right-of-way user and contractor (if used) shall be identified by three feet by three feet information signs on
all work requiring a permit. The signs shall state the name and phone number of the right-of-way user and
contractor (if used). The signs shall be placed in the right-of-way on each approach to the location where
construction is occurring from the time of the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be
posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring.
Sec. 24.09.047 Excavation to be under supervision of the right-of-way manager
(a) Any right-of-way user engaged in making or backfilling any excavation in any right-of-way shall, at all
times while such work is in progress, keep at the job location the permit, or a copy thereof, and shall provide of
the same, when requested by any authorized city employee. At all times while the work is in progress, the rightof-
way user shall also maintain, at the job location, a sign, barricade or other device bearing the right-of-way
user's name.
(b) The right-of-way user shall protect from damage utility conduits, sewer conduits, water conduits, lawns,
shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, irrigation, sidewalks, streets, signs, street lights, or other property at, near or
encountered in its work. The right-of-way user shall determine the boundary of the right-of-way.
(c) All excavations and other construction in the streets shall be conducted so as to interfere as little as
practicable with the use of right-of-way and with the use of private property, in accordance with any lawful and
reasonable direction given by or under the authority of the governing body of the city pursuant to the policy and
regulatory powers of the city necessary to provide for public convenience. The right-of-way user shall not
trespass upon private property. The right-of-way user shall determine the boundary between right-of-way and
private property and place stakes/markers indicating the boundary to remain in place for the duration of the
work.
(d) The city reserves the right (among others) to lay, and allow to be laid, electricity, sewer, gas, water and
other pipe lines or cables and facilities, as well as drainage pipes, and channels and streets, and to perform, and
allow to be performed, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed
necessary or proper by the governing body of the city, in, across, along, over or under any right-of-way or public
place occupied by a right-of-way user and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street and to
maintain all of the city's facilities. In allowing such work to be performed by others, the city shall not be liable to
a right-of-way user for any damage caused by those persons or entities. Nothing herein shall relieve any third
party from responsibility for damages caused to a right-of-way user by such third party.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 600/618
(e) All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment and facilities erected by a right-of-way user
within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the right-of-way, and
to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of
said streets. No pole may be placed in an area prohibited by another section of this article or which interferes
with the public's unimpeded use of the right-of-way.
(f) If the city requires a right-of-way user to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any way or manner to alter,
relocate or change its property to enable any other corporation or person, except the city, to use, or to use with
greater convenience, any right-of-way or public place, the right-of-way user shall not be required to make any
such changes until such other corporation or person shall have undertaken, with solvent bond, to reimburse a
right-of-way user for any loss and expense which will be caused by, or arise out of such removal, change,
adaptation, alteration, conformance or relocation of a right-of-way user's facilities; provided, however, that the
city shall never be liable for such reimbursement.
Sec. 24.09.048 Registration certificate required
It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to perform construction in the right-of-way
without first having made either application and obtained a permit therefor or have in possession a valid
registration certificate. A registration certificate may only be used for construction activities not requiring a
permit in accordance with this article. These activities include tree trimming, general maintenance, line work and
providing a service connection from the property line to a customer provided the activity complies with section
24.09.064.
Sec. 24.09.049 Hours of operation for nonemergency work
(a) Excavation and boring shall be conducted between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. per this Code of Ordinances
unless permission is granted by the city.
(b) All other work requiring an inspection shall be done between 7:00 a.m. and thirty (30) minutes before
sundown on Monday through Friday, except on holidays. No work shall be performed on holidays. A right-ofway
user may work on Saturday subject to the approval of the right-of-way manager and a notification no later
than noon on Thursday before the Saturday in which the work is to be performed. The Saturday inspection fee
must be paid prior to noon on Thursday prior to the Saturday in which the work is to be performed.
Sec. 24.09.050 Denial of permit
A permit may be denied or suspended for any of the following reasons:
(1) Failure to provide proof of a surety bond or liability insurance acceptable to the city or notice
of termination of the same.
(2) Failure to secure a contractor's license or other required license.
(3) Failure to perform in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(4) The proposed excavation would be located in a public street and not otherwise permitted by this
article.
(5) The proposed warning or other traffic-control procedures or equipment do not comply with the
requirements of the TMUTCD or the requirements of the right-of-way manager.
(6) The proposed activity would violate any city ordinance or state or federal law, rule, regulation
or statute.
(7) The permit application contains false or misleading information.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 601/618
(8) The activity would cause a public health or safety hazard.
(9) The right-of-way user is not authorized within the city.
(10) The right-of-way user is in violation of this article relative to work in progress.
(11) The right-of-way user has not compensated the city, unless the user is not legally obligated to
compensate the city by contract, by agreement or by law, for using the public property; or the rightof-
way user has failed to timely make required payments.
Sec. 24.09.051 Appeal
A right-of-way user that: (i) has been denied registration; (ii) has been denied a permit; (iii) has had a permit
revoked; or (iv) believes that fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition
reviewed, upon written request as follows:
(1) If an applicant desires to appeal a decision, the applicant may file a written notice of appeal
with the right-of-way manager within five business days of the date the decision was rendered. The
notice must state the alternatives available and routes explored, hardship encountered, cost
comparison of other alternatives and a statement of any other significant factors. The right-of-way
manager shall provide a written decision within five business days. Failure to render a decision
within five business days shall constitute a denial.
(2) If a further denial is given, the appellant may thereafter file a written notice of appeal to the city
manager within five business days of receipt of the right-of-way manager's written decision. The city
manager shall provide a written decision within five business days of receipt of an appeal in
accordance with this section. Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a
denial.
Secs. 24.09.052–24.09.060 Reserved
Division 3. Technical Specifications
Sec. 24.09.061 Lawful use of right-of-way
(a) The use of the right-of-way in any manner which violates federal, state, or local laws, or city codes,
ordinances and regulations, including, without limitation, those relating to health, safety, noise, environmental
protection, waste disposal and water and air quality, is prohibited. All permittees shall provide satisfactory
evidence of compliance with the foregoing upon request of the city.
(b) The permittee shall dispose of all material removed from the right-of-way and any waste created by
permittee in compliance with all state, federal and local laws and requirements. Temporary storage of material
may be placed in a pile no higher than 30 inches.
(c) If a permittee excavates any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the right-of-way, such
permittee shall be responsible for environmental assessment, excavation, testing, transportation and disposal of
that material in accordance with applicable law. The permittee shall promptly notify the city, orally, of the
condition within two hours of discovery of any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the right-ofway,
and within eight hours provide the aforementioned information to the city in writing. The permittee must
consult with and receive written authorization from the city before undertaking any of the steps/actions set forth
in this subsection.
Sec. 24.09.062 Compliance with safety regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 602/618
The permittee and right-of-way user shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local safety regulations
and requirements, including, by example and not limitation, the occupational safety and health standards for the
construction industry.
Sec. 24.09.063 Conformance with the thoroughfare plan
A right-of-way user should consult the city's thoroughfare plan prior to the acquisition of any interest in real
property in the city for the installation or relocation of service lines or other equipment or facilities along or
adjacent to any street, right-of-way, thoroughfare, highway, or any proposed street, right-of-way, highway or
thoroughfare to attempt to minimize any future conflict regarding the location of such facilities. All right-of-way
users are charged at all times with constructive notice of the thoroughfare plan. The city shall, at a minimum,
have no liability for the value of or loss by a right-of-way user of any improvements constructed in the area
shown on the thoroughfare plan, except as provided herein. Typical locations of city facilities are depicted in the
city standard details.
Sec. 24.09.064 Tree trimming and graffiti abatement
Permission is granted to a right-of-way user, subject to the requirements of this code, to trim trees upon and
overhanging the right-of-way, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a right-ofway
user's facilities. When so directed by the city, the tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and
direction of the city. The right-of-way user shall make the necessary repairs or restoration, including, but not
limited to, cleaning of graffiti, as soon as practicable but not to exceed seven days after the right-of-way user
discovers or learns of any misuse, destruction, damage or vandalism to its facilities.
Sec. 24.09.065 Employee communication
The right-of-way user shall ensure that there is at least one employee on the jobsite, during any type of work
activity, who can read, write and speak English fluently.
Sec. 24.09.066 Routing and spatial assignment
The city reserves the right, in the permit or otherwise, to restrict or determine the route (pathway) and/or spatial
location, whether horizontal, vertical or depth, of any facility and/or structure or improvement in the right-ofway.
The city reserves the right to reserve space for future utilities.
Sec. 24.09.067 Commencement and completion
After obtaining the permit and prior to commencing the work, the permittee shall notify the right-of-way
manager, and shall commence and complete all work within the time specified in the permit, unless an extension
of time is granted by the right-of-way manager. No work shall commence until erosion control measures (e.g. silt
fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades are in place.
Sec. 24.09.068 Notification of affected property owners
Except in the case of an emergency, whenever excavation is required in the right-of-way adjacent to an occupied
property, the right-of-way user shall notify the property owner of the activity through use of a door hanger,
which shall include the following information:
(1) Permit number;
(2) Identity of the contractor and the right-of-way user, including a contact name and phone
number by which more information regarding the project could be obtained and a 24-hour a day
emergency phone number; and
(3) The anticipated duration of the construction work.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 603/618
Sec. 24.09.069 Safe conduct of work
Every permittee and right-of-way user shall prosecute its work diligently and in a good, safe, and workmanlike
manner, and shall safeguard and protect the public, using the street or right-of-way where the work is being
performed, from accidents or damage by placing barriers, lights and other sufficient safeguards around all cuts,
openings and excavation, in accordance with TMUTCD. All material, implements and tools stored upon the
premises and used in connection with the excavation shall be stored in a safe and nonhazardous manner.
Sec. 24.09.070 Revocation or suspension of permit
(a) The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke or suspend any permit, without refund of the
permit fee, in the event of a breach by the permittee of the terms and/or conditions of the permit, this article
and/or any other city ordinance. A breach of the terms of the permit shall include, but not be limited to any of the
following:
(1) The violation of any provision of the permit.
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any provision of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens.
(3) Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit application.
(4) The failure to meet insurance, surety bond or indemnification requirements.
(5) The failure to complete the work as specified in the permit.
(6) The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article.
(7) Repeated traffic-control violation(s).
(8) Failure to protect facilities or repair facilities damaged in the right-of-way.
(9) Violation of any part of this article.
(10) Recognition by the right-of-way manager that a permit was issued in error.
(11) Failing to comply with an order of the right-of-way manager on the permit and any other valid
permit held by the right-of-way user.
(12) Any safety violation or other action that threatens the health, welfare and/or safety of the
public as solely determined by the right-of-way manager.
(b) If the right-of-way manager determines that the permittee has committed a breach of any law or condition
of the right-of-way permit, the right-of-way manager shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy
such violation. Continued violation may be cause for revocation of the permit or legal action, or both. The rightof-
way manager may, in his discretion, revoke the permit, provide specifications to cure the breach, or both.
Within two business days of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the right-of-way
manager with a plan, acceptable to the right-of-way manager, for correction of the breach. Permittee's failure to
do so or permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan shall be cause for revocation of the permit.
Sec. 24.09.071 Work not in accordance with permit declared unlawful
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made, any excavation, or to install, cause
or allow to be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance in or under
the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place, at any location, other than that
described in the application for the permit and as shown on the plans filed with the right-of-way manager, and in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 604/618
accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the circumstances appearing after the excavation is
commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the right-of-way manager may, in his sole discretion,
grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account.
(b) Failure to comply with requirements set forth in this article or on any permit shall be cause for revocation
of the subject permit and of any other permits held by the same permittee until the violations have been corrected
or the right-of-way manager has approved alternative requirements. In addition to any penalty for violation, and
excavation done or installation erected without a permit or not in accordance with a permit must be removed by
the person doing the excavation or erecting the installation within five (5) business days of written notice from
the city's right-of-way manager.
Sec. 24.09.072 Work done without a permit
No cut, excavation, grading or disturbing of the right-of-way or wires on poles, in any way, shall be made, other
than excavations necessary for emergency work, without first securing a permit. No person or right-of-way user
shall, at any time, open or encumber more of the right-of-way than shall be reasonably necessary to complete a
project in the most expeditious manner.
Sec. 24.09.073 Cessation of work
At any time, the right-of-way manager may order the immediate cessation of any work that poses a threat to the
health, safety or well-being of the public. The right-of-way manager may revoke the permit of any permittee in
any instance where there is a threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public.
Sec. 24.09.074 Violations of standards; notice
The right-of-way manager may issue a written notice to the permittee indicating work that does not conform to
the terms of the permit, applicable standards, conditions, codes or other applicable regulation. Within five days
after issuance of written notice, the permittee shall present proof to the right-of-way manager that the violation
has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the right-of-way manager may
revoke the permit.
Sec. 24.09.075 Location and relocation of facilities
Subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws, the right-of-way user shall, upon the request of the city,
which shall be in writing, locate and/or relocate its facilities situated within any right-of-way, at no expense to
the city, where reasonable and necessary to accommodate any city project. The written request provided by the
city shall state the date by which the relocation by the right-of-way user shall be completed and a reasonable
amount of time shall be provided by the city. When relocation is necessitated by federal government
requirements, which includes reimbursements of costs, the city will reimburse applicant for its proportionate
share from funds provided to the city in such reimbursements.
Sec. 24.09.076 Relocation facilities for the city
In the event the city finds it necessary to move a right-of-way user's facilities to protect the right-of-way, any city
utilities and/or street, the city shall notify the local representative of the right-of-way user. Right-of-way user
shall promptly move or facilitate the relocation of the subject facilities at right-of-way user's sole expense.
Sec. 24.09.077 Abandoned facilities
(a) A right-of-way user owning abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall:
(1) Remove its facilities and repair, at its sole expense, any damage caused by the removal. The
right-of-way manager may allow some or all facilities to remain if the right-of-way manager
determines same is in the best interest of the public to do so; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 605/618
(2) Provide information satisfactory to the city that the right-of-way user's obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way have been lawfully assumed by another authorized right-of-way user.
(b) The facilities of the right-of-way user who fails to comply with this section, and those facilities which
remain unused for two years, shall be deemed to be abandoned unless, within the aforesaid two-year period, the
city receives written confirmation and reasonable evidence, as solely determined by city, that the right-of-way
user intends to use the facilities. The city may exercise any remedies and/or rights it has at law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, taking possession of the abandoned facilities or requiring the removal of the
facilities by the right-of-way user at the right-of-way user's sole expense.
Sec. 24.09.078 Underground service requirements
Placement of new utility support structures (poles) shall be prohibited for electrical distribution lines with 60,000
volts and less and all communication utilities, unless otherwise allowed by other law or an existing franchise
agreement between the right-of-way user and the city or a PUCT tariff. This does not prohibit replacing existing
poles for maintenance purposes.
Sec. 24.09.079 Location of poles and conduits
All poles in the right-of-way shall be of sound material and straight, and shall not interfere with the flow of
water in any gutter or drain, and shall be placed so as not to interfere with vehicular and pedestrian travel. The
location and route of all conduits, fiber, cables, utilities and facilities placed and constructed by a right-of-way
user in the construction and maintenance of its system in the city shall be subject to the reasonable and proper
control, direction and approval of the city. The installation location (coordinates) of the pole must comply with
the plans submitted as part of the application as the placement must be approved by the right-of-way manager.
Placement of poles and anchor guys along curvilinear streets shall comply with city ordinances and regulations.
Sec. 24.09.080 Size and location of aboveground facilities
The maximum dimensions for ground mounted utility structures above the ground in the right-of-way adjacent to
streets are seven feet long (parallel to the road), two feet wide (perpendicular to the road) and six feet in height.
For structures three feet or less in height, the width may be 44 inches. This does not include poles. The height of
utility structures shall be measured from the lowest grade at any point 18 inches or less from the side of the
structure that faces the street to the highest point of the structure. Utility structures exceeding those dimensions
shall not be located in the right-of-way adjacent to streets, unless otherwise approved in writing by the right-ofway
manager. All aboveground facilities shall be located outside of the corner visibility triangle at all
intersections, future intersections and all driveways. No aboveground facilities may be placed in a parkway that
is across from a median opening.
Sec. 24.09.081 Height of overhead line
The user shall ensure all overhead lines are constructed and maintained so that the minimum clearances are in
compliance with the National Electrical Code as it exists or may be amended.
Sec. 24.09.082 Attachments to poles
(a) Nothing shall obligate or restrict a right-of-way user from exercising its rights to enter into pole
attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power
companies or with other wire-using companies authorized to operate within the city.
(b) A right-of-way user shall utilize existing pole space, conduit, and other facilities whenever reasonably
and/or economically possible.
(c) Antennas must be mounted to the top of the pole, or flush to the pole near the top, in a screen that is coated
or painted an approved color to match the pole to camouflage the installation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 606/618
(d) Equipment, other than antennas, must be in an underground vault. Vaults must be flush to the ground.
(e) If the existing pole already has more than two existing risers/drops, the pole must be replaced with a metal
pole and all wires and cables must be run in conduit inside the pole. The existing drops will also be relocated
inside the new pole and underground entry into the pole through the foundation is required. When installation
will result in two or fewer risers/drops on the pole, the wires and cable may be installed as a riser/drop in conduit
painted an approved color.
Sec. 24.09.083 Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires
The right-of-way user shall rearrange its transmission media temporarily as necessary to permit the moving of
houses or other bulky structures. The requesting parties shall, pay the reasonable and necessary expense of such
temporary rearrangements. The right-of-way user shall in a reasonable time frame and reasonable cost, remove
its transmission media in connection with the demolition of unsafe structures, including emergency or ordered
demolitions at no cost to the city. The right-of-way user may invoice the requesting parties for the cost of this
work, where applicable.
Sec. 24.09.084 Street closures
(a) All lane closures on any thoroughfare shall comply with TMUTCD, and shall include a lane closure
exhibit to be submitted with the permit to the right-of-way manager. The right-of-way manager may require a
traffic-control plan. Arrow boards and message boards may be required for lane closures on thoroughfares.
(b) Unless approved by the city engineer, lane closure of any street and/or intersection will be between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Any proposed lane closure requires that traffic-control plan be submitted and
approved by the city engineer prior to the closure.
(c) All lane closures require notification to the city police and fire departments at least twenty-four (24) hours
prior to closing.
Sec. 24.09.085 Site maintenance during construction and prior to full restoration
(a) Erosion control and stormwater management. The right-of-way user shall be responsible for stormwater
management, erosion control and excavation safety measures that comply with city, state and federal guidelines.
Requirements shall include, but not limited to, construction fencing around any excavation that will be left
overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open
holes, and high erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing. Upon request of right-of-way manager, the
right-of-way user may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from the federal or state
government.
(b) Dust control. The right-of-way user shall ensure that the work is conducted and site maintained to
minimize blowing dust. At any time dust leaves the jobsite so that it is a nuisance, the work will stop until
measures can be taken to eliminate the dust.
(c) Traffic-control safety. In the event of noncompliance with the TMUTCD, the right-of-way user shall be
notified of the violation. In the event of continued noncompliance, the right-of-way manager may revoke the
permit, in addition to any other remedies available to the city. At any time the right-of-way manager determines
the work threatens public safety, he may take immediate action as necessary including but not limited to,
stopping all work, or have a third party make the repairs at the expense of the applicant.
(d) Responsibility for signs, barricades and warning devices. The right-of-way user working in any right-ofway
is responsible for the safe movement of traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, through the construction area.
The right-of-way user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic-control as specified in the
TMUTCD.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 607/618
(1) Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic-control
practices and have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and
regulations, including without limitation, those in TMUTCD, may place and maintain the trafficcontrol
devices in a construction area.
(2) The right-of-way user must either: (A) subcontract the barricading to a firm specializing in
traffic-control; or (B) submit the qualifications and name of employees to the right-of-way user
manager for approval prior to the work commencing. The right-of-way user must also submit a
traffic-control plan for review when required by this article. All signs and barricades must conform to
the requirements of the TMUTCD.
(3) All barricades, plates, and other traffic-control equipment must conform to TMUTCD
specifications and must be inspected and maintained by the traffic-control representative.
(4) All barricades, plates and other traffic-control equipment must display accurate and sufficient
information including without limitation, the name of the right-of-way user.
(5) Noncompliance with the TMUTCD shall be cited in writing. In the event of noncompliance
after citation, the right-of-way manager may place the necessary devices as required, and the right-ofway
user shall reimburse the city for all such expenses as well as $500.00 for noncompliance. Failure
to comply with this provision may result in denial of application for future permits.
(6) All traffic-control devices must be removed immediately upon completion of work.
(e) Duty to barricade. At all times during construction activity, the contractor and/or right-of-way user, as
applicable, shall place and maintain all necessary and proper barriers and other safeguards, including without
limitation, watchmen certified in accordance with the safety training described in this article, if necessary, upon
and around the work and for the prevention of accidents, and after daylight hours, shall place, maintain and keep
suitable sufficient lights, in accordance with the TMUTCD.
Sec. 24.09.086 Inspection
The permittee shall make the work site accessible to the city, and others as authorized by law, for inspection at
all reasonable times during performance of the work.
Sec. 24.09.087 Materials testing
The city will require testing of materials used in construction in or near the right-of-way to determine
conformance with city construction specifications, including, but not limited to, compaction tests on backfill
materials, subgrade, aggregate base course, Portland concrete (rigid pavement), asphaltic concrete (flexible
pavement) and other construction materials as deemed necessary by the city. The right-of-way user shall, at his
expense, hire a testing laboratory with current accreditation by the American Association for Laboratory
Accreditation, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) or another
nationally recognized accreditation agency that verifies compliance with ASTM E 329 and that demonstrates the
laboratory's capabilities to perform applicable ASTM or AASHTO test procedures, as may be required.
Sec. 24.09.088 Duties of persons making excavations or creating obstructions
Any person who shall cause to be made any excavation or obstruction in any street or right-of-way shall not
allow the same to remain there beyond a time reasonably sufficient for the completion of the work and/or
removal of the obstruction, and shall repair the subject portion of such street and/or right-of-way so as to restore
the same to its condition previous to the making of such excavation or obstruction. It shall be the duty of such
excavators to protect the area while such condition exists and promptly to repair the same so as to leave the
street or right-of-way in as good condition as before the excavation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 608/618
Sec. 24.09.089 Emergency excavations
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit or duct in or under
any street, or right-of-way by virtue of any law, article or permit, from making such excavation as may be
necessary for compliance with law or for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided
that the person making the excavation shall notify the right-of-way manager within 24 hours. Except as
specifically provided otherwise in this article for excavations authorized by this section, permittee shall be
subject to all fees and requirements of this article.
Sec. 24.09.090 Excavation in streets
Except in case of an emergency there shall be no excavation in any street without the prior written approval of
the right-of-way manager. Any request for a permit to excavate a street shall include a description of the
proposed work and proposed restoration of the area, as well as a statement of clear and convincing evidence is
provided to the right-of-way manager as to why alternate procedures cannot or should not be used in lieu of
excavating a street. All pavement cuts and repairs shall be performed by a contractor with experience in street
repair work. Any damage to pavement outside the removal area shall also be repaired subject to approval of the
right-of-way manager. Installation of utilities in existing streets shall be by bore (not open cut), unless approved
in writing by the city engineer. Repair of existing streets shall be per the city's standard construction detail and
must be approved by the city engineer.
(1) Jacking and boring. A permittee or right-of-way user shall perform all work in conformance
with methods approved by the city and in such a manner as to not interfere or disturb existing or
planned infrastructure.
(2) Responsibility of excavated area maintenance. A permittee or right-of-way user shall warrant
and be responsible for its repairs in the right-of-way for two years from the completion date of any
repair.
Sec. 24.09.091 Backfill of excavated area
(a) Open trenches may be temporarily backfilled for the convenience of the permittee or the public safety.
Traffic bearing plates can be used temporarily in conformance with city requirements. At least one hour prior to
beginning permanent backfill operations, the permittee shall notify the right-of-way manager of the time the
backfill will begin.
(b) All excess water and mud shall be removed from the trench prior to backfilling. Any backfill placed during
a rainy period or at other times, where excess water cannot be prevented from entering the trench, will be
considered temporary and shall be removed as soon as weather permits. All disturbed base material or any base
that has been undermined shall be removed and discarded. Compaction of all backfill shall be 95 percent of
maximum density with a moisture content of minus two percent to plus four percent of optimum moisture
content as determined by ASTM D698 under or near paved surfaces, future paved surfaces or otherwise as
determined by right-of-way manager. Outside of pavement surfaces, compaction of all backfill shall be 95
percent of maximum density with a moisture content of minus two percent to plus four percent of optimum
moisture content as determined by ASTM D698, and be smoothed, raked, and topsoil and grass or other
landscaping installed to match the surrounding conditions.
Sec. 24.09.092 Right-of-way restoration requirements
(a) The work to be done pursuant to the permit and any repair and/or subsequent restoration of the right-ofway
must be completed within the dates specified in the permit. In the event of circumstances beyond the control
of the permittee or when work is prohibited by unseasonable or unreasonable conditions, the right-of-way
manager may, in his sole discretion, extend the dates on receipt of a substantiated supplementary application for
a permit extension.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 609/618
(b) All earth, materials, sidewalk, pavement, utilities, conduits, crossing, irrigation, landscaping, monuments,
manhole covers, valve covers, meter box lids or improvements of any kind, which are owned or possessed by the
city, and damaged, disturbed, or removed by a right-of-way user shall be fully repaired promptly by the right-ofway
user, at its sole expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the right-of-way manager with material approved
by the City.
(c) After any excavation, the right-of-way user shall, at its expense, restore the right-of-way, trench envelope,
pavement structure and the surrounding area, to the same or better condition than it was prior to the excavation.
The restoration shall be made in accordance with specifications set forth herein, and the repair shall be covered
by a maintenance bond for two years from the completion date of any repair.
(d) In the event the right-of-way user fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition
required herein, or fails to satisfactorily and/or timely complete all restoration, the city may, at its option, serve
written notice upon the right-of-way user that, unless within five days after serving of such notice a satisfactory
arrangement can be made for the proper restoration of the right-of-way by the right-of-way user, the city may
take over the work and prosecute same to completion, by contract or otherwise, at the sole expense of the rightof-
way user, and right-of-way user, and its surety, shall be liable to the city for any and all cost incurred by the
city by reason of such prosecution an [and] completion including, without limitation, the applicable public
inconvenience penalty. Nothing contained herein shall limit any other remedies available to the city.
(e) If any excavation cannot be backfilled immediately, the right-of-way user shall securely and adequately
cover the excavation and maintain proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of
the opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel.
(f) In all right-of-way restoration, the right-of-way user guarantees its work and shall maintain it two years
from the date of completion of any restoration. During the period following completion, the right-of-way user
shall, in the event of any failure of the restoration, and upon notification from the right-of-way manager,
reimburse the city for pavement restoration costs as provided for in this article. Additionally, the right-of-way
user, in the event of such failure, shall within 48 hours of notice from the city, repair the subject trench envelope.
(g) The two-year guarantee period shall be applicable to, among others, failure of the pavement surface as
well as failure of the trench envelope. Notwithstanding remediation of the pavement structure by the city, the
right-of-way user retains repair responsibility at all times during the guarantee period for the trench envelope. In
locations where two or more right-of-way users have made repairs in the exact same location, the last right-ofway
user to excavate shall be responsible for the two-year guarantee in that location, unless the right-of-way
manager determines, in his sole discretion, that a failure was most likely a result of work performed by another
right-of-way user. That right-of-way user shall be responsible for the two-year maintenance period.
(h) All street excavations shall be perpendicular excavations, as possible, unless otherwise approved by the
right-of-way manager. Excavations in streets, which are not perpendicular excavations require block-to-block
and curb-to-curb pavement reconstruction, or other method of repair approved by the right-of-way manager. All
repairs shall be equal or better than that which existed prior to the commencement of any work.
(i) No trench shall be opened for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts for a distance greater than can
be backfilled on the same workday before sunset. Any variance from this requirement must be granted in writing
from the right-of-way manager prior to work beginning.
Sec. 24.09.093 Restoration of pavement
Unless otherwise specified in the permit, restoration of the pavement of any street, alley, right-of-way or other
public place shall be performed by the permittee.
(1) No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more
than 200 feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, other than with the
prior written consent of the right-of-way manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 610/618
(2) All excavations shall comply with the city construction standards, as amended, and
requirements of this article. Unless otherwise required by city standards, as amended, or if unusual
conditions are encountered, the right-of-way manager may require new standards for compaction,
backfill and pavement restoration.
(3) Any excavated pavement, debris and/or other rubble shall be removed, together with any
surplus material, within one working day from the time such material is placed upon the street. After
backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the right-of-way user shall remove all loose
paving material and trim the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the
right-of-way manager.
(4) Whenever any caving occurs in the sidewalks of any excavation, the pavements above such
caving shall be cut away, trench backfilled, compacted and sidewalk pavement restored. In no case
shall any side or lateral tamping fill any void under a pavement.
Sec. 24.09.094 Permanent pavement repairs
The right-of-way user will maintain the excavated area until permanent pavement restoration of the excavated
area is complete. The right-of-way user shall make the final repairs within seven days on thoroughfares that are
classified as major and within 30 days on residential, local and alley streets after the right-of-way manager
makes final inspection. Backfill failures shall remain the responsibility of the right-of-way user.
Sec. 24.09.095 Substandard repair of pavement of right-of-way
In case the pavement or the surface of the street, alley, or right-of-way in, over or near any excavation should
become depressed, cracked or broken at any time or fails in any way at any time after the excavation has been
made and during the two-year warranty, the right-of-way user shall comply with any applicable obligations of
this article, including, without limitation, reimbursement to the city of the cost to restore the street and/or rightof-
way.
Sec. 24.09.096 Failure to complete work within specified time
In the event any work governed by this article is not completed by the right-of-way user within the time required
or in accordance with the specifications required herein or by the right-of-way manager, the right-of-way
manager may cause such work to be performed as is necessary to secure the work area to a safe and passable
condition. The right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for the costs of securing the site.
Sec. 24.09.097 Removal and reconstruction where work is defective
All construction work in the streets, right-of-ways, sidewalks and public places of the city is declared to be
subject to the exclusive control of the city, and whenever, in the sole opinion of the right-of-way manager, any
such work shall not have been duly completed within a reasonable time or shall have been executed in a
defective manner, whether because of bad workmanship or materials or because not true to the lines or grades or
specification therefor given to him by the right-of-way manager, then upon written demand or notice from the
right-of-way manager, such right-of-way user or contractor shall promptly remedy, complete and/or remove and
reconstruct such incomplete or defective work all as the right-of-way manager may require, and these provisions
shall also apply to all repair and maintenance work. If the contractor or right-of-way user shall fail or refuse to
do so within a reasonable time to be specified by the right-of-way manager, then, if required by the right-of-way
manager, such work shall be completed or corrected or removed and wholly or partially reconstructed by the
city, in such a manner as in the opinion of the right-of-way manager may be necessary to make such work as
good as originally required, and such work may be done by contract or otherwise, under the direction of the
right-of-way manager, and the contractor or right-of-way user shall reimburse city for any and all cost incurred
by the city performing the work described in this section.
Sec. 24.09.098 Cleanup of right-of-way
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 611/618
In every case, and at all times, the work of removing from the right-of-way all obstructions, surplus materials,
debris and waste matter of every description caused by and/or accumulated from the excavation shall be the sole
responsibility of the right-of-way user. The right-of-way user shall maintain the area on and around the
excavation and related work in a clean, safe and orderly fashion at all times during conduct of the excavation and
shall clean the same area upon completion of work. Streets shall be cleaned by use of a vacuum street sweeper.
The right-of-way user shall clean the surrounding area, as outlined above, within one day upon completion and
approval of all trench work and pavement restoration unless the right-of-way manager, sufficient reason
therefore having been given to his satisfaction, grants a written extension of time.
Sec. 24.09.099 Reporting completion of work
When the work under permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the city in accordance with the
requirements placed on the permit. The city will schedule a final walk-through with the contractor to develop a
final punch list of items to be remedied.
Sec. 24.09.100 Effect of article on persons engaged in construction
Any permit issued prior to the adoption of this article will remain subject to the terms and conditions of city
ordinances and requirements in effect at the time of issuance of the permit and is not affected by this article,
except that, upon expiration or conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be obtained in
accordance with this article.
Secs. 24.09.101–24.09.120 Reserved
Division 4. Indemnification, Insurance, Bonding and Liability
Sec. 24.09.121 Liability of right-of-way user
To the extent allowed by law, the right-of-way user shall be liable to the city for any damage or loss occasioned
by any act and/or omission occurring in connection with its excavation, and subject to state law, the right-of-way
user shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, agents,
representatives and volunteers from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands,
claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its
councilmembers, officers, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers may be subjected for injury of any
type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act and/or omission. The city shall
promptly notify a permittee, or right-of-way user, at the address set forth in the permit, or last known address, of
any claim, suit or demand served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee or
right-of-way user in connection with an excavation.
Sec. 24.09.122 Insurance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, unless exempt under this chapter, to construct, reconstruct or repair any
sidewalk, driveway, curb or curb and gutter in any street, alley, easement or right-of-way of the city without
having first executed and delivered to the city a current policy of liability insurance in an amount determined by
the city, and such insurance must be conditioned as follows: that the principal shall fully indemnify and hold the
city harmless from any and all cost, expense or damage, whether real or asserted, on account of any injury done
to any person or property in the prosecution of the work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned by the
performance of such work. The city shall have no duty to perform under this article until such certificate has
been delivered to the department.
(b) The city shall be entitled, upon request and without expense before issuing a permit, to receive copies of
the policies and all endorsements thereto as they apply to the limits required by the city, and may make a
reasonable request for deletion, revision, or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or
exclusions (except where policy revisions are established by law or regulation binding upon any party to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 612/618
policy or the underwriter of such policy). Upon such request by the city, the right-of-way user shall exercise
reasonable effort to accomplish such changes in policy coverage, and shall pay the cost thereof.
(c) Right-of-way user shall notify the city in the event of any notice of cancellation, nonrenewal or material
change in coverage and shall give such notices not less than 30 days prior to the change, or ten days' notice for
cancellation due to nonpayment of premiums, which notice must be accompanied by a replacement certificate of
insurance.
(d) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the right-of-way
user may be held responsible for payments of damages to persons (including death) or property resulting from
the right-of-way user's, or its subcontractors', performance of the work performed in the public right-of-way.
(e) Any city-owned utility is exempted from the requirement to provide the insurance specified herein.
(f) With respect to the right-of-way user's obligation to comply with the requirements for commercial general
(public) liability insurance coverage, the city right-of-way manager may, in his discretion, allow the right-of-way
user to self-insure upon annual production of evidence that is satisfactory to show the user has sufficient assets
and history of performance to justify the user to self-insure.
Sec. 24.09.123 Performance/assurance bond
Before a permit shall be issued, the right-of-way manager may, in his discretion, require the applicant and/or the
person or entity for which the applicant is performing, to execute and deliver to the city, to be kept on file with
the city, a good and sufficient bond of performance or assurance, in the sum to be determined by the city and
conditioned that the person making the application shall promptly adjust, pay and settle all legitimate claims for
damages that may result by reason of carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing such work or by
reason of any defects therein caused or arising from careless, negligent or imperfect construction thereof, and to
hold the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, volunteers, agents, and representatives, free and harmless
from liability on all such claims for damages to the performance or assurance bond which shall cover the cost of
repairs in or upon the street, sidewalk or other public place where the work is to be done that may become
necessary by reason of such cut or excavation having been made. The bond shall be maintained until the work is
accepted by the city.
Sec. 24.09.124 Liability of contractor and sureties for maintenance and repair work
Any defects of workmanship or material relating to work done by an excavator during the initial project or
becoming known, or which should have been known, during the guarantee period (the two years) shall be known
as maintenance or repair work, and both the excavator and the sureties and/or the contractor's bond shall be fully
liable for any default of such contractor under this section. In the event of a failure in the restoration of an
excavation, the right-of-way user shall, at its sole expense, have one opportunity to repair, in a timely manner,
the section of the restoration that has failed, which repair shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in
this article. In the event of any subsequent failure of that section of the restoration, the city retains the right and
option to terminate the right-of-way user's guaranty, upon written notice to the right-of-way user. In such event,
the right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for its direct costs associated with the repair of the failure of the
restoration work.
Sec. 24.09.125 When additional security required
In the event the right-of-way manager reasonably believes the contractor's or right-of-way user's solvency is
threatened, the right-of-way manager may, at any time, make written demand on a contractor and/or right-of-way
user for bonds, and the contractor and/or right-of-way user shall immediately furnish such additional bond or
bonds to the city.
Sec. 24.09.126 Decision of right-of-way manager binding on contractor, right-of-way user and sureties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 613/618
If any question arises as to when any work was actually begun or other specific dates, the decision of the rightof-
way manager shall be conclusive on the contractor, right-of-way user, and the sureties on all such bonds.
Secs. 24.09.127–24.09.140 Reserved
Division 5. Variances and Exemptions
Sec. 24.09.141 Variance/exemptions
A permittee or right-of-way user may request a variance from any of the requirements of this article by filing a
written request with the right-of-way manager stating the requirement and the basis for the variance. The rightof-
way manager may reject incomplete variance requests. The applicant shall bear its own expenses of the
application process.
(1) Any request for a variance from any right-of-way restoration requirement shall be made in
writing, in advance of any contemplated work and shall be accompanied by digitally formatted
detailed plans of the substituted reconstruction and/or repair of the excavated area, if applicable.
(2) Any request for an exemption and/or variance from any penalty and/or fee, other than as
provided in this article, shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a written detailed
request stating the reasons therefor.
(3) Any request for an exemption and/or variance from any permit, or any other requirement of this
article shall be made in writing, stating in detail all reasons for the requested exemption and/or
variance.
(4) The department shall grant or deny an application for a variance and/or exemption within ten
days of receipt of the application for variance and/or exemption.
(5) Denial of the variance may be appealed in accordance with section 24.09.051.
(Ordinance 2017-08-32 adopted 8/28/17)
ARTICLE 24.10 CERTAIN USES OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND ERECTION OF NETWORK
NODES AND SUPPORT POLES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sec. 24.10.001 Purpose and scope
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for the placement of node
support poles in the right-of-way and network nodes in the public right-of-way and on service poles within the
city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefits and will be consistent with the preservation of the integrity,
safe usage, and visual qualities of the city public right-of-way and the city as a whole.
(b) Intent. In enacting this article, the city is establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by
network nodes, including without limitation, ensuring that network nodes or node support poles do not adversely
affect,
(1) Use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
(2) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(3) The operation of facilities lawfully located in public right-of-way or public property;
(4) The ability of the city to protect the environment, including the prevention of damage to trees;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 614/618
(5) The character of residential and historic areas, and city parks, in which network nodes may be
installed; and
(6) The rapid deployment of network nodes to provide the benefits of wireless services.
(c) Conflicts with other chapters. This article supersedes all chapters, parts of chapters or rules adopted prior
hereto that are in conflict herewith, only to the extent of such conflict.
Sec. 24.10.002 Definitions
All terms used in this article, not specifically defined herein, have the meaning provided in chapter 284 of the
Texas Local Government Code.
Applicant. Any person who submits an application and is a network provider.
Application. A request submitted by an applicant
(1) For a permit to collocate network nodes;
(2) To install a transport facility; or
(3) Approve the installation, replacement or modification of a pole.
City code. Those ordinance provisions relevant to use of the public right-of-way where compliant with
applicable law.
Day. Calendar day.
Person. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or
organization, including the city.
Routine maintenance.
(1) Work in the public right-of-way that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or
vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way;
(2) Replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar
in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a
public right-of-way; or
(3) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes
that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles, in the public right-of-way.
Technical grounds. In light of prevailing industry and engineering standards, reasons of insufficiency of capacity,
safety, reliability and/or generally applicable engineering purposes consistent with applicable law and city code.
Sec. 24.10.003 Permitted use; application and fees
(a) Permitted use. Collocation of network nodes and the placement of node support poles, meeting the
parameters set forth in section 24.10.005 below and in applicable law, may be permitted at the discretion of the
city.
(b) Permit required. No person shall place a network node, transport facility or node support pole in the public
right-of-way, without first filing a permit application and obtaining a permit therefor, except as otherwise
provided in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 615/618
(c) Permit application. All permit applications filed pursuant to this article shall be on a form, paper or
electronic, provided by the city. The applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly
marking each page of such materials accordingly.
(d) Application requirements. The permit application shall be made by the network provider or its duly
authorized representative and shall contain the following:
(1) The applicant's name, address, telephone number, e-mail address.
(2) The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of all consultants, if any, acting
on behalf of the applicant with respect to the filing of the application.
(3) Construction and engineering drawings and information confirming that the construction will
be consistent with city code and the city's design manual for the installation of network nodes and
node support poles, attached herein as exhibit A to Ordinance 2017-08-033.
(e) Routine maintenance and replacement. A permit application shall not be required for: (1) routine
maintenance; or (2) the replacement of a node with another node that is substantially similar.
(f) Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted
in writing to the city within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. Any permit holder must
notify the city's right-of-way manager within 30 days of any sale, transfer, merger, or assignment of ownership
of a network provider's business, and point-of-contact information shall be updated at all times the use of the
right-of-way is in effect.
(g) Application fees. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by the
applicable small cell application fees for nodes and poles, as set forth in the master fee schedule for the city.
(h) Authority of applicant. An applicant must provide evidence that it has acquired all required authorization
pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way. The applicants right to use and
occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police
powers and manage its public right-of-way, based on the Texas Local Gov't Code chapter 284 and all other state
or federal laws.
Sec. 24.10.004 Action on permit applications
(a) Review of applications. The city shall review applications for network nodes, node support poles and
transport facilities in light of their conformity with applicable law and city code and shall issue such permits
subject to the following requirements:
(1) Within 30 days of receiving an application for a network node or node support pole, or 10 days
for a transport facility, the city shall determine and notify the applicant whether the application is
complete; or if incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information in such
notification.
(2) The city shall make its final decision to approve or deny a complete application no later than
(A) 21 days after receipt of a complete application for a transport facility; (B) 60 days after receipt of
a complete application for a network node; and (C) 150 days after receipt of a completed application
for a new node support pole.
(3) The city shall advise the applicant in writing of its final decision, and, if denied, the basis for
that denial, including specific provisions of city code or applicable law on which the denial was
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies the
application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 616/618
application within 30 days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. The city shall
approve or deny the revised application within 90 days of receipt of the amended application.
(4) If the city fails to act on an application within the review period specified in this section, the
application shall be deemed denied.
(5) An applicant seeking to collocate network nodes may, at the applicant's discretion, file a
consolidated application and receive permits for up to 30 network nodes. Provided however, the city's
denial of any node within a single application shall not affect other nodes submitted in the same
application.
Sec. 24.10.005 Network nodes in the public right-of-way; maximum height; other requirements
(a) Maximum size of permitted use. Collocation of permitted use network nodes in the public right-of-way
shall be subject to the size limitations specified in chapter 284.003 of the Local Government Code.
(b) Undergrounding provisions. A network provider shall comply with undergrounding requirements,
including Code of Ordinances article 24.09, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other
public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first
obtaining zoning or land use approval. This requirement or restriction shall not be interpreted to prohibit a
network provider from replacing an existing structure.
(c) Historic areas and design districts. Subject to the permit application approval time frames in section
24.10.004, a network provider must obtain advance approval from the city before collocating new network nodes
or installing new node support poles in any areas zoned or designated as a historic district or as an
overlay/special districts if the district has decorative poles. Such installations shall be subject to the design and
aesthetic standards of such areas, and may bus subject to undergrounding provisions.
(d) Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. A network provider may not install a new node
support pole in a public right-of-way without the city's discretionary, written consent of the right-of-way
manager if the public right-of-way is located in a municipal park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
(1) Not more than 50 feet wide; and
(2) Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land
that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. A network provider shall comply
with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions when installing network nodes in parks
and residential areas.
(e) Zoning. A network provider seeking to construct, replace or modify a pole or node in the public right-ofway
that exceeds the height or size limits contained in this section, shall be subject to applicable zoning
requirements.
Sec. 24.10.006 Effect of permit
(a) Authority granted. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge
upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the public right-of-way.
(b) Time of installation. A network provider shall begin the installation for which a permit is granted not later
than six months after final approval and shall diligently pursue the installation to completion. Provided, however,
the city may place a longer time limit on completion or grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the
network provider.
(c) Right to occupy. Once a network provider has collocated a network node or placed a node support pole
pursuant to a permit, the provider shall be permitted to continue to maintain such collocation or such pole unless
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 617/618
required to remove or relocate under the terms of this article.
(d) Interference with network nodes. City will not grant a permit to any person to install any network node or
other wireless facility if the city knows or has reason to know that such person's use of such network node of
other wireless facility may in any way adversely affect or interfere with the use and operation of an existing and
operational network node for which the city has previously issued a permit.
Sec. 24.10.007 Removal, relocation or modification of network nodes in the ROW
(a) Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a network provider shall, at its own expense,
protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
network node or node support pole within the public right-of-way whenever the city has determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or
installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the public right-of-way.
(b) Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to disconnect or
move any network node located within the public right-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit,
the city shall notify the network provider and allow the network provider an opportunity to move its own
facilities prior to the city disconnecting or removing a facility and shall notify the network provider after
disconnecting or removing a network node or node support pole.
(c) Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a network node or node support pole within the public
right-of-way, the network provider shall notify the city within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice, the city
may direct the network provider to remove all or any portion of a network node or node support pole if the city,
or any of its departments, determines, subject to city code, that such removal is necessary to protect public
health, safety and welfare.
Sec. 24.10.008 Public right-of-way rate
(a) Annual rate. Once a network provider has installed and made operational a network node in the public
right-of-way, network provider shall pay to the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way in the
amount set forth annually per node in the city public right-of-way and per pole attachment, in accordance with
the master fee schedule for the city.
(b) Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from the public rightof-
way and cease paying the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way following removal and
notification to the city of such removal.
Sec. 24.10.009 Attachment to service poles in the public right-of-way
A network provider may be permitted to attach network nodes to city-owned service poles, consistent with
applicable law and city code, and subject to the requirements specified herein and in the city's sole discretion.
(1) Permits. A network provider shall obtain a permit, pursuant to the terms of this article, prior to
collocating network nodes on service poles.
(2) Make ready. Network provider shall be responsible for costs for make ready work on city
service poles to which provider seeks to place a network node.
(3) Technical limitations. In the event the city determines, based upon technical grounds, that
inadequate space exists on a service pole to accommodate the proposed network node, such pole may
be replaced by network provider, at the network provider's expense, with a service pole with adequate
space to accommodate the proposed network node.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 618/618
(4) Facilities rearrangements. If another provider would have to rearrange or adjust any of its
facilities to accommodate a new network node, the city shall use reasonable efforts to work with the
affected providers to coordinate such activity. All make ready work shall comply with NESC, and
other applicable codes. The applicant shall not be responsible for any third-party costs, including
those of other network providers, to adjust existing attachments that are noncompliant with the NESC
and other applicable codes at the time of the application.
(5) Service pole attachment fee. The rate to collocate a network node on a service pole in the
public right-of-way shall be $20.00 per pole per year. Subject to the provisions of section 24.10.010,
such compensation together with the application fee and the public right-of-way rate specified in
section 24.10.008 shall be the sole compensation that the network provider shall be required to pay to
the city.
(6) Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from a
service pole in the public right-of-way and cease paying the attachment fee to the city upon
notification to the city that the facilities have been removed.
Sec. 24.10.010 Transport facilities
Installation of transport facilities, including applicable compensation to the city for such facilities, shall be
governed by chapter 284.055 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Sec. 24.10.011 Design manual
A network provider shall comply with the city's design manual for the installation of network nodes and node
support poles, if any, in place on the date a permit application is filed in relation to work for which the city has
approved a permit application.
Sec. 24.10.012 Network provider and CTP indemnity and CTP indemnity
A network provider shall indemnify the city as specified by Texas Local Government Code, as may be amended.
A CTP shall indemnify the city as specified by Texas Local Government Code section 283.057.
(Ordinance 2017-08-33 adopted 8/28/17)

LANCASTER DEVELOPMENT CODE
VOLUME I
ORDINANCE #2006-04-13
(ADOPTED APRIL 24, 2006)
14-i
Ordinance No. 2006-04-13
Adopted April 24, 2006
Effective April 24, 2006
Amended August 28, 2006 (Ordinance No. 2006-08-28)
Amended August 28, 2006 (Ordinance No. 2006-08-29)
Amended October 23, 2006 (Ordinance No. 2006-10-41)
Amended November 13, 2006 (Ordinance No. 2006-11-43)
Amended February 12, 2007(Ordinance No. 2007-02-03)
Amended June 11, 2007 (Ordinance No. 2007-06-23)
Amended July 23, 2007 (Ordinance No. 2007-07-37)
Amended August 13, 2007 (Ordinance No. 2007-08-39)
Amended January 28, 2008 (Ordinance No. 2008-01-02)
Amended February 25, 2008 (Ordinance No. 2008-02-11)
Amended June 9, 2008 (Ordinance No. 2008-06-20)
Amended July 14, 2008 (Ordinance No. 2008-07-25)
Amended October 27, 2008 (Ordinance No. 2008-10-44)
Amended November 10, 2008 (Ordinance No. 2008-11-47)
14-ii
CHAPTER 14
DEVELOPMENT CODE
ARTICLE 14.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS.........................................................................1
Sec. 14.101 Short Title..................................................................................................................................................1
Sec. 14.102 Authority....................................................................................................................................................1
Sec. 14.103 Jurisdiction................................................................................................................................................1
Sec. 14.104 Purposes.....................................................................................................................................................1
Sec. 14.105 Effective Date and Applicability..............................................................................................................2
Sec. 14.106 Applicability of Existing Regulations......................................................................................................2
Sec. 14.107 Relationship to Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan and Open Space Plan...............................2
Sec. 14.108 Compliance with Code Required.............................................................................................................2
Sec. 14.109 Diagrams and Drawings...........................................................................................................................2
Sec. 14.1000 Severability................................................................................................................................................2
Sec. 14.1100 Zoning, Subdivision and Local Government Code...............................................................................3
ARTICLE 14.200. AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.........................4
Sec. 14.201 Sequence of Review...................................................................................................................................4
Sec. 14.202 Initiation of Administrative Procedures..................................................................................................4
Sec. 14.203 Submittal and Filing.................................................................................................................................4
Sec. 14.204 Authority to Initiate a Request................................................................................................................4
Sec. 14.205 Application Withdrawal...........................................................................................................................4
Sec. 14.206 Boards and Commissions—Appointment, Term, and Procedures.......................................................4
Sec. 14.207 Conduct of Public Hearings.....................................................................................................................5
Sec. 14.208 City Council...............................................................................................................................................6
Sec. 14.209 Planning and Zoning Commission...........................................................................................................7
14-iii
Sec. 14.210 Board of Adjustment...............................................................................................................................10
Sec. 14.211 Sign Control Board.................................................................................................................................13
Sec. 14.212 Historic Landmark Preservation Committee (HLPC).........................................................................14
Sec. 14.213 Tree Advisory Board...............................................................................................................................19
Sec. 14.214 Procedure in Planning Cases — Additional Information Submitted.................................................19
Sec. 14.215 Computation of Time..............................................................................................................................19
Sec. 14.216 Fees...........................................................................................................................................................19
Sec. 14.217 Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance..........................................................................................20
ARTICLE 14.300 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS..........................................................21
Sec. 14.301 Official Zoning Map................................................................................................................................21
Sec. 14.302 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries...................................................................................23
Sec. 14.303 Regulations Applicable to all Districts..................................................................................................23
Sec. 14.304 Listing of Approved Planned Developments.........................................................................................24
Sec. 14.305 Listing of Approved Specific Use Permits.............................................................................................24
Sec. 14.306 Zoning upon Annexation........................................................................................................................24
ARTICLE 14.400. PERMISSIBLE USES...........................................................................25
Sec. 14.401 Land Use Schedule..................................................................................................................................25
Sec. 14.402 Use Standards..........................................................................................................................................27
Sec. 14.403 Other Special Use Standards..................................................................................................................43
Sec. 14.404 Specific Use Permits (SUP)......................................................................................................................44
Sec. 14.405 Floodplain Areas.....................................................................................................................................44
Sec. 14.406 Temporary Uses and Structures............................................................................................................45
Sec. 14.407 New and Unlisted Uses............................................................................................................................46
Sec. 14.408 Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Sites.........................................................................................46
ARTICLE 14.500. DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.......49
Sec. 14.501 General.....................................................................................................................................................49
Sec. 14.502 Agriculture-Open Space District...........................................................................................................58
14-iv
Sec. 14.503 Residential Districts................................................................................................................................58
Sec. 14.504 Commercial Districts..............................................................................................................................65
Sec. 14.505 Industrial Districts..................................................................................................................................74
Sec.14.506 Special Districts…………………………………………………………………………………………79
(Sec.14.550) Special Overlay Zoning Districts…(SEE VOLUME II)…………………..………………..…..……79
Sec.14.507 In-Fill Standards……………………………………………………………………………………….87
ARTICLE 14.600. PARKING AND LOADING....................................................................88
Sec. 14.601 Purpose.....................................................................................................................................................88
Sec. 14.602 Applicability............................................................................................................................................88
Sec. 14.603 Commercial Parking................................................................................................................................89
Sec. 14.604 Residential Parking.................................................................................................................................92
Sec. 14.605 Off -Street Parking Requirements..........................................................................................................93
Sec. 14.606 Off-Street Loading Requirements.......................................................................................................101
ARTICLE 14.700. ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE................................................103
Sec. 14.701 Purpose...................................................................................................................................................103
Sec. 14.702 Applicability..........................................................................................................................................103
Sec. 14.703 Outdoor Lighting for Non-Residential Properties.............................................................................103
Sec. 14.704 Noise........................................................................................................................................................107
Sec. 14.705 Smoke and Particulate Matter.............................................................................................................109
Sec. 14.706 Odorous Matter.....................................................................................................................................109
Sec. 14.707 Toxic, Caustic And Noxious Matter.....................................................................................................109
Sec. 14.708 Vibration................................................................................................................................................109
Sec. 14.709 Fire or Explosive Hazard Material......................................................................................................110
Sec. 14.710 Water and Waste Pollution..................................................................................................................112
ARTICLE 14.800 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS................................................................113
Sec. 14.801 Purpose...................................................................................................................................................113
Sec. 14.802 Application of Article............................................................................................................................113
14-v
Sec. 14.803 Landscape Plan Submission.................................................................................................................114
Sec. 14.804 Mandatory Provisions...........................................................................................................................115
Sec. 14.805 Landscape Materials & Standards......................................................................................................120
Sec. 14.806 Public Right Of Way Visibility............................................................................................................123
Sec. 14.807 Completion of Landscaping..................................................................................................................125
Sec. 14.808 General Maintenance............................................................................................................................125
Sec. 14.809 Approved Plant List…………………………………………………………………………… ……………....127
ARTICLE 14.900 TREE PRESERVATION........................................................................128
Sec. 14.901 General Provisions................................................................................................................................128
Sec. 14.902 Definitions for Tree Preservation........................................................................................................128
Sec. 14.903 Permit Required....................................................................................................................................133
Sec. 14.904 Submittal Requirements.......................................................................................................................135
Sec. 14.905 Exemptions............................................................................................................................................137
Sec. 14.905 Review and Approval Process..............................................................................................................138
Sec. 14.906 Guidelines for Tree Protection.............................................................................................................139
Sec. 14.907 Tree Replacement..................................................................................................................................141
Sec. 14.908 Tree Planting Restrictions....................................................................................................................144
Sec. 14.909 Street Trees............................................................................................................................................144
Sec. 14.910 Ordinance Enforcement.......................................................................................................................144
Sec. 14.911 Violations...............................................................................................................................................145
ARTICLE 14.1000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS....................................146
Sec. 14.1001 Planned Development - General...........................................................................................................146
Sec. 14.1002 Planned Development Procedures........................................................................................................148
Sec. 14.1003 Effect on Existing PDs...........................................................................................................................159
Sec. 14.1004 Amendments to Approved PD Applications........................................................................................160
ARTICLE 14.1100. ZONING-RELATED APPLICATIONS................................................161
Sec. 14.1101 Zoning Change.......................................................................................................................................161
14-vi
Sec. 14.1102 Required Site Plan (Non-PD)................................................................................................................162
Sec. 14.1103 Certificates of Appropriateness (CA)...................................................................................................166
Sec. 14.1104 Development Code Text Amendments.................................................................................................170
ARTICLE 14.1200 SIGN STANDARDS...........................................................................171
Sec. 14.1201 General....................................................................................................................................................171
Sec. 14.1202 General Sign Regulations......................................................................................................................172
Sec. 14.1203 Specific Sign Regulations.......................................................................................................................175
Sec. 14.1204 Portable Signs, Temporary Banners, Flags, Or Inflatable Signs.......................................................176
Sec. 14.1205 Developemnt / Real Estate Directional Signs.......................................................................................179
Sec. 14.1206 Off-Site Church Identification/Welcome Signs...................................................................................180
Sec. 14.1207 Special and Unique Signs.......................................................................................................................181
Sec. 14.1208 Maintenance of Signs.............................................................................................................................182
Sec. 14.1209 Removal of Obsolete Signs....................................................................................................................182
Sec. 14.1210 Removal or Repair of Unsafe Signs......................................................................................................182
Sec. 14.1211 Illegal and Nonconforming Signs..........................................................................................................183
Sec. 14.1212 Administration and Permits..................................................................................................................184
ARTICLE 14.1300. DEFINITIONS.....................................................................................187
Sec. 14.1301 Usage...................................................................................................................................................187
Sec. 14.1302 Definitions...........................................................................................................................................187
ARTICLE 14.1400 PARK LAND DEDICATION.............................................................................204
Sec. 14.1401 Purpose………………………………………………………………………………….……………204
Sec. 14.1402 Definitions……………………………………………………………………………………………205
Sec. 14.1403 General Requirement…………………………………….………………………………………….206
Sec. 14.1403 Dedication of Land in Lieu of fees……………………….………………………………………….207
Sec. 14.1405 These Requirements shall Apply………………………………………………………………….....209
Sec. 14.1406 Capital Improvements in Lieu of Land……………………………………………………………...209
Sec. 14.1407 Character and Minimum Area……………………...………………………………………………209
14-vii
14-viii
Sec. 14.1408 Prior Dedication……………………………………………………………………………………211
Sec. 14.1409 Private Park Option-Open Space ………………………………………………………………..211
Sec. 14.1410 Consideration of Park, etc….……………………………………………………………………..212
Sec. 14.1411 Special Fund Refund……………………………………………………………………………...212
Sec. 14.1412 Criteria for Acceptance of Park Land …………………………………………………………..212
Sec. 14.1413 Additional Requirements…………………………………………………..……………………..213
ARTICLE 14.1500 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES.......................214
Sec. 14.1501 Enforcement………………………………………………………………………………………..214
Sec. 14.1502 Violations…………………………………………………………………………………………...214
Sec. 14.1503 Penalties…………………………………………………………………………………………….215
ARTICLE 14.1600 SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS
ARTICLE 14.1700 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
APPENDIX A-PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS (MAP)
APPENDIX B-SPECIFIC USE PERMITS (MAP)
ARTICLE 14.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 14.101 Short Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Lancaster Development Code of the City of Lancaster, or simply as the Lancaster Development Code, LDC, or as referenced in this document as the "Code".
Sec. 14.102 Authority
The Lancaster Development Code is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to the City and subject to any limitations imposed by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
Sec. 14.103 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this Lancaster Development Code apply generally to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Lancaster and to the lands subject to its zoning jurisdiction as conferred by State law. Those provisions pertaining to the subdivision of land, and those regulations adopted for the primary purpose of protecting water quality or to afford flood protection, apply to all property within the City's corporate boundaries and to all property within its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), as established by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 42 and Chapter 212. References to jurisdictions or the applicability of specific development regulations appearing elsewhere in this Lancaster Development Code take precedence over this jurisdictional statement in the event of a conflicting interpretation.
Sec. 14.104 Purposes
The Lancaster Development Code is adopted for the following purposes:
(1)
To protect, promote, improve and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Lancaster;
(2)
To ensure the safe, orderly and efficient development and expansion of the City of Lancaster in accordance with and pursuant to its Comprehensive Plan, which includes the Thoroughfare, Parks, Trails and Streetscape Plans;
(3)
To conserve, develop, protect and utilize natural resources, including but not limited to topography, vegetation, flood plain and other resources, in keeping with the public interest;
(4)
To prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration or diffusion of population or land uses;
(5)
To protect and preserve places and areas of historical, cultural or architectural importance and significance to the community;
(6)
To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
(7)
To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land;
(8)
To prevent the pollution of air and water, to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities, to safeguard water resources and to preserve the integrity and aesthetic quality of the community;
(9)
To lessen congestion in the streets and provide convenient, safe and efficient circulation for vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(10)
To facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of transportation, water, wastewater, schools, parks, public safety and recreational facilities, and other public facilities and services; and
14-1
(11)
To treat in one unified text those areas of regulation more typically dealt with in separate ordinances such as, but not exclusively, the zoning ordinance, the subdivision rules and regulations.
Sec. 14.105 Effective Date and Applicability
The Lancaster Development Code takes effect upon adoption of this Ordinance by the City Council. The provisions of this Code supersedes all other development regulations governing the development of land within the City. All development applications and proposals filed on or after the effective date of this ordinance, whether for new developments or for add-ons or expansions of existing developments, shall be processed in accordance with the standards and requirements and pursuant to the procedures herein established.
Sec. 14.106 Applicability of Existing Regulations
All existing unexpired, valid building permits and preliminary plats which are complete and duly filed prior to enactment of the Lancaster Development Code in accordance with development regulations in effect prior to adoption of these regulations, shall be processed under procedures therein established, and shall be evaluated and approved or disapproved under the standards and requirements contained in such regulations, notwithstanding the adoption of the Lancaster Development Code. Those site plans which were technically reviewed and approved by the City Council prior to the adoption of this Code shall be exempt from meeting any new requirements after the adoption of this Code.
Where any provisions in the Lancaster Development Code are in apparent conflict, the more restrictive standard or procedure shall be followed.
Sec. 14.107 Relationship to Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan and Open Space Plan
The Lancaster Development Code is intended to implement the policies and objectives contained in the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, and Open Space Plan for the City and to affect the City's plan for provision of public facilities and services within City limits and within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction. If a zoning or rezoning request differs from what the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, or Open Space Plan recommends for that area, the City Planner will advise applicant of this and will request applicant to submit a written letter. This letter will request the City Planner to prepare and process the necessary exception or amendment to the Plan. The City will process this request concurrently with the (re)zoning case at no additional cost to the applicant.
Sec. 14.108 Compliance with Code Required
All development of land within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Lancaster or its extraterritorial jurisdiction as applicable, shall conform to the requirements of the Lancaster Development Code, and no person may use, occupy, sell or develop land, buildings or other structures, or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, sale or development of land, buildings or other structures under his/her control, except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code. Within the City of Lancaster's extraterritorial jurisdiction, no person may sell or develop land, or authorize or permit the sale or development of land, except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code.
Sec. 14.109 Diagrams and Drawings
This Code contains diagrams and drawings. When diagrams and drawings appear in this Code, they are presented for explanation purposes only unless specifically referred to in the text of this Code. The text governs over any diagram or drawing when any discrepancy exists. The provisions of this section do not extend to concept plans or site plans which are required and approved under this Code.
Sec. 14.1000 Severability
14-2
All sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this ordinance are severable, and if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is declare unconstitutional or otherwise invalid in any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not cause any remaining section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance to fail or become inoperative.
Sec. 14.1100 Zoning, Subdivision and Local Government Code
(a) Zoning Ordinance. For the purposes of development, reference to the City’s Zoning Ordinance shall refer to the following Articles:
(1)
Article 14.100 General Provisions
(2)
Article 14.200 Administrative Procedures
(3)
Article 14.400 Permissible Uses*
(4)
Article 14.500 Zoning District Development Standards
(5)
Article 14.1000 Planned Development Districts
(6)
Article 14.1100 Zoning-Related Applications
(7)
Article 14.300 Zoning District and Maps
(8)
Article 14.600 Definitions
(9)
Article 14.1500 Administration and Enforcement
(b) LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE. All references to the LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE in this Lancaster Development Code shall mean “as amended”.
14-3
ARTICLE 14.200. AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
Sec. 14.201 Sequence of Review
Where an applicant requests an Exception as provided herein from a provision of this ordinance in conjunction with an application for amendment of the Official Zoning Map, the Exception shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council at the same time that they consider the request for the zoning change.
Sec. 14.202 Initiation of Administrative Procedures
All platting, zoning and site plan requests to be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council, shall be initiated by filing an application with the City. All requests for building permits shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the City. The applications required by this section shall be on forms supplied by the City of Lancaster which shall be available in the offices of the City.
Sec. 14.203 Submittal and Filing
No application shall be deemed “filed” until such application is determined to be complete and the fee established in this ordinance or other ordinances of the City of Lancaster for processing the application has been paid.
Sec. 14.204 Authority to Initiate a Request
All platting, zoning and site plan requests, and/or requests to amend the Comprehensive Plan-or the Thoroughfare Plan may be initiated by the owner of the affected property or his/her authorized representative who files the required application and pays the appropriate fee for the request, or the City Council may direct the Director of Community Development to initiate such a request on behalf of the City.
Amendments to the text of this ordinance shall be initiated only by action of the City Council directing the Director of Community Development to initiate such a request on behalf of the City or by the Director of Community Development's own initiative.
Variances to be considered by the Board of Adjustment may be initiated by the owner of the affected property or his/her authorized representative or any aggrieved party who files the required application and pays the appropriate fee, or by any person aggrieved by the decision of an administrative officer with authority over any matter appealable to the Board of Adjustment, or by an officer, or appropriate Board of the City.
Sec. 14.205 Application Withdrawal
Any request for withdrawal of an application must be submitted in writing to the Director.
Application fees are not refundable except in cases in which the Director determines that an application was accepted in error, or the fee paid exceeded the amount due under the provision of this ordinance or the ordinances of the City of Lancaster, in which case the amount of the overpayment may be refunded to the applicant.
Sec. 14.206 Boards and Commissions—Appointment, Term, and Procedures
(a) Open Meetings. All meetings of any board or commission under this Code shall be open to the public.
(b) Keeping of Minutes. Each board or commission shall keep accurate minutes of each meeting which shall be forwarded to the City Secretary within ten (10) days following approval. Such board or commission shall keep an accurate record of the names of the members who are present and absent from their meetings. When public hearings are necessary or required, notice of the public
14-4
hearings and the conduct of the same will be in compliance with the requirements of the Local Government Code and this ordinance.
(c) Appointment. Each member of a board or commission shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(d) Attendance. In case of excessive absences, a board, commission or committee member or alternate shall be removed from office. Absences from three (3) consecutive meetings or a total of five (5) absences within a twelve-month period shall constitute excessive absences. This provision shall apply even if such meeting is subsequently canceled or postponed due to lack of a quorum.
Sec. 14.207 Conduct of Public Hearings
(a) Notice of Public Hearing
Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in district boundaries shall be sent to all owners of property within a distance of at least 200 feet from the boundaries of the subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Such notice shall be served by using the last known address as listed on the last approved City tax roll and depositing the notice postage paid in the United States mail.
In addition, notice of such hearing shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, and signs giving notice of a proposed zone change shall be placed on the subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
Notice of hearings on proposed changes in the text of the Zoning Ordinance shall be accomplished by one publication not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in the official newspaper of the City.
(b) Public Hearing Postponement, Recess, and Continuations
(1)
A public hearing for which notice has been given may be postponed by announcing the postponement at or after the time and place the hearing is scheduled to begin.
(2)
A public hearing may be recessed and continued any time after the hearing has commenced.
(3)
If a postponement or continuance of a public hearing is to a specific date and time no later than 60 days from the first or most recent hearing, the announcement of the postponement or continuance at the public hearing in which the application has been postponed or continued shall be sufficient notice and no additional notice is required.
(4)
Postponed or continued public hearing shall be presumed to be held in the same location, unless a different location for the hearing is announced at the time of the postponement or continuance.
(5)
In the event that any request or amendment is being considered, whether or not a public hearing is involved, and it is continued at the request of the applicant more than one (1) time, an additional fee shall be required to cover the reasonable costs to the City, including the cost of any additional advertising cost and the cost of the City’s consultants due to the postponement.
(6)
If the applicant is not present at a meeting where the request is being considered and the request cannot be considered, then an additional fee shall be required.
(c) Conduct of Public Hearing. Subject to the presiding officer's inherent authority to conduct meetings, the public hearing shall generally be conducted as follows:
(1)
Report by the City representative;
(2)
Open Public Hearing;
14-5
(3)
Presentation by the applicant;
(4)
Testimony and questions by the public;
(5)
Rebuttal by the applicant;
(6)
Closure of the public hearing.
Sec. 14.208 City Council
(a) Authority. The Council shall conduct a public hearing and make determinations on the following matters:
(1)
Text Amendments to this ordinance.
(2)
Zoning Changes and Map Amendments, including reclassification of the zoning designations on land, specific use permits, and planned developments.
(3)
Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan.
(4)
Amendments to the Thoroughfare Plan.
(5)
Amendments to the Open Space Plan.
(6)
Exceptions and appeals as may be set out in this ordinance.
(b) Joint Hearings. The City Council may hold a public hearing, after publishing the required notice, jointly and with any public hearing required to be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission, but the City Council shall not take action until it has received a final report from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(c) Council Hearing Notice. Before the fifteenth day before the date of the hearing by the City Council, notice of the time and place of the hearing must be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Lancaster.
(d) Council Approval or Denial. Following the closure of the public hearing, the Council may take the following actions:
(1)
Approval of an Item. The Council may approve the request or amendment either as requested, or in the form of a more restrictive district, and subject to such appropriate conditions as are allowed by law. However, when a proposed zoning request is heard by the City Council that has been denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a three-fourths (3/4) majority vote by the city council shall be required for approval.
(2)
Approval of any request for a text amendment to this ordinance or a zoning change and map amendment shall be granted only if the Council determines that the request or amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this ordinance. In the event the request or amendment concerns a text amendment to this ordinance or a zoning change and map amendment, the Council shall enact an ordinance amending this ordinance or amending the official Zoning Map, whichever is applicable.
(3)
Denial of an Item. The Council may deny the request or amendment with prejudice. If a request or amendment is denied with prejudice, a new application may be submitted for the same lot or tract of land, or any portion thereof, within one year only if the new request is for a more restrictive or less intense use or development. Unless the new proposal is more restrictive or less intense than the previously denied proposal, then no other application pertaining to a change of zoning and map amendment may be submitted on the same lot or tract of land, or any portion thereof, for a period of one (1) year from the date of its denial by the Council. If a request or amendment is denied by the Council without an indication of "with" or "without" prejudice, then the action shall be considered to be "denied with prejudice”.
14-6
(4)
Denial Without Prejudice. The Council may deny the request or amendment without prejudice, in which case an application for a change in zoning and map amendment other than that which was requested on the original application may be filed at the applicant's discretion.
(5)
Reapplication Due to Changed Conditions. A proposal to rezone a tract or parcel of land which has been previously rejected by the Council may be resubmitted within one year only if there is an actual change in conditions relating to zoning principles of the tract or parcel of land or the property surrounding it. In that event, the applicant must submit to the Director of Community Development, in writing, a resume describing such changed conditions. The Director shall investigate the property or cause such an investigation to be made and shall report to the Planning and Zoning Commission whether or not such changed conditions exist. Upon hearing this report, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall either grant or deny the request to refile the proposal for rezoning.
(e) Protest of Proposed Change in Zoning. Property owners of the effected property or adjacent to and within a radius of two hundred (200) feet of a property for which a change in zoning is being considered have the right to file a written protest against the request. The land area of this two hundred (200) feet radius includes streets, alleys and other public right-of-way.
Whenever such written protest is signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots or land included in such zoning change, or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and within the above mentioned two hundred (200) feet radius, such change in zoning shall require a favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the Council.
For purposes of determining representation on this written protest, the written protest of any one owner of land owned by two or more persons shall be presumed to be the protest of all owners.
Sec. 14.209 Planning and Zoning Commission
(a) Creation and Membership
(1)
Membership. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the City Council, and shall hold their office for a term of two (2) years on a rotating basis. The terms of office shall expire on the last day of July or until their successor has been appointed. In the event that a vacancy occurs on the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the expiration of a full term, the City Council shall appoint a new member to complete the unexpired term. Any member of the Commission may be reappointed by the City Council upon completion of a full term.
(2)
Residency. Each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be a resident of the City of Lancaster at the time of his/her appointment. A member of the Planning and Zoning Commission ceasing to reside in the City during his/her term of office shall immediately forfeit the office.
(3)
Removal. Any member of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be removed from office without cause by the City Council to be sufficient for removal of the member. If a vacancy should exist in the Planning and Zoning Commission membership due to removal from office, resignation, death, refusal or inability to serve, the City Council shall appoint a new member to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term.
(b) Powers and Duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(1)
To advise the City Council and make recommendations concerning adoption of, or amendments to, zoning regulations and the zoning map;
14-7
(2)
To advise the Council and make recommendations concerning adoption of, or amendments to the City's Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, and Open Space Plan and implementation thereof;
(3)
To oversee the City's regulations governing the platting and recording of subdivisions, including matters pertaining to the dedication of public facilities, and to advise the Council on matters pertaining to public improvements, traffic, utility extensions and the provision of public facilities and services, in order to implement the City's Comprehensive Plan;
(4)
To undertake such actions as are necessary to exercise its delegated powers, as indicated by adopted ordinance, including the granting of Exceptions;
(5)
To approve certain matters relating to platting and recording of subdivisions as dictated by the City's ordinances and this ordinance;
(6)
To select a Planning and Zoning Commission Chair;
(7)
To call public hearings to initiate amendments to this Code in accordance with State law; and
(8)
Other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or State law.
(c) Procedures.
(1)
Election of Officers. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman at the first meeting in August for a term of one (1) year. The Vice-Chairman is to preside in the absence of the Chairman. Both the Chairman and the Vice-chairman shall vote on every item unless prohibited by law. The Zoning Administrator shall serve as the Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2)
Public Hearing and Notice. Prior to making its report to the city council, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on each application. Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in district boundaries shall be sent to all owners of property, as indicated by the most recently approved tax roll, located within the area of application and within two hundred (200) feet of any property affected thereby, within not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the city tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice of hearings on proposed changes in the text of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the city, or a newspaper of general circulation in the city, before the 15th day before the date of the hearing before the city council. If the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that the proposed changes in the zoning regulations contained in the text of the comprehensive zoning ordinance will have a substantial impact on the development rights of property owners in the zoning districts being affected by the proposed changes, the commission may also require written notice to the property owners in the same manner as notice is given on proposed changes in district boundaries. If the commission does not so find, it may provide for notice of its public hearing by publication in the same manner as notice is given for the public hearing by the city council.
(3)
Meetings
A.
Open to the Public. All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be open to the public in accordance with State law. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Commission and shall be a public record. The City Manager or designee of the City
14-8
of Lancaster shall be the custodian and possessor of the records and minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
B.
Calling of Meetings. Meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be held as often as necessary to conduct the business coming before the Commission at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Commission may determine in accordance with State law and this Code.
C.
Quorum. Any three (3) members including the Chairman or Vice Chairman shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The affirmative vote of a majority of those attending any meeting at which there is a quorum present shall be necessary to pass any motion, recommendation or resolution of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
D.
Failure to Appear. Failure of the applicant for a zoning-related application, or his representative, to appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission for more than one (1) hearing without an approved delay shall constitute sufficient grounds for the Planning and Zoning Commission to terminate the application.
(d) Criteria for Granting Exceptions.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may make a recommendation to approve Exceptions as provided in this Code that are consistent with the general purpose and intent of the ordinance.
Exceptions are subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards to ensure that they are consistent with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance and the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
The City Council, pursuant to the powers conferred upon it by State law, the ordinances of the City, and this Article may grant Exceptions herein provided to the provisions of this ordinance upon finding that:
(1)
Such Exception will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent property in the same district; and
(2)
Such Exception will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of the public; and
(3)
Such Exception will not be contrary to the public interest; and
(4)
Such Exception will not authorize the operation of a use other than those uses specifically authorized for the district in which the property for which the Exception is sought is located, except as provided elsewhere in this ordinance; and
(5)
Such Exception will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this ordinance; and
(6)
Such Exception will not alter the essential character of the district in which is located the property for which the Exception is sought; and
(7)
Such Exception will not substantially weaken the general purposes of the zoning regulations established for the district in which the property is located; and
(8)
Such Exception is within the spirit and intent of the City’s Comprehensive plan and other policies.
14-9
Sec. 14.210 Board of Adjustment
(a) Organization.
(1)
Membership. The Board shall consist of five (5) citizens each to be appointed or re-appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the city council for staggered terms of two (2) years respectively. Each member of the Board shall be removable for just cause by city council upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
(2)
The city council may appoint up to four (4) alternate members of the Board who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city manager. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city manager. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and shall be subject to removal as regular members
(3)
The Director. The Director, or his authorized representative, shall act as secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and shall set up and maintain a separate file for each application for appeal and Variance received and shall record therein the names and addresses of all persons, firms and corporations to whom notices are mailed, including the date of mailing and further keep a record of all notices published as required herein. All records and files herein provided for shall be permanent and official files and records of the City.
(b) Procedures.
(1)
Adopting Procedural Rules. The Board of Adjustment, by majority vote, shall adopt such procedural rules as are necessary to execute its duties.
(2)
Election of Officers. The Board of Adjustment shall annually select one of its members to be the Chairman, and the Vice Chairman to act in the absence of the Chairman.
(3)
Quorum. All cases before the Board of Adjustment must be heard by at least four members.
(4)
Calling Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson, and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such Chairperson, or in his/her absence the acting chairperson, shall administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses.
(5)
Meetings Open to the Public. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public as provided by State law.
(6)
Keeping of Minutes. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
The Secretary of the Board shall forthwith notify in writing the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Building Official of each decision, interpretation and Variance granted under the provisions of this ordinance.
14-10
(c) Powers and Duties. When in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the following Variances to the regulations herein established:
(1)
Subpoena witnesses, etc. The Board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and punish for contempt and may require the production of documents under such regulations as it may establish.
(2)
Appeal of an Administrative Decision. The Board shall consider an appeal from any person aggrieved by a decision of any administrative officer with authority over any matter regulated by this ordinance or by any officer, department, Board or division of the City affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be received within fifteen (15) calendar days after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with the officer whose decision is being appealed and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds of the appeal and the City’s required fee.
(3)
The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board, all papers constituting the record from which the action appealed was taken.
(4)
An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action which has been appealed, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken, certifies to the Board that a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
(5)
In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed unless there is a restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction on application, and notice is given to the officer whose decision is the subject of appeal.
(6)
Odd Shaped Parcels. The Board may permit such variances of the height, yard, area, coverage and parking regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land which differs from other parcels in the district by being of such restricted area, shape, or slope that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification as provided by State law.
(7)
Non-Conforming Use. The Board may not permit the expansion or enlargement of a building occupied by a non-conforming use on the lot or tract occupied by such building.
(8)
Change of Non-Conforming Use. The Board may not authorize a change of use from one non-conforming use to another non-conforming use.
(9)
Termination of nonconforming uses and structures. Upon request by city council or upon its own initiative, the Board of adjustment may establish a termination date for a nonconforming use. Such termination date shall provide that the owner's actual investment in the structure made legally prior to the use became nonconforming, can be amortized within a definite time period. In connection with establishing a reasonable time period, the Board may consider the amount of the investment realized to date, and the amount remaining, if any, to be recovered during the amortization period, the life expectancy of the investment, the existence or nonexistence of lease obligations, removal costs directly attributable to the establishment of a termination date, and other costs and expenses directly attributable to the establishment of a termination date. Nonconformity as to parking shall not be subject to termination under this section. The procedure for termination of a nonconforming use shall be as established by the rules and regulations of the Board and shall include procedures for the giving of notice, the holding of a public hearing, and the rendition and transmittal of a decision to the property owner.
14-11
(10)
Violation of Other Ordinances. The Board is not authorized to permit or approve any request that would be in violation of any other ordinances or City regulations that would prohibit such improvement or construction to be made.
(d) Criteria for Granting Variances. The City’s Board of Adjustment, pursuant to the powers conferred upon it by State law, the ordinances of the City, and this Article may grant Variances to the provisions of this ordinance upon finding that:
(1)
Due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship.
(2)
The Variance or request for relief is not a self-created hardship.
(3)
Such Variance or request for relief will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent property in the same district; and
(4)
Such Variance or request for relief will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of the public; and
(5)
Such Variance or request for relief will not be contrary to the public interest; and
(6)
Such Variance or request for relief will not authorize the operation of a use other than those uses specifically authorized for the district in which the property for which the Variance is sought is located, except as provided in Section 10.3 above; and
(7)
Such Variance or request for relief will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this ordinance; and
(8)
Such Variance or request for relief will not alter the essential character of the district in which is located the property for which the Variance is sought; and
(9)
Such Variance or request for relief will not substantially weaken the general purposes of the zoning regulations established for the district in which the property is located; and
(10)
The plight of the owner of the property for which the Variance or Exception is sought is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, including but not limited to the area, shape or slope, and the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the property and are not merely financial, and are not due to or the result of general conditions in the district in which the property is located.
(e) Actions of the Board
(1)
In exercising its powers, the Board, may, in conformity with the provisions of the Local Government Code, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or determination appealed from, and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken including the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant.
(2)
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to revise any order, requirements, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to affect any Variance in the ordinance.
(3)
Any Variance authorized by the Board, either under the provisions of this ordinance or under the authority granted to the Board under the statutes of the State, shall allow for the issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy or other relief as the case may be for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of the favorable action on the part of the Board, unless the Board in its minutes shall, at the same time, grant a longer period and the effected property owner complies with all other applicable ordinances.
(4)
If a building permit or certificate of occupancy has not been applied for or issued within a ninety (90) day period or as the Board may specifically grant, the Order granting relief
14-12
(5)
Such termination and waiver shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal to the Board in accordance with the rules, and regulations regarding appeals.
(f) Appeals on Same Matter. No appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall be allowed concerning the same matter prior to the expiration of six (6) months from a ruling of the Board on any appeal to such body unless other rulings on the same or similar subject matter have, within such six-month period, been altered or changed by ruling of the Board, in which case such change of circumstances shall permit the allowance of an appeal, but shall in no way have force in law to compel the Board, after a hearing, to grant such subsequent appeal, but such appeal shall be considered on its merits as in all other cases.
(g) Effective Date. A decision on a Variance shall be effective upon decision by the Board.
(h) Appeal from Board.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment or any officer, department, or Board of the municipality pursuant to this section, may present to a court of competent jurisdiction, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of such illegality in accordance with State law.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision complained of in the office of the City Secretary and not thereafter.
No appeal from a Board of Adjustment decision under its jurisdiction, as set out in the Zoning Ordinance of the City, shall be heard by the City Council.
Sec. 14.211 Sign Control Board
(a) Creation. There is hereby established a Sign Control Board consisting of five (5) members. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as the Sign Control Board.
(b) Powers and duties. The Sign Control Board shall have the following powers and perform the following duties:
(1) Considerations. In considering the request for exception to requirements of this article, the Sign Control Board shall consider, but not limited to:
A.
the degree of Exception,
B.
the reasons for Exceptions requested,
C.
the location of Exceptions requested,
D.
the duration of requested Exception,
E.
the effect on public safety,
F.
protection of neighborhood property,
G.
the degree of hardship or injustice involved, and
H.
the effect of the Exception on the general plan for signing within the city.
(2) Considerations for Area or Height Exceptions. In considering an Exception from the area or height limitations of this article, the Sign Control Board shall consider the proximity of nonconforming existing signs to the location of the requested Exception and the area and height of such nonconforming signs.
14-13
(3) Decisions.
A.
The Sign Control Board may grant the Exception requested, grant an Exception of a lesser nature than requested, or deny an Exception request.
B.
All actions on Exception requests may be appealed within ten (10) days to City Council. Decisions of the Board shall become final unless reversed or modified by the City Council at the second regular City Council meeting following the Sign Control Board meeting at which formal action was taken by the Board. In reviewing the action of the Board, or Exception requests, the council shall consider the records made at the hearing before the Sign Control Board.
(4) Study and Review.
A.
The Sign Control Board shall conduct continuing studies of sign ordinances in neighboring municipalities as well as other cities where such study will assist in upgrading the function of signing within the City of Lancaster and make recommendations to the City Council where appropriate.
B.
Continuing Review of Non-Conforming Signs and Previous Exceptions. The Sign Control Board will conduct a continual review of all nonconforming signs and Exceptions granted and determine their desirability and effects upon the neighborhood and city and make recommendations to the City Council where appropriate.
C.
The Sign Control Board will evaluate new signing techniques as such are developed and recommend to the City Council their benefits and disadvantages in the City of Lancaster.
D.
The Sign Control Board shall conduct studies, prepare opinions and general plans as requested by the City Council.
(5) Discuss Signage Plans. The Sign Control Board may discuss the planning of signage in new or existing developments upon the request of the developer.
(6) Other Duties. The Sign Control Board shall perform any duties specified elsewhere in this article, including, from time to time, recommendations to City Council for changes or amendments to this article.
Sec. 14.212 Historic Landmark Preservation Committee (HLPC)
(a) Organization.
(1)
Created. There is hereby created the Lancaster Historic Landmark Preservation Committee, under the authority granted to municipalities in Section 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, hereafter referred to as the or as the HLPC.
(2)
Membership. The HLPC shall consist of five (5) members and one (1) alternate to be appointed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and confirmed by the City Council. Of the five (5) members of the HLPC, at least three (3) shall have experience and/or expertise in the following fields: architecture, planning, landscape architecture, building construction or real estate appraisal. At least one member shall be a member of the Lancaster Historical Society. At least one member shall be the owner of a designated historic landmark or property within an historic district. All HLPC members shall be residents of the city and shall have a demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation practices and principles.
(3)
Terms of Office. HLPC members shall serve for terms of two (2) years with three (3) members' terms expiring in odd numbered years and two (2) members' terms expiring in even numbered years. The alternate will serve a one (1) year term. 14-14
(4)
Officers. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the HLPC shall be elected annually following appointment of new members, by and from the members of the HLPC.
(5)
Meetings. The HLPC shall meet at least monthly, if business is at hand. Special meetings may be called any time by the Chairperson, the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or on the written request of any two (2) HLPC members. All meetings shall be held in conformance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(6)
Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three (3) members. Issues shall be decided by the vote of a simple majority of the members present.
(7)
Meeting Minutes. Minutes of each meeting shall be filed in the office of the Historic Preservation Officer (HPO).
(b) Historic Landmark Preservation Committee (HLPC) Powers and Duties.
(1)
Rules and Procedures. Prepare rules and procedures as necessary to carry out the business of the HLPC. Rules and procedures shall be filed in the office of the Historic Preservation Officer (HPO).
(2)
Criteria for Designation. Adopt criteria for the designation of historic, architectural and cultural landmarks and the delineation of historic districts, which shall be recommended to the Planning and Zoning Commission for subsequent submittal to the City Council.
(3)
Inventory Significant Properties. Conduct surveys and maintain an inventory of significant historic, architectural, archeological and cultural landmarks and all properties located in historic districts within the City.
(4)
Recommendation to Planning and Zoning Commission. Recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission for subsequent submission to the City Council the conferral of recognition to the owners of designated historic landmarks or properties within designated historic districts by means of certificates, plaques or markers.
(5)
Public Awareness. Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and architectural preservation by developing and participating in public education programs.
(6)
Designation. Recommend the designation of sites, buildings, structures, objects or areas as landmarks and historic districts.
(7)
Funding Recommendations. Make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission for subsequent submission to the City Council concerning the utilization of funds and funding methods such as tax deferments, grants, fees, donations or other means to promote the preservation and vitality of landmarks and historic districts within the City.
(8)
Certificates of Appropriateness (CA). Review and make recommendations on applications for Certificates of Appropriateness and Certificates of Economic Hardship.
(9)
Ad Hoc Committees. Create ad-hoc committees from among its membership and delegate to these Committees responsibilities to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.
(10)
Minutes. Maintain written minutes which record all actions taken by the HLPC and the reasons for taking such actions.
(11)
Reports. Prepare and submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission and for subsequent submission to the City Council periodic or special reports summarizing the status of landmarks and historic districts and the HLPC’s work and accomplishments.
(12)
Design Guidelines. Prepare specific design guidelines for the review of landmarks and historic districts.
(13)
Acquisition of Structures. Recommend the acquisition of landmark structures by the City where their preservation is essential to the purpose of this act and where private preservation is not feasible.
14-15
(14)
Other Recommendations. Recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission for subsequent submission to the City Council acceptance of donations of preservation easements and development rights as well as any other gift of value for the purpose of historic preservation.
(c) Historic Preservation Officer (HPO). The City Manager shall designate a staff member as the Historic Preservation Officer. The Historic Preservation Officer shall administer this ordinance and advise the HLPC on related matters.
(d) Historic Landmarks: Definition and Designation.
(1)
Definition. An historic landmark is defined as an individual site, building, object or structure, designated by ordinance of the City Council, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration and/or preservation for its historic, cultural and/or architectural significance to the City of Lancaster.
(2)
Designation. An historic landmark shall be designated as follows:
A. Nomination. Nomination for historic landmark designation shall be made to the HLPC on forms provided by the HLPC. The nomination may be submitted by the owner of record of the nominated property, the HLPC or a member of the HLPC, the City Council, the Lancaster Historical Society, the Dallas County Historical Commission or other recognized historic preservation organization. The owner of record shall be notified at the time a property is nominated for designation.
Designated Texas Historic Landmarks, archeological sites and properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places shall be automatically eligible for designation as historic landmarks upon processing of a nomination application.
The following criteria shall be considered when determining whether a nominated property is eligible for consideration:
1.
Significance in history, architecture, archeology and/or culture;
2.
Association with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, regional, state or national history;
3.
Association with the lives of persons significant in our past;
4.
Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction;
5.
Representative work of a master designer, builder or craftsman; and/or
6.
An established and familiar visual feature of the City.
B. HLPC Recommendation. The HLPC shall, within forty-five (45) days from the receipt of an administratively complete nomination, determine that the nomination meets, or fails to meet the criteria for designation as a landmark.
In reviewing the application, the HLPC should solicit and receive input from the owners of the nominated property, interested parties and technical experts. Testimony or documentary evidence received by the HLPC may be included in the report to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In making this determination, the HLPC may specify that all, some or none of the building(s), site(s) or feature(s) specified in the nomination are suitable or not suitable for landmark designation. The HLPC shall forward a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The recommendation shall be accompanied by a report that:
1.
Explains, compares and/or contrasts the significance of the nominated landmark as it relates to the criteria;
14-16
2.
Explains, verifies and/or details the integrity, or authenticity of a nominated landmark's historic identity noting claims or conjecture that may be reasonable but that cannot be verified;
3.
Identifies significant exterior architectural features of the nominated landmark that should be protected;
4.
Identifies the types of construction, alteration, demolition and removal, other than those requiring a building permit that should be reviewed for a Certificate of Appropriateness;
5.
Describes the relationship of the nominated landmark to the on-going effort of the HLPC to identify and nominate all potential properties that meet the criteria for designation;
6.
Recommends appropriate permitted uses, special uses, height and area regulations, minimum dwelling size, floor area, sign regulations and parking regulations when necessary or appropriate to the preservation of the nominated landmark; and
7.
Provides a map and/or legal description showing the location of the nominated landmark.
C. Notification of HLPC Recommendation. A notice of determination shall be mailed to the owner of record of the nominated landmark within seven (7) days of the recommendation.
D. Planning and Zoning Commission Public Hearing. Upon receipt of the report from the HLPC, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the nominated landmark within thirty (30) days following the receipt of the report. Notice of the public hearing shall be placed in the official newspaper of the City at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall also be sent by regular mail to the owners of record of the properties immediately abutting the nominated landmark or within 200 feet of the nominated landmark.
E. Commission Recommendation to Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the City Council. The findings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be based on the same criteria listed in this section, the report from the HLPC and any input received at the public hearing. In making its recommendation the Planning and Zoning Commission may designate that all, some or none of the building(s), site(s) or feature(s) are suitable or not suitable for landmark designation. A notice of determination shall be mailed to the owner of record of the nominated landmark within seven (7) days of the recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
F. Council Decision. The City Council may:
1.
Designate by ordinance landmark status for all, or some of the building(s), site(s) or feature(s) specified or,
2.
Remand the nomination to the Planning and Zoning Commission or HLPC for additional consideration or,
3.
Reject the nomination of the landmark in its entirety.
G. City Council Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a recommendation the Council shall conduct a public hearing on the nominated landmark within forty-five (45) days. Notice of the public hearing shall be placed in the official newspaper of the City at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing. Notice of the public hearing 14-17
shall also be sent by regular mail to the owners of record and properties immediately abutting the nominated landmark or within 200 feet of the nominated landmark.
H. Recording of Designation. Upon designation of a site, building, object or structure as an historic landmark, the City Council shall cause the designation to be recorded in the Official Public Records of Real Property of Dallas County and the Dallas County Appraisal District.
(e) Historic Districts: Definition and Designation.
(1)
Definition. An historic district is an area of the city designated by ordinance of the City Council which possesses within definable geographic boundaries a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings or structures united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.
(2)
Designation. An historic district shall be designated as follows:
A. Nomination. Nomination for historic district designation shall be made to the HLPC on forms provided by the HLPC. The nomination may be submitted by one or more owners of record of properties within the nominated district, the HLPC or a member of the HLPC, the City Council, the Lancaster Historical Society, the Dallas County Historical Commission or other recognized historic preservation organization. The owners of record shall be notified at the time a district is nominated for designation.
Historic Districts listed in the National Register of Historic Places shall be automatically eligible for designation as historic landmarks upon processing of a nomination application.
The following criteria shall be considered when determining whether a nominated area is eligible for consideration:
1.
Significance in history, architecture, archeology and/or culture;
2.
Association with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, regional, state or national history;
3.
Association with the lives of persons significant in our past;
4.
Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction; and/or
5.
Representative work of a master designer, builder or craftsman.
B Process. The Process for designating historic districts shall be the same as for designating Historic Landmarks in 13.4.B above. However, the HLPC shall prepare a report that:
1.
Explains, compares and/or contrasts the significance of the nominated district as it relates to the criteria; and
2.
Identifies significant architectural features of the structures within the nominated district that should be protected; and,
3.
Identifies the types of alterations and demolitions that should be reviewed for Certificate of Appropriateness Review; and,
4.
d Describes the relationship of the nominated district to the ongoing effort of the HLPC to identify and nominate all potential areas that meet the criteria for designation; and,
5.
Provides a map and legal description showing the location and boundaries of the nominated district.
14-18
C. Upon designation of an area as an historic district, the City Council shall cause the designation to be recorded in the Official Public Records of Real Property of Dallas County and the Dallas County Appraisal District.
D. The designation of an historic district shall be an official overlay zoning district on the zoning map of the City of Lancaster. Such designation shall be identified on the zoning map with the letters "HP" as a prefix.
(f) Designated Districts and Landmarks Listed
(1) Historic Landmarks. Sites, buildings, objects and structures designated as Historic Landmarks in the City of Lancaster: are set forth in Appendix "A," which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
(2) Historic Districts. Areas designated as Historic Districts within the City of Lancaster are set forth in Appendix "B," which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
Sec. 14.213 Tree Advisory Board
(a) Organization. The City Council shall by ordinance or resolution create the Tree Advisory Board, which shall be the Park and Recreation Advisory Board. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall remain the approval authority relating to appeals following any decision under this section.
(b) Responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Advisory Board to consider appeals to decisions of the City staff interpretation of Article 14.900 et. seq. and to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update periodically, a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan shall be presented to the Council and when adopted shall represent the comprehensive tree plan for the City.
Sec. 14.214 Procedure in Planning Cases — Additional Information Submitted
New matters of evidence not presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission, but which may reasonably have affected their recommendation, should not be heard or considered by the Council in its public hearings related to amendments to the zoning ordinance and maps to the City.
In the event new evidence develops between the date of the hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the hearing of the Council on any zoning change, or if for any other valid reason a person wishes to present evidence to the Council which had not been presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Council should refer the case back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further hearings to consider the new evidence.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit anyone from speaking in the public hearing related to changes in zoning.
Sec. 14.215 Computation of Time
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday as observed by the City of Lancaster, that day shall be excluded. Whenever a person has the right, or is required to perform some act within the prescribed period after the service of a notice or other paper upon him, and the notice or paper is served by mail, three calendar days shall be added to the prescribed time unless otherwise specifically provided.
Sec. 14.216 Fees
Fees for all applications and appeals referred to in this ordinance shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
14-19
Sec. 14.217 Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance
(a) Certificates of Occupancy Shall be Required for Any of the Following:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered.
(2) Change in zoning classification or building use and occupancy classification of an existing building or space used for commercial purposes to a use of a different classification.
(3) Occupancy and use of vacant land, except agricultural use.
(4) Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
(5) Any change in tenancy of a structure or space used for commercial purposes.
(6) Any change in ownership of any commercial building or structure.
(b) Procedure for Application
Written application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made to the Building Official prior to the change in zoning classification, occupancy classification, or occupancy of any land, structure, or space; for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered; and for any change in ownership or tenancy of a structure, space, or building used for commercial purposes. Said certificate shall be issued after the land, space or structure has been inspected and found to be in compliance with all the applicable laws of the City of Lancaster.
(c) Contents.
Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of the building and fire laws and ordinances. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official or his agent and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
14-20
ARTICLE 14.300 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
Sec. 14.301 Official Zoning Map
(a) The City of Lancaster is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. The zones, or districts, hereby established are and shall be known and cited as:
Zoning Districts
ABBREVIATED DESIGNATION ZONING DISTRICT NAME
"AO"
Agricultural Open
"SF-E"
Single Family Estate
“SF-4”
Single Family Residential
“SF-5”
Single Family Residential
“SF-6”
Single Family Residential
“SF-6”
“ZL-7”
Zero Lot Line Single Family Residential
“2F-6”
Two-Family (or Duplex) Residential
“SFA-16”
Single Family Attached Residential
“TH-16”
Town House Residential
“MH”
Mobile Home Residential
“MF-16”
Multi-Family Residential District
“NS”
Neighborhood Service
“R”
Retail
“CH”
Commercial Highway
“CS”
Commercial Service
“TC”
Town Center District (Reserved)
“ORT”
Office Research Technology
“LI”
Light Industrial
“MI”
Medium Industrial
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
“PD”
Planned Development
“HPO”
Historic Preservation Overlay
“NPO”
Neighborhood Preservation Overlay
SEE VOLUME II
14-21
(b) The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Secretary, under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map
referred to in ARTICLE III of the Zoning Ordinance,
Ordinance No. 13-84, as amended, of the City of Lancaster, Texas"
together with the date of adoption of this ordinance.”
(c) When changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map by the City Secretary promptly after the amendment has been approved by City Council, and the change shall note the ordinance number and date that the change was approved.
(d) No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance.
(e) The original reproducible tracing of the Official Zoning Map shall be located in the Office of the Director of Community Development and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, building and other structures in the City of Lancaster.
(f) City Council may, by ordinance, adopt a new Official Zoning Map should the original reproducible tracing of the Official Zoning Map be damaged, destroyed, lost or become ambiguous because of the nature or number of changes and additions. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no other correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Secretary, under the following words:
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of Map being replaced) as a part of the Lancaster Development Code of the City of Lancaster, Texas."
(g) Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
14-22
Sec. 14.302 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
(a) Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) The district boundary lines shown on the zoning district map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines or extensions thereof.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines of such streets, highways or alleys.
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines.
(4) Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits.
(5) Boundaries indicated as following railroad or utility lines shall be construed to be the centerline of the right-of-way or, if no centerline is established, the boundary shall be interpreted to be midway between the right-of-way lines.
(6) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, drainageways or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(7) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, or whenever a street or alley area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or way, and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
(8) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections A through C above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
(9) Where physical features of the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning district map, or if there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections A through J, or the zoning of property is invalidated by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the property shall be considered as classified AO, Agricultural Open District, temporarily.
Sec. 14.303 Regulations Applicable to all Districts.
The following regulations shall apply to all zoning districts listed in this Article and further defined in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses and Article 14.500. District Development Standards.
(1) No land or building shall be used or intended for any use other than those permitted in the district wherein such land or building is located.
(2) No building shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged, structurally altered, or moved in such manner as to evade conformity with height, bulk, yard, lot area, use, and other regulations for the district wherein such building is located.
(3) No yard provided adjacent to a building for the purpose of complying with provisions of this zoning code shall be considered as providing any part of a yard for another building on the same lot or on an adjacent lot.
(4) No street or walkway shall serve as any part of a required yard or minimum lot area although street rights of way and open space may be used in determining allowable units per acre in residential subdivisions.
14-23
Sec. 14.304 Listing of Approved Planned Developments.
Planned Developments that have been approved and appear on the zoning maps are referenced by a Planned Development Number (PD #) and the zoning district classification and/or uses authorized by the particular zoning case. The listing of approved Planned Developments will be documented in Appendix A of this Code.
Sec. 14.305 Listing of Approved Specific Use Permits
Specific Use Permits that have been approved shall be referenced by a Specific Use Number (SUP #) and the type of use authorized by those permits. The listing of approved Specific Use Permits will be documented in Appendix B of this Code.
Sec. 14.306 Zoning upon Annexation
(a) Annexed Lands. All territory hereinafter annexed to the City of Lancaster shall be temporarily classified as AO, agricultural open district, until permanent zoning is established by the city council of the City of Lancaster. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations.
(b) In an area temporarily classified as AO, agricultural open district:
(1) No person shall erect, construct or proceed or continue with the erection or construction of any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the City of Lancaster without first applying for and obtaining a building permit or certificate of occupancy from the building official or the city council as may be required.
(2) No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the building official other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building permitted in the AO, agricultural open district, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than the AO, Agricultural Open District, by the city council in the manner prescribed by law except as provided in subsection 6.2.C following.
(3) An application for a permit for any other use than that specified in paragraph B above shall be made to the building official of the City of Lancaster and by him referred to the planning and zoning commission for consideration and recommendation to the city council and the action and recommendation of each body concerning any such permit shall take into consideration the appropriate land use for the area. The city council, after receiving and reviewing the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission may by majority vote authorize the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy or may disapprove the application.
14-24
ARTICLE 14.400. PERMISSIBLE USES
Sec. 14.401 Land Use Schedule
(a) Use of Land and Buildings. Buildings, structures and land shall be used only in accordance with the uses permitted in the following "Land Use Schedule," subject to all other applicable requirements of this ordinance including Article 14.500. Zoning District Development Standards.
(1) The symbol "P" shall mean that the use is permitted as a principal use in that zoning district by right.
(2) The symbol "S" shall mean that the principal use is permitted in that zoning district only after first obtaining a "Specific Use Permit" as set forth in this Article.
(3) The Symbol "A" shall mean that this use is specifically permitted as an accessory use to a main use in the district. This does not exclude other land uses which are generally considered ancillary to the primary use.
(4) The Symbol “+” shall mean that this use is conditional and has special standards or requirements listed in this section, which it must meet in order to be allowed.
(5) A blank square shall mean that the use is not allowed in that zoning district as a principal use.
ORDINANCE NUMBER 2006-08-29
Due to the fact that the City is in the process of updating the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and development standards for the I-35 Corridor this ordinance requires all new developments within 1000 lineal feet of I-35, from IH-20 to the Dallas County Line to require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). See Exhibit A.
14-25
This page left blank intentionally.
14-26
Sec. 14.402 Use Standards
Conditions. The following uses as provided by this Code shall meet the standards established in this section, which are as follows:
(a) Rural and Animal-Related
(1) Animal Clinic for Small Animals
A.
A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.
B.
Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only incidental to such clinic use.
(2) Horse Corral or Stable (Commercial).
A. Ground accumulations of manure shall be collected and properly disposed of so as not to create offensive odors, fly breeding, or in any way pose a health hazard or nuisance to human beings and animals; and
B. Fences or pens, corrals or similar enclosures shall be of sufficient height and strength to properly retain the animal, and be properly maintained.
C. Farm animals shall be regulated by Animal Control Ordinance as to acreage and how close they come to residences.
(b) Residential and Lodging Use Conditions:
(1) Accessory Building (Accessory to Residential Use)
A. The accessory building shall be accessory to a residential use and located on the same lot.
B. In all residential districts, one (1) detached garage shall be allowed provided that:
1.
It does not exceed 900 square feet in area;
2.
It is located on the same lot as the residential use;
3.
If located partially or totally in front of the rear façade of the main structure, the exterior cladding must contain the same materials, as found on the main structure and is generally in the same proportion; and
4.
Detached garages shall not exceed the height limit in the district.
C. In SF-E, no more than two (2) accessory buildings shall be allowed totaling up to 600 square feet (each) in area, and 15 feet or less in height.
D. In SF-4, SF-5, SF-6, no more than two (2) accessory buildings shall be allowed which are up to 225 square feet (each) in area and 15 feet or less in height. (Greenhouses are exempt from the materials requirement.)
E. In 2F, no more than two (2) accessory buildings shall be allowed which is up to 100 square feet (each) in area and 10 feet or less in height. (Greenhouses are exempt from the materials requirement.)
F. These standards shall not apply to residential buildings in AO Districts where such building is associated with a residential or agricultural use.
G. See below for “portable building” standards which include prefabricated storage sheds.
(2) Residential Portable and Accessory Building Setbacks.
A. Portable Buildings 0-160 s.f. and up to 10 ft. in Height:
1.
Rear Setback: 3 ft.
14-27
2.
Side Setback: 3 ft.
3.
Separation from other structures: 3 ft.
B. Accessory Buildings 121-225 s.f. and up to 15 ft in Height
1.
Rear Setback: 3 ft.
2.
Side Setback: Required Zoning District Setback.
3.
Separation from other structures: 6 ft.
C. Detached Garages 226-900 s.f. and up to 15 ft. in Height
1.
Rear Setback: With Alley —20 ft. with garage doors facing alley, 3 ft. without garage doors facing alley, Without Alley — 10 ft.
2.
Side Setback: Required Zoning District Setback.
3.
Separation from other structures: 10 ft.
(3) Bed and Breakfast Operation
A.
A “bed and breakfast” must be located on an owner-occupied single family lot, or on an immediately adjacent lot.
B.
One (1) parking space per bedroom to be rented shall be provided above the single family parking requirement
C.
No outside advertising shall be allowed on the lot unless located in a non-residential zoning district or permitted by an SUP.
D.
A permanent wired smoke alarm system meeting all City codes shall be installed.
E.
The premises shall pass a fire code inspection before opening and on an annual basis thereafter.
F.
All applicable hotel/motel taxes shall be paid.
G.
The maximum length of stay is limited to 14 consecutive days in any 30 day period.
H.
A Certificate of Occupancy permit shall be obtained prior to occupancy.
(4) Carport (Residential)
A.
In residential districts, Carports must be open on at least two (2) sides and be located at least 20 feet behind the corner of the front façade or meet the garage setback adjacent to an alley. It must also meet the minimum required side yard setbacks for a detached garage
B.
Carports which are visible from a public street must be constructed of materials matching those of the primary residential structure.
C.
Carports not meeting these standards must obtain an SUP.
D.
Porte-cocheres are not considered carports, and are allowed, provided that they are attached and integral with the design of the house.
(5) Duplex
A.
Limited to two (2) families.
B.
The dwelling must be permanently attached to a concrete foundation.
C.
The primary roof pitch must be at least 4 in 12 inches.
D.
The duplex must have 1-hour fire wall separating the units.
14-28
(6) Guest Quarters/Secondary Living Unit
A.
Guest quarters or secondary living unit may be allowed on a property in a residential or commercial zoning district provided that it is ancillary to the primary use and that only one such facility is provided.
B.
The area of such quarters shall not exceed 900 s.f. or 50% of the main structure, which ever is less. However, in the AO District, such quarters may be up to 1,200 s.f. in size.
C.
No such use may be sold or conveyed separately without meeting the requirements of the zoning district and the Subdivision Regulations.
(7) Home Occupation
A.
Incidental to Primary use. The use must clearly be incidental and secondary to the primary use of the property as a residence.
B.
Employees. No more than two (2) people outside the family may be employed in the home occupation.
C.
Exterior Indication. There shall be no exterior display, exterior storage of materials, and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building.
D.
Traffic. No more traffic shall be generated by such home occupation than would normally be expected in the neighborhood.
E.
Parking. In addition to the off-street parking required for the residence, adequate additional off-street parking shall be provided for the vehicles of each employee and the maximum number of users the home occupation may attract, one (1) additional parking space at the rest of the house shall be provided.
F.
Nuisance. No nuisance, offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or electrical disturbance shall be generated.
G.
Excluded Uses. A home occupation may not be interpreted to include the following: facilities for repair of motor vehicles, small motors, daycare center, or uses which utilize flammable or hazardous materials.
(8) Portable Building - Residential
A.
On residentially zoned properties one (1) portable building shall be allowed as an accessory to a residential use on the same lot except for multi-family districts, which shall not contain portable buildings.
B.
Such building shall not exceed 160 square feet in floor area or 10 feet in height. In 2F, such building shall be limited to 100 square feet in area.
(9) Single Family Dwelling (Attached, Detached, Zero Lot Line)
A.
The dwelling must be permanently attached to a permanent concrete or pier and beam foundation.
B.
The primary roof pitch must be at least four (4) in 12 inches.
(10) Townhouse. In retail districts, townhouses must be part of an integrated master plan with retail development, and include an attractive pedestrian environment.
(11) Urban Residential
A.
Urban residential includes residential development which at least partly face streets, public sidewalks, or common open space, or which are located above retail, office or service uses.
14-29
B.
Ground floor urban residential should have direct access to a sidewalk via a stoop or landing, and a majority of parking should be located within a structure.
EXAMPLES OF URBAN RESIDENTIAL. LEGACY TOWN CENTER AND CELEBRATION
(c) Institutional and Community Service Use Conditions
(1) Assisted Living Facility Class A and Class B. See “Group or Community Home” below.
(2) Church/House of Worship
A.
A building used for non-profit purposes by a recognized and legally established sect solely for the purpose of worship.
B.
Significant accessory uses such as retail, restaurants, schools, coffee houses, day care centers, bingo parlors and halls may only be allowed in a zoning district that allows such uses.
(3) Convalescent Care Facility/Nursing Home. A facility that provides nursing services and custodial care on a 24-hour basis for three (3) or more unrelated individuals who for reasons of illness, physical infirmity, or advanced age, require such services.
(4) Daycare
A.
Daycare is a facility that:
1.
Is licensed by the State;
2.
Provides care for six (6) or more children or adults who do not reside in the facility, who are present primarily during daytime hours, and who do not regularly stay over night; and
3.
May provide some instruction.
B.
Adequate provision for pick-up and drop-off shall be provided, as determined by the City Engineer.
(5) Group or Community Home
A. A home for disabled persons whose ability to care for himself, perform manual tasks, learn, work, walk, see, hear, speak or breath is substantially limited because the person has an orthopedic, visual, speech, or hearing impairment, Alzheimer’s disease, pre-senile dementia, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, Muscular Dystrophy, Multiple Sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, autism, or emotional illness. It may also include rehabilitation for such disabilities.
B. The facility must be a community-based residential home operated by:
14-30
1.
The Texas Department of Mental Health and Metal Retardation (MHMR);
2.
A community center organized under Subchapter A, Chapter 534, Health and Safety Code, that provides services to persons with disabilities;
3.
An entity subject to the Texas Non-Profit Corporation Act; or
4.
An entity certified by the Texas Department of Human Services as a provider under the medical assistance program service persons in intermediate care facilities for persons with mental retardation; or
5.
An entity operating an assisted living facility licensed under Chapter 247, Health and Safety Code.
C. When the facility is located within a single-family or duplex residential zoning district,
1.
The exterior structure must retain compatibility with the surrounding residential dwellings, and
2.
Not more than six (6) persons with disabilities and two (2) supervisors may reside in the facility at the same time. The limitation on the number of persons with disabilities applies regardless of the legal relationship of those persons to one another.
D.
A community or group home may not be established within one-half (½) mile of an existing community or group home unless a Specific Use Permit is approved by the City Council.
E.
The residents of a community or group home may not keep for the use of the residents of the home, either on the premises or on a public right-of-way adjacent to the home, motor vehicles in numbers that exceed the number of bedrooms in the home.
(6) Community or Halfway House
A.
A place where persons are aided in readjusting to society following a period of imprisonment, hospitalization, or institutionalized treatment.
B.
Such facilities may be located no closer than within a 1,000-foot radius to another halfway house (as measured from building to building). An SUP shall be required for any facility located closer than 1,000 feet.
C.
Such facilities shall be licensed.
(7) Public or Private School, Primary
A.
Must be located on a collector or larger roadway unless otherwise approved by the Director.
B.
Must provide adequate drop-off areas so as not to unnecessarily impede street traffic.
C.
Drop-off and access provisions must be approved by the Director or his/her designee.
D.
Other sections of the ordinance shall apply to screening, landscaping and cladding.
(8) Public or Private School, Secondary
A.
Must be located on a collector or larger roadway.
B.
Must provide adequate drop-off areas so as not to unnecessarily impede street traffic.
14-31
C.
Drop-off and emergency access provisions must be approved by the Director or his/her designee.
Other sections of the ordinance shall apply to screening, landscaping and cladding.
(9) Public or Private School, Senior
A.
Must be located on a collector street or larger roadway.
B.
Must provide adequate drop-off areas so as not to unnecessarily impede street traffic.
C.
Drop-off and access provisions must be approved by the Director or his/her appointed designee.
D.
Other sections of the ordinance shall apply to screening, landscaping and cladding.
(10) Public or Private School Temporary Education Building. Temporary buildings for classrooms, recreation and administration needs for public school districts may be located on public school district sites when approved by the City Manager or his/her appointed designee. However, the City Manager or designee may at their discretion, require a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the City Council. An application for “Temporary Education Building” must be submitted on forms supplied by the Building Official’s office and shall include a schedule indicating the expected phasing-out of all temporary structures. Such permit shall be valid for a period of up to five (5) years. All temporary structures should be located so that they are screened by the permanent buildings whenever possible.
(d) Office and Professional Use Conditions.
(1) Financial Institution with Drive-Through
A.
A financial institution is an establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issuance of money, and/or the extension of credit that facilitates the transmission of funds. This shall not include pawn shops or businesses that advertise check cashing services.
B.
Drive-throughs shall not be located on a property adjacent to a residential use. Drive-throughs shall be separated from residential properties by an intervening building.
C.
Drive-throughs shall not have access to local residential streets.
D.
Stacking lanes for drive-through service windows shall accommodate at least six (6) cars per lane, unless specifically approved by the Director or his/her appointed designee.
(e) Recreation, Entertainment & Amusement Use Conditions
(1) Billiard Parlor or Pool Hall
A. Any business or premises in which one (1) or more pool or billiard tables are located and used for the playing of billiards, pool or similar games and for which a fee is charged, either directly or indirectly, by means of a general admission fee, membership fee, dues or the like. Exceptions include:
1.
Billiard or pool or tables kept in private residences or apartments and used without charge by members of the family or bona fide guests;
2.
Billiard or pool tables on the premises of religious, charitable, educational or fraternal organizations for the use of members or their guests, and not for private profit, although a charge is made for playing; and
3.
Billiard or pool tables on the premises of publicly owned facilities.
14-32
B. Businesses which contain more than 3 pool or billiard tables or similar games and for which a fee is charged, either directly or indirectly, by means of a general admission fee, membership fee, dues or the like, shall require the approval of an SUP.
(2) Carnival, Circus, or Amusement Ride (Temporary)
A.
A promotional event intended to attract people to a site where there may or may not be an admission charge, and which may include such activities as rides, entertainment, game booths, food stands, exhibitions, and animal displays, and not extending greater than 14 days in duration.
B.
Carnival, circus and amusement ride uses shall be no closer than 300 feet to residentially zoned land unless such setback is reduced or waived by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
C.
Such events must obtain a Special Events Permit from the City of Lancaster.
(3) Commercial Amusement/Recreation (Indoor)
A.
Any enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with a variety of amusing or entertaining activities, including such activities as skating rinks, bowling alleys, video arcades and similar enterprises, but does not include theaters and auditoriums. It also includes establishments with more than four (4) coin operated machines as defined by City Ordinances, excluding billiard or pool halls. Exceptions include:
1.
Skill or coin-operated machines kept in private residences or apartments and used without charge by members of the family or bona fide guests;
2.
Skill or coin-operated machines on the premises of religious, charitable, educational or fraternal organizations for the use of members or their guests, and not for private profit, although a charge is made for playing; and
3.
Billiard or pool tables on the premises of publicly owned facilities.
B.
A skill or coin operated machine is defined as any coin-operated machine of any kind or character whatsoever, when such machines dispense or are used or are capable of being used or operated for amusement or pleasure or when such machines are operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure, or for any other purpose other than the dispensing or vending of merchandise, music or service, as those terms are defined in Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated, Articles 8801-8817.
(5) Commercial Amusement / Recreation (Outdoor)
A.
Outdoor commercial recreation and amusements, excluding drive-in theaters, but including golf courses, target ranges and skeet shoots, picnic groves, amusement parks, circus or carnival grounds, commercial amusement or recreational developments or tents, and other similar uses. This includes temporary structures used for meetings. Such uses shall be considered “temporary” if the use does not exceed 14 days. (See “Carnival, Circus, or Amusement Ride (Temporary)” above.)
B.
Outdoor commercial recreational and amusement uses shall be no closer than 300 feet to residentially zoned land unless such setback is reduced or waived by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
(6) Fund Raising Events by Non-Profit, Indoor or Outdoor (Temporary)
A.
An event sponsored by a recognized legal non-profit organization, intended to attract people to a site where there may or may not be an admission charge.
B.
Such events must obtain a Special Events Permit from the City of Lancaster for residential districts.
14-33
(7) Tennis Courts. Tennis courts shall meet standards for lighting and noise levels at adjacent residential property lines. (See Art. 14.700. Environmental Performance Standards)
(f) Retail and Personal Service Use Regulations
(1) Christmas Tree Sales Lot & Similar Uses (Temporary). The temporary sales of Christmas trees, pumpkins and other seasonal goods may be allowed with a permit approved by the Building Official provided it meets the following conditions:
A.
Any such temporary facility of lot shall be limited to seasonal sales.
B.
The maximum time limit of such use shall not exceed 45 days annually. At the end of the 45-day period, the structure and other facilities related to the use shall be removed from the property.
C.
Any temporary power poles will be removed on the date of or immediately following the termination date of the permit.
D.
Any such temporary facility shall not reduce the number of required parking spaces of any nearby building or use, below the number actually needed by the use(s).
E.
Any such temporary facility shall have permanent restrooms for employees available within 300 feet of the property where such use is permitted for which written permission from the permanent building owner for restroom use must be submitted to the Building Official; however, a portable restroom facility, motor home or travel trailer providing such facilities may be allowed.
(2) Cosmetics, Permanent
A. Cosmetics, Permanent, as defined by the State Department of Health.
B. It includes electrolysis, but does not include ornamental tattoos.
(3) Display, Incidental. Outdoor sales and display, excluding vehicles and vehicular machinery, for which the sale of these items are the primary business, shall meet the following standards:
A. Outdoor sales and displays are permitted only in areas designated on the Site Plan filed with the City.
B. Outdoor sales and display may not exceed 5% of the adjacent building floor area. (Building area is defined as the entirely enclosed portion of the primary building.)
C. Outdoor sales and display may occupy up to 30% of a covered sidewalk that is located within 20 feet of the building. Such display shall not impede pedestrian use of the sidewalk and at least a 5’ passable distance shall be maintained.
D. Any outside sales and display not located on a covered sidewalk must be screened from view of adjacent roadways, public areas and adjacent properties. Such screening must:
1.
Be a minimum of eight (8) feet high or one (1) foot taller than the materials being displayed, which ever is greater.
2.
Include minimum of 20% solid screening matching the material of the primary building. The remainder may be solid evergreen planting, or wrought iron, dark vinyl coated chain link or similar materials.
E.
Any outside sales and display not located on a covered sidewalk must be located immediately adjacent to or connected to the primary structure.
F.
No outdoor sales and display may be located on any portion of a parking lot.
G.
Christmas tree sales are exempted from these standards, and such trees may be stored outdoors for sale beginning one (1) week before Thanksgiving and ending December 31. (Also, see Christmas Tree Sales Lot & Similar Uses (Temporary)).
14-34
H.
Landscape Materials. The accessory seasonal display of plants and related landscape materials such as fertilizer, peat moss, and ornamental landscape items by a permitted retail use may be displayed upon approval by the Building Official only under the following conditions:
1.
The plants and related materials shall be located on an all weather surface.
2.
All of the plants and related materials shall be located behind the building line.
3.
Notwithstanding “6” above, the storage area for display of plants and related materials shall not occupy any required parking spaces as outlined in Article 14.600. Parking and Loading. Excess parking spaces may be used if all other requirements in this Section are met.
4.
The storage area for display of plants shall not occupy more than 5% of the total lot area.
I.
Trucks, Trailers and Storage Containers. The restrictions in above, shall be construed to prohibit the storage and display of rental trucks, trailers and storage containers except in districts where such uses are indicated as permitted uses.
(4) Private Club, Lodge or Fraternal Organization
A.
Definition. A Private Club is an establishment providing social and dining facilities as well as alcoholic beverages service to an association of persons and otherwise falling within the definition of and permitted under the provisions of that portion of, Chapter 32 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as may be amended and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs.
B. Setbacks from Other Uses. No private club that serves and/or sells alcoholic beverages shall be licensed to operate within 300 feet from a church, public or private school, or public hospital. For a church or public hospital, the 300 feet shall be measured along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. For public or private schools, the measurement of distance shall be in direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the private club and in a direct line across intersections. Provided that the limitations of this section shall not apply to a private club which is in operation at the time of the passage of this article.
C. No Exterior Bar Entrance. There shall be no exterior entrance directly to the bar area except emergency fire exits if required.
(5) Real Estate Sales Office, On-Site (Temporary). Temporary on-site real estate sales offices located on property being sold, shall be limited to the period of sale of the lots with a 2-year initial period and one-year extensions being authorized by the Building Official. Such offices must be maintained at all times.
(6) Restaurant with Drive-Through.
A.
Drive-throughs shall not have access to local residential streets.
B.
Stacking lanes for drive-through service windows shall accommodate at least six (6) cars per lane, unless specifically approved by the Director or his/her appointed designee.
(g) Commercial & Business Services
(1) Building & Landscape Material with Outside Storage. Outdoor sales and display, excluding vehicles and vehicular machinery, for which the sale of these items is the primary business, shall meet the following standards:
A.
Outdoor sales and displays are permitted only in areas designated on the Site Plan filed with the City.
14-35
B.
Outdoor sales and display may not exceed 5% of the adjacent building floor area. (Building area is defined as the entirely enclosed air conditioned portion of the primary building.)
C.
Outdoor sales and display may occupy up to 30% of a covered sidewalk that is located within 20 feet of the building. Such display shall not impede pedestrian use of the sidewalk and at least a 6-foot passable distance shall be maintained.
D.
Any outside sales and display not located on a covered sidewalk must be screened from view of adjacent roadways, public areas and adjacent properties. Such screening must:
1.
Be a minimum of eight (8) feet high or one (1) foot taller than the materials being displayed, which ever is greater.
2.
Include minimum of 20% solid screening matching the material of the primary building. The remainder may be solid evergreen planting, or wrought iron, dark vinyl coated chain link or similar materials.
E.
Any outside sales and display not located on a covered sidewalk must be located immediately adjacent to or connected to the primary structure.
F.
No outdoor sales and display may be located in any portion of a parking lot.
G.
Christmas tree sales are excepted from these standards, and such trees may be stored outdoors for sale beginning one (1) week before Thanksgiving and ending December 31.
(2) Building Maintenance, Service and Sales with Outside Storage. All outside storage must be screened from adjacent streets and public areas.
(3) Portable Buildings – Commercial/Industrial. On Commercially or Industrially zoned properties:
A.
The portable building must be located in such a manner as to have access to public right-of-way within two hundred (200) feet.
B.
The portable building, if approved for occupancy by industrial, commercial, or residential uses, must have an approved water distribution and sewage disposal system available for its use.
C.
There must be a provision for garbage and trash collection and disposal.
(4) Temporary On-Site Construction Office.
A.
Only one (1) construction or field office shall be allowed per construction site, unless specifically approved by the Building Official.
B.
Temporary Construction Offices shall be limited to the period of construction with a 2-year initial period and 1-year extensions being authorized by the Building Official. Such offices shall be maintained at all times.
(h) Auto & Marine–Related Use Conditions
(1) Auto Repair Garage, Major
A.
General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, frame-work, welding, and major painting service.
B.
Garage doors shall not face the street or a residential lot.
C.
Vehicles, equipment, parts or inventory shall not be stored outside over night unless expressly permitted by this ordinance. In which case, they shall be screened from public streets, sidewalks and open space, and any residentially-zoned lot.
14-36
(2) Auto Repair Garage, Minor
A.
The replacement of any part or repair of any part that does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work, minor painting and upholstering service. It also includes “quick lube” type businesses. This applies to only to passenger automobiles and trucks not in excess of 7,000 pounds gross weight.
B.
In a Retail (R) District, an “auto repair garage, minor” is permitted as an accessory to a retail use, when the gross floor area of the auto repair and related storage does not exceed 30% of the retail sales floor area, and if all work is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. If it is a stand-alone use, it shall require a Specific Use Permit.
C.
Garage doors or bays shall not face the street or a residential lot.
D.
Vehicles, equipment, parts or inventory shall not be stored outside over night unless expressly permitted by this Ordinance. In which case, they shall be screened from public streets, sidewalks and open space, and any residentially-zoned lot.
E.
A Site Plan must be approved by the Director or his/her appointed designee prior to issuance of any Building Permit.
(3) Boat and Trailer Dealerships (New and Used)
A.
The area to be used for outside storage and display shall not exceed 50% of the lot area within 100 feet of any adjacent street.
B.
All such outside storage and display areas must be permanently paved to City standards.
C.
All such outside storage and display areas must be screened along all road frontages with a solid evergreen landscape screen a minimum of three (3) feet in height.
D.
All such outside storage and display areas may be lighted with directed exterior lighting that does not glare onto any adjacent roadways.
E.
A site plan and landscape plan shall be approved prior to issuance of any Building Permit.
(4) Carwash/Auto Detail. The following standards apply to any free-standing or accessory carwash or auto detailing use:
A.
Entrances and exits to the car wash shall not directly face any public street. On corner sites, car wash entrances or exits shall not open toward the street with the highest traffic volume, or as determined by the Director or his/her appointed designee.
B.
The car wash shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any street frontage.
(5) Motor Vehicle Dealerships (new and Used)
A.
The area to be used for outside storage and display shall not exceed 50% of the lot area within 100 feet of any adjacent street.
B.
All such outside storage and display areas must be permanently paved to City standards.
C.
All such outside storage and display areas must be screened along all road frontages with a solid evergreen landscape screen a minimum of three (3) feet in height.
D.
All such outside storage and display areas may be lighted with directed exterior lighting that does not glare onto any adjacent roadways.
E.
A site plan and landscape plan shall be approved prior to issuance of any Building Permit.
14-37
(6) Service Station
A.
An establishment where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold as the principal use of the property. Light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, and minor repairs may also be provided if incidental to such principal use. Service station does not include premises where retail sales space exceeds 25% of the total building area or 500 s.f. of gross floor area, whichever is less.
B.
Entrances and exits to any service bays shall not directly face any public street. On corner sites, Service bay entrances or exits shall not open toward a residential use.
C.
The location of access drives from adjacent streets and the orientation of service bays shall be determined by the Director or his/her appointed designee to minimize visual and auditory impacts.
(7) Truck Stop with Fuel and Accessory Services
A.
Entrances and exits to any service bays shall not directly face any public street. On corner sites, service bay entrances or exits shall not open toward a residential use.
B.
The location of access drives from adjacent streets and the orientation of service bays shall be determined by the Director or his/her appointed designee to minimize visual and auditory impacts.
(i) Industrial & Manufacturing
(1) Asphalt or Concrete Batch Plant. Any asphalt or concrete batch plant shall meet environmental standards established by this ordinance and state and federal agencies.
(2) Asphalt or Concrete Batch Plant, Temporary; and Standing Lime Trucks
A.
A permit from the Building Official stating any special conditions relating to its siting and reduction of potential impacts on adjacent uses, shall be required for this use.
B.
Temporary asphalt or concrete batch plants are limited to the period of construction it was constructed to serve.
C.
Any batch plant facilities or standing lime trucks must be located no closer than 500 feet to a residential property.
D.
Any asphalt or concrete batch plant and standing lime trucks shall meet environmental standards established by this ordinance and state and federal agencies.
E.
If these standards are not met, such a facility must first receive approval of an Exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(3) Environmentally Hazardous Materials
A.
Any land use which involves environmentally hazardous materials shall meet environmental standards established by this ordinance and state and federal agencies.
B.
A permit from the Fire Marshal stating any special conditions relating to its siting and reduction of potential impacts on adjacent uses, shall be required for this use.
(4) Mining and Extraction (Sand, Gravel, Oil & Other)
A.
Any mining and extraction activity shall meet environmental standards established by this ordinance and state and federal agencies.
B.
A permit from the Building Official stating any special conditions relating to its siting and reduction of potential impacts on adjacent uses, shall be required for this use.
C.
The permit shall also include provisions for restoration of the property once extraction ceases.
14-38
(j) Wholesale, Distribution & Storage
(1) Mini-Warehouse
A.
The number of storage units per acre shall not exceed 125, the minimum number of storage units shall be 10; and the maximum site area shall be five (5) acres.
B.
Unless located in an industrial district, mini-warehouses shall be fully screened from roadways, parks and trails. They may, however, be located behind other commercial uses which face a street and have an access drive area no greater than 35 feet wide.
C.
Only single story units are allowed; no multi-story buildings will be permitted unless the second story is used entirely as an office/caretaker residence-unit which shall not exceed 36 feet in height.
D.
A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be required for the on-site manager (i.e. caretaker; resident or otherwise).
E.
A Site Plan, including a landscape plan and building elevations, shall be approved prior to receiving a Building Permit. In addition, any application for an SUP shall include such plan.
F.
Perimeter walls shall be provided which face the front, rear and side property lines. Overhead doors shall not face adjacent streets. All exterior perimeter walls facing the front, rear and side property lines shall be 100% brick construction. Perimeter walls facing the front yard shall incorporate architectural features to break up the long repetitive nature of self-storage buildings – such as; offsets in buildings; variation of materials; variation of heights; etc. No pre-engineered metal building components (such as gutters and downspouts) shall be incorporated in the perimeter walls facing the front property line. Exterior walls shall be constructed of split face block, brick or stone.
G.
The front, side and rear building set back areas shall be landscaped. Landscaping should be clustered, creating interesting relief from the long repetitive nature of self-storage buildings.
H.
The facilities shall incorporate the use of perimeter gates that limit access to the storage areas to customers only. Gates shall conform to all applicable zoning, building and fire code requirements. Special access for fire and police personnel shall be provided as required.
I.
All screening fences shall be wrought iron with landscaping / living screen or masonry. See-through fencing should be wrought iron, or similar. Chain link fencing of any kind shall be prohibited.
J.
Buildings and see-through fencing should be oriented in a manner to restrict the visibility of interior overhead doors and drives from the public street. The color(s) of the garage doors, as well as other doors within the facility, shall compliment the exterior colors of the main building(s).
K.
The commercial operation of rental trucks and trailers shall be prohibited unless located in an industrial district which allows such use.
L.
Businesses shall not be allowed to operate in the individual storage units.
M.
No outside storage of any kind shall be allowed (including the outside storage of boats, recreational vehicles, and motor or self-propelled vehicles) unless located in an industrial district which allows such use.
N.
Concrete shall be used for all paving.
O.
Roofs shall have a minimum pitch of four (4) in 12 and be constructed with a metal standing seam. Mechanical equipment shall be screened with the roof structure or parapet walls. 14-39
P.
Lighting standards shall be limited to a maximum of 20 feet in height.
Q.
The residential unit as an accessory to the permitted use shall not exceed 1600 square feet.
(2) Outside Storage
A.
Outdoor storage shall be screened to the height of what is being stored from streets and public open space, and from abutting residentially zoned districts, and from a NS, R, CS, CBD or RT district.
B.
No outside storage shall be allowed in any zoning district adjacent to IH-35 or IH-20.
(k) Utilities, Communications & Transportation
(1) Antenna Standards and Regulations.
A. Antenna—Accessory.
1.
The antenna installation shall comply with the height and area regulations of the applicable zoning district.
2.
Administrative approval of the antenna installation shall be required.
B. Antenna—Commercial, located entirely within any nonresidential structure allowed under the applicable zoning district regulations:
1.
Any necessary equipment building shall be of a material allowed by the applicable zoning district, similar in color and character to the principal building on the site; or the necessary equipment shall be contained entirely within the principal building on the property or in an underground vault.
2.
Any necessary equipment building shall be enclosed by a decorative iron fence surrounded by a screening hedge which will achieve a height of at least six (6) feet at maturity or a masonry screening wall at least eight (8) feet in height, compatible in color with the principal building and the equipment building.
3.
At least one (1) paved parking space with concrete paved access thereto shall be provided at the antenna location; said parking space need not be reserved exclusively for use in conjunction with the antenna installation and may be one (1) of the spaces provided for the principal use on the property.
4.
Administrative approval of the antenna installation shall be required prior to the issuance of any permits for construction.
5.
No more than three (3) separate equipment buildings shall be located on a single lot.
C. Antenna, Commercial—Free-Standing, when attached to a utility installation or a light pole in a public park or on public school property:
1.
The height of the utility installation or light pole upon which the antenna is attached shall be greater than 75 feet but no more than 150 feet.
2.
The antenna shall extend no more than 10 feet above the maximum height of the utility structure.
3.
A minimum clearance of 15 feet shall be maintained from the ground to the lowest element of the antenna.
4.
A minimum setback of 20 feet shall be maintained from the utility installation, light pole or any equipment building to the lot line of the nearest property developed for residential occupancy.
5.
Any necessary equipment building may be constructed of metal with a baked-on or pre-painted surface and shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height and 75 square feet 14-40
in area. The exterior surfaces shall be covered in paint or a similar coating; or the building may be built of a material allowed by the applicable zoning district for the principal building; or the necessary equipment may be contained entirely within a principal building on the property or in an underground vault. All equipment buildings shall be maintained free from graffiti.
6.
At least one (1) paved parking space with concrete paved access may be required at the antenna location; this parking space need not be reserved exclusively for use in conjunction with the antenna installation and may be one (1) of the spaces provided for the principal use on the property, if any.
7.
Administrative approval of the antenna installation shall be required prior to the issuance of any permits for construction.
8.
No more than three (3) separate antennas and three (3) equipment buildings shall be located on a single lot or structure.
D. Antenna, Commercial—Free-Standing, Other.
1.
The antenna installation shall comply with the height and area regulations of the applicable zoning district and the support structure shall not exceed 125 feet in height.
2.
The antenna shall not extend more than 10 feet above the maximum height of the support structure.
3.
Any necessary equipment building shall be of a material allowed by the applicable zoning district, similar in color and character to the principal building on the site; or the necessary equipment shall be contained entirely within a principal building on the property or in an underground vault.
4.
The antenna and any equipment buildings shall be enclosed by a decorative iron fence surrounded by a screening hedge which will achieve a height of at least six (6) feet at maturity or by a masonry screening wall at least eight (8) feet in height, compatible in color and character with the principal building and the equipment building.
5.
At least one (1) paved parking space with a concrete paved access may be required at the antenna location; this space need not be reserved exclusively for use in conjunction with the antenna facility and may be one (1) of the spaces required for the principal use on the property.
6.
Administrative approval of the antenna installation shall be required prior to the issuance of any permits for construction.
7.
No more than three (3) separate antennas and three (3) equipment buildings shall be located on a single lot or structure.
E. Antenna, Commercial—Mounted, 12 feet or less in height, on nonresidential structures allowed under the applicable zoning district regulations:
1.
The total height of the structure, including the antenna, shall not exceed the maximum height of the zoning district by more than 12 feet.
2.
A minimum clearance of 15 feet shall be maintained from the ground to the lowest element of the antenna.
3.
Any necessary equipment building shall be of a material allowed by the applicable zoning district, similar in color and character to the principal building; or the necessary equipment shall be contained entirely within a principal building on the property or in an underground vault.
14-41
4.
The antenna and any necessary equipment building shall be enclosed by a decorative iron fence surrounded by a screening hedge, which will achieve a height of at least six (6) feet at maturity or a masonry screening wall at least eight (8) feet in height, compatible in color and character with the principal building and the equipment building.
5.
At least one (1) paved parking space with paved access thereto shall be provided at the antenna location; said space need not be reserved exclusively for use in conjunction with the antenna facility and may be one (1) of the spaces required for the principal use on the property.
6.
Administrative approval of the antenna installation shall be required prior to the issuance of any permits for construction.
(2) Construction and Maintenance Requirements. All antenna masts, towers and antenna supports used for television and radio reception or transmission shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
A.
All electrical specifications of such antenna masts, towers and supports shall comply with the National Electrical Code, the electrical code of the city, Standard Building Code, and the building code of the City.
B.
Antenna structures shall be designed in accordance with section 1205.1 of the Standard Building Code.
(3) Permit Required. Any person desiring to erect or have erected an antenna more than 25 feet in height above ground level, or an antenna mast 25 feet or less in height but not erected as required by this Department, shall make written application to Building Inspections for a permit to erect same. Sufficient plans and specifications, as determined by the Building Official, must accompany each application. It shall be unlawful and a Building Inspections violation to erect, or cause to be erected, or to maintain, or cause to maintain, such antenna mast without first having obtained a permit. It shall be the duty of the permittee to request a final inspection upon completion of the antenna system. Domestic TV antennas are exempt from this section.
(4) Restrictions and Limitations. All antenna systems constructed and maintained under the provisions of Building Inspections shall be subject to the following restrictions and limitations:
A.
No such antenna system shall be more than 99 feet in height.
B.
The location on the lot of such antenna system shall comply with the requirements of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city insofar as the front building line and side yard building line and requirements are concerned. No portion of an antenna system shall extend beyond the front building line on any lot, and on corner lots the side yard setback requirements shall be adhered to on the side adjacent to a public street, and where the front and side yard requirements are applicable, all portions of such structures shall be within the limits fixed by such requirements.
C.
All antenna systems constructed under the provisions of Building Inspections shall be maintained so as to at all times comply with those requirements.
(5) Roof-Mounted Equipment. All roof-mounted equipment, including fans, vents, air conditioning units and cooling towers, should be screened to eliminate the view from the ground level of adjacent properties and all roadways. The screen shall be constructed of materials approved by the building official. Roof-mounted equipment should be placed and finished in a manner which minimizes its visibility from overhead views from nearby buildings and elevated thoroughfare sections.
14-42
A.
The overall screening height will be the height of the tallest element of roof-mounted equipment.
B.
The outside of the screening device should be painted or finished in a similar color to the building facade, trim or roof surface to minimize the visibility of the equipment and screen the view from ground level.
C.
Roof-mounted equipment and the inside of the screening device should be painted similar to the color of the roof surface in order to minimize the visibility of the equipment and screening device from overhead views.
(6) Antenna, Dish. Dish antennas not exceeding 36” in diameter shall be allowed in any district as an accessory use, provided that they meet the following conditions:
A.
Dish antennas shall not be located within front or side yards, and shall be fully screened from view from streets and public or common open areas. In all cases, they must be screened to minimize the visual impact from adjacent properties.
B.
In residential districts, they shall be located only in rear yards. However, dish antennas 20 inches or smaller may be roof mounted provided that they are located behind a transverse roof ridge line and screened from adjacent properties.
C.
In commercial districts, if located on ground level, dish antennas shall be screened to the full height of the structure with landscaping. They may also be allowed on roof tops provided that they are located and screened so as to minimize visual impact from other properties in the area.
D.
In industrial districts, dish antennas may be ground or roof mounted but must be screened to minimize the visual impact from adjacent properties.
E.
If the standards above are not reasonably achievable, a Specific Use Permit (SUP) shall be obtained prior to installation of a dish antenna.
(7) Utility Lines. All Utility Distribution Lines shall be placed underground. Utility Distribution Lines placed above-ground shall require special approval of the City Council.
Sec. 14.403 Other Special Use Standards
(a) Farm Animals and Horses
(1) Grazing Animals. In non-agricultural districts, grazing animals 500 pounds or greater, including horses and cattle must have a minimum fenced or enclosed area of 15,000 s.f. per animal. Grazing animals of less than 500 pounds, including sheep and goats, must have a minimum fenced or enclosed area of 3,000 s.f. per animal, and a minimum lot size of 10,000 s.f.
(2) Other Animals. An SUP is required for other farm animals, including chickens and swine, and for a reduction in the land area required for grazing farm animals. The City shall not grant an SUP for any farm animal unless it is convinced that the presence of such animals will not injure the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties, including the impact of dust, flies and odor.
(3) General Conditions. Notwithstanding the conditions above,
A.
Ground accumulations of manure shall be collected and properly disposed of so as not to create offensive odors, fly breeding, or in any way pose a health hazard or nuisance to human beings and animals;
B.
Fences or pens, corrals or similar enclosures shall be of sufficient height and strength to properly retain the animal; and
C.
All enclosures for grazing animals shall be placed a minimum of 25 feet from the boundary of any adjoining lot or tract which is zoned for residential use.
14-43
D.
In SF-E, no swine, goats, or fowl are permitted.
E.
Nothing contained herein shall conflict with any State law or applicable ordinance.
(b) Temporary Accommodation for Employees, Customers and Visitors
(1) Temporary Accommodations. Temporary accommodation for employees, customers and visitors may be provided as an ancillary use in commercial zoning districts provided that:
A.
Such accommodation is clearly in support of the business operation,
B.
No rental of such facilities to the general transient public occurs,
C.
Accommodation is for temporary stays, not to exceed 30 days, and
D.
No more than 5% of the building area is utilized for this ancillary use.
Sec. 14.404 Specific Use Permits (SUP)
(a)
Permit Required. A Specific Use Permit (SUP) is required for any use identified in the Land Use Table as requiring one. And for uses with standards where the standards are not being met, unless otherwise set out (See Use Standards). The procedure for requesting an SUP is set out in Article 14.1100. Zoning Related Applications.
(b) Special Requirements: The Planning and Zoning Commission in considering and determining its recommendations to the City Council on any request for a Specific Use Permit may require from the applicant plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. The City Council may, in the interest of public welfare and to assure compliance of this Ordinance, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as Specific Use Permits, the City Council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and locations indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise, vibration, dust, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, explosion, glare, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions.
(c) Application for Specific Use Permit: Any person, firm or corporation, either as land owner or tenant, may request the use of property which requires a Specific Use Permit. A Specific Use Permit may be granted after application has been properly made and a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council has been conducted. The proposed use must comply with all regulations and restrictions as contained in the Zoning Ordinance, codes, regulations, and conditions of the City of Lancaster, including, but not limited to the Electrical Code, the Building Code, the Fire Code, the Plumbing Code, and other applicable Ordinances and codes. In addition all requests for a Specific Use Permit must comply with all State and Federal laws and regulations applicable to such use. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may enforce additional restrictions or stipulations as the facts and circumstances of each case may warrant.
Sec. 14.405 Floodplain Areas
(a) Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within that portion of a district which is designated as being within the 100-year floodplain by the City Engineer, provided they are allowed in the underlying zoning, and that they meet any additional requirements established in the City’s Floodplain Regulations:
(1) Agriculture. Agricultural activities including the ordinary cultivation of land or legal forms of animal husbandry.
(2) Utilities. Local utilities
(3) Parks and Recreation. Public or private parks, community centers, playgrounds, public golf courses.
14-44
(4) Private Recreation. Private commercial open area amusements such as golf courses, driving ranges, archery courses and similar uses when approved by a Specific Use Permit.
(5) Private Open Space. Private open spaces as part of a Planned Development (PD) District, provided such use does not interfere with the continuity of the City’s Open Space System.
(b) Dumping, Excavating or Filling Floodplain. Any dump, excavation, storage or filling operation within that portion of a district having a Floodplain designation shall require a permit from the City Engineer.
(c) Local Flooding May Occur in Other Areas. The fact that land or property is or is not within a district having a Floodplain designation shall not constitute assurance that such land or property is not subject to local flooding and the designation of Floodplain in this ordinance shall not be so interpreted.
Sec. 14.406 Temporary Uses and Structures
(a) Temporary Uses
(1) This Subsection includes by reference all temporary uses listed in the Land Use Chart.
(2) The temporary use shall not be intrusive or inconsistent with existing land uses in area, or with anticipated land uses that may be constructed during the life of the temporary use.
(b) Temporary Structures. All buildings or other structures which are erected or located on the property in connection with the temporary use shall be removed not later than 10 days after the expiration of the time period for which the use was approved or as set forth in the conditions of approval.' 14-45
Sec. 14.407 New and Unlisted Uses
(a) Review. New and unlisted land uses which were not originally anticipated will likely be considered for location within the City. Such uses shall require a zoning ordinance amendment and shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for inclusion in specific zoning districts or as part of a Planned Development (PD) zoning request.
(b) Conditions. When considering requests for a new land use, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider the potential effects of the use on adjacent properties in terms of requirements for services, visual impact, traffic generation, the extent to which the use is consistent with other uses allowed in the district, and other issues they deem appropriate.
Sec. 14.408 Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Sites
(a) Intent. Within the zoning districts established by this ordinance, there may exist lots, structures and uses of land which were lawful before the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, and which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under this Ordinance. It is generally the intent to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed or abandoned, or until such earlier time as they are ordered to be removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent that such non-conforming lots, buildings, or uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, except as otherwise specifically provided, and that such non-conforming lots, buildings or uses may not be used as justification for adding other lots, buildings or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zoning district. Except as otherwise provided, non-conforming uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the same zoning districts.
(b) Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to lots, uses and buildings which become non-conforming by reason of the adoption of or an amendment to, this ordinance, as of the effective date of such amendment.
(c) Non-conforming uses
(1) Exceptions
A.
Except as specified below, any use, building, or structure lawfully existing at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or at the time of annexation into the City may be continued, even though the use, building or structure may not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located.
B.
The right to continue non-conforming uses shall be subject to regulations prohibiting the creation of a nuisance and regulations reasonably protecting adjacent property.
C.
Lawfully amortized as provided in this Code.
(2) Cessation of Non-conforming Use. For the purposes of this Sub-section, a use shall be deemed to have ceased or been abandoned when it has been discontinued for a total of 180 calendar days during any three (3) year period whether with the intent to abandon the use or not.
(3) Expansion of Non-conforming Use. No existing building or premises devoted to a use that is not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which such building or premises is located shall be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, except when required to do so by law or order, unless the use is changed to a use that is permitted in the district in which the building or premises is located, and except as follows:
A.
Whenever a non-conforming use has been changed to a conforming use, the non-conforming use shall be terminated and shall not thereafter be changed to a non-conforming use.
14-46
(d) Non-conforming Building or Sites
(1) City-Created Non-conformity of Structures. In the event that the City takes an act or action which transforms a previously conforming structure for purposes of front, side and rear yard setback requirements into a non-conforming structure for the purposes of front, side and rear yard setbacks, then such structure shall be deemed to be in conformance with the required setback prescribed in this Ordinance. (For Land Use non-conformity, see Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.)
(2) Use of Non-conforming Buildings, Structures or Land
A.
No building or structure which was originally designed for or used as a non-conforming use shall again be put to a nonconforming use, where such use has ceased for 180 days or more during any three (3) year period.
B.
The use of land, structures, and/or buildings involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000 or less, which does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be discontinued within six (6) months from the enactment of this Ordinance. The non-conforming use of land and/or buildings involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000 or less, which becomes non-conforming by reason of subsequent amendments to this ordinance shall be discontinued within six (6) months from the date of such amendment.
(3) Construction Approved Prior to Ordinance. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to require any change in the overall plans, construction, or designated use of any development, structure, or part thereof, where official approval and the required building permits were granted before the enactment of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, where construction, conforming with the plans, shall have been started prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or such amendment, and where such construction shall have been completed in a normal manner within the subsequent twelve (12) month period, with no interruption, except for reasons beyond the builder’s control.
(4) Modifying non-conforming structures
A.
A structure that is non-conforming solely because its exterior wall construction does not comply with the regulation of the zoning district in which it is situated may be expanded or enlarged not to exceed fifty (50%) percent of the original floor area, but provided that the expansion or enlargement shall be in compliance with all the regulations of the zoning district, with the exception that the expanded exterior walls may be constructed with materials that match the existing exterior wall construction.
B.
A non-conforming structure may be expanded or enlarged to exceed fifty (50%) percent of the floor area, providing the expansion or enlargement shall be in compliance with all the regulations of the district in which the structure is located.
C.
For the purpose of this section, the fifty (50%) percent rule shall be cumulative with respect to time.
(5) Damage Due to Acts of God
A.
Damage in Excess or 50%. Any non-conforming structure which is damaged more than 50% of its then appraised tax value above the foundation, by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, rot or other calamity or act of God, shall not be restored or reconstructed and used as it was before the damaging event.
B.
Damage of 50% or Less. If such structure is damaged 50% or less than its then appraised tax value above the foundation, it may be restored, reconstructed, or used as before, provided that the restoration or reconstruction is completed within twelve (12) months of the damaging event. The twelve (12) month period does not include any necessary litigation.
14-47
C.
Lots Platted Prior to March 5, 1984. The Building Official may permit the reconstruction of non-conforming single-family structures situated on platted lots approved prior to March 5, 1984. Such non-conforming single-family structures shall be deemed in conformance with this section as long as the use of the lot is allowed in the respective zoning district.
(6). Repair of Unsafe Buildings, Structures and Sites. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the strengthening or repair of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority, unless such repairs exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the building. If the repairs exceed 50%, the building shall be brought into conformity with all requirements of the zoning district and Building Code in which it is located.
(7) General Repairs and Maintenance
A.
On any non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use, no work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-load-bearing walls, fixture, wiring, or plumbing to an extent exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current replacement cost of the non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of the structure as the case may be.
B.
If fifty percent (50%) or more of a non-conforming structure containing a non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs or maintenance, and is declared by a duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(8) Moving of a Non-conforming Building or Structure. No non-conforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, or on any other lot located in the City, unless every portion of the building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district.
(9) Non-conforming Lot Sizes. All lots used for storage that do not require a building and the use of such lot is made non-conforming by this Ordinance or amendments thereto shall cease to be used for such storage within six (6) months of the date of adoption of this Ordinance or amendments.
14-48
ARTICLE 14.500. DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
Sec. 14.501 General
(a) Purpose. In addition to the requirements contained in this Chapter regarding lot size and uses, the provisions of this article regarding development regulations and standards shall apply. The standards in this sub-section are intended to achieve the following goals:
(1) To provide well-planned growth and development, while retaining the natural setting and small-town character of the City.
(2) To promote and respect conservation development and the enhancement of important natural features and resources within the community.
(3) Encourage development of high quality residential neighborhoods that are aesthetically pleasing, yet meet the diverse housing market needs of the community.
(4) Encourage quality nonresidential development that is aesthetically pleasing, yet meets the market and economic development needs of the community.
(5) Ensure that utility and infrastructure systems (e.g., water supply, wastewater treatment, storm drainage, etc.) will adequately serve present and future residents and businesses.
(6) Ensure that public services and facilities (e.g., police and fire protection, library services, administrative facilities, etc.) will adequately serve present and future residents and businesses.
(7) Promote a more livable City and high quality of life through attractive urban design practices and through a proactive approach to how the City looks. Reinforce Lancaster’s image and identity as a community of excellence in business, residence, leisure and education through urban design and increased public awareness and involvement.
A.
To be a full life-cycle city; providing opportunities for housing for families with children as well as for singles, the young and the elderly in proximity to services.
B.
To promote the creation of attractive sustainable neighborhoods and commercial areas.
(b) Open Space.
(1) Applicability. This provision applies to all zoning districts and development in the City.
(2) Purpose. The City of Lancaster is planned to have a small town atmosphere and be environmentally friendly. Open space corridors and trails are intended to link major areas of the City using floodplain areas, drainage areas and roadways. Because of the importance of open space and recreational amenities to commercial and residential vitality of the City, all projects should contribute to the open space system as established in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, Parks Plan and Thoroughfare Plan.
(3) Requirement. All projects in the City should reserve, dedicate and/or develop public open space consistent with the Open Space Plan, subdivision standards and development agreements.
(c) Site Plans.
(1) Approval of a Site Plan shall be required for all developments except individual single family and duplex lots and shall be accompanied by a proposed development schedule. Any owner, builder, or developer of a tract or parcel of land shall obtain an approved Site Plan for the proposed development, prior to issuance of a Building Permit, from the Director, providing for an appeal of denial to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The contents of this Site Plan shall comply with the requirements as specified in Article XI Zoning-Related Applications. Upon approval, such development shall comply with the approved plan.
14-49
(2) Site Plans for stand-alone retail buildings larger than 25,000 s.f. shall demonstrate how the property might be utilized with multiple smaller tenants.
(d) Lots With Multiple Frontages. Where lots have multiple frontages on one or more streets, the required front yard shall be provided on each street.
14-50
BUILDING SETBACKS AND YARDS
YARD LOCATION ON DIFFERENT SHAPED LOTS
14-52
(e) Calculation of Density. Calculation of the allowable density shall be based on the gross site area including road right-of-way, floodplain, and open space and park areas that will be dedicated to the City or preserved and maintained by some other mechanism. Notwithstanding the calculation, other provisions of this Code may limit the actual density allowed on any given site.
(f) Screening of Mechanical and Electrical Equipment. Mechanical and electrical equipment on the ground or roof shall be screened from view of adjacent properties and all public areas unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(g) Residential Adjacency Standards.
(1) Purpose. The general objectives of residential adjacency standards are to preserve and protect the integrity, enjoyment and property values of residential neighborhoods within the City of Lancaster, through the establishment of standards for certain non-residential uses that may impact surrounding residential land uses. These standards are in addition to the development regulations applicable to the underlying zoning district. When any requirements in this section are in conflict with any other requirements for the underlying zoning district, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
(2) Applicability.
A. The Residential Adjacency Standards shall apply when a use is proposed for a non-residential building or site that is within five hundred feet (500’) of a residential district boundary.
B. Review of proposals for compliance with the Residential Adjacency Standards will be carried out in conjunction with Site Plan review, depending on whether or not the actual use of the site is known.
(3) Standards.
A.
Pedestrian Accessibility. Where feasible, easy and attractive pedestrian access should be provided between the retail or service use and adjacent neighborhoods. This may include lining the pedestrian way with retail and residential uses.
B.
Noise.
1.
Any use containing individual service speakers shall not be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of any residential district unless the speaker is appropriately screened and shall meet the standards established in Article 14.700 Noise. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require wing walls, landscape screens, changes in building orientation, and/or other design elements to screen and minimize the impact of individual service speakers.
2.
Any use containing public address/paging systems shall not be permitted within five hundred feet (500’) of any residential district unless separated by a four-lane or larger thoroughfare.
C. Loading Spaces.
1.
Where adjacent to residential districts, off-street loading areas shall be fully screened from view of the residential district.
2.
The Director may require wing walls, landscape screens, changes in building orientation, and/or other architectural elements to minimize the impact of uses containing loading docks within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of any residential district.
14-53
D. Vehicular Service Bays.
1.
All vehicular service bays within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a residential district shall face away from adjacent residential districts unless separated by a building or permanent architectural feature of minimum height matching the height of the service bays.
2.
Walls separating service bays from a residential district shall be of masonry or reinforced concrete with no openings.
3.
The Director may require wing walls, landscape screens, changes in building orientation, and/or other design elements to minimize the impact of service bays within one hundred fifty (150’) of a residential district.
4.
No use including outdoor vehicular repair, servicing or testing shall be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a residential district.
E. Small Engine Repair Shops. Small engine repair shops shall not be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a residential district unless all repair, service, and testing activities are done in a fully enclosed building.
F. Motorcycle Sales/Service. Motorcycle sales/service facilities shall not be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a residential district unless all repair, service, and testing activities are done in a fully enclosed building.
G. Car Wash and Fuel Dispensing Facilities.
1. Car wash and fuel dispensing facilities shall not be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a residential district.
2. Where car wash and fuel dispensing facilities are within three hundred feet (300’) but greater than one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a residential district, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require wing walls, landscape screens, and/or other design elements to screen and minimize the impact of such facilities.
H. Combination Gas Station, Fast Food Restaurant, Convenience Store.
1. Combination gas station, fast food restaurant, convenience store shall not be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a residential district.
2. Where combination gas station, fast food restaurant, convenience stores are within three hundred feet (300’) but greater than one hundred fifty (150’) of a residential district, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require wing walls, landscape screens, and/or other design elements to screen and minimize the impact of such facilities.
(3) Review. The following information shall be submitted in order to facilitate the review:
A.
All information and procedures as required by Site Plan Review in Article 14.1100 Zoning-Related Applications.
B.
Location of pedestrian circulation, building locations and build-to lines.
C.
Points of access for vehicles and general location of parking areas.
D.
Location and description of any existing and proposed exterior speaker systems to include information about the height, octave and decibel band ranges of each fixture.
E.
Information indicating the location and orientation of all off-street loading spaces.
F.
Information indicating the location and orientation of all vehicular service bays.
G.
Information indicating the location and description of existing and proposed screening.
(h) Fences.
14-54
(1) General. All fences within the City shall conform to the following standards:
A. Fences may be built to a maximum 8 feet in height except as specified in Sub-section (b) Residential Fences of this subsection. However,
1.
No solid fencing greater than 42 inches in height may be built in front of the front building setback line;
2.
No chain link fences shall be allowed within 10 feet of property lines unless completely screened from adjacent public areas and properties by either structures or by solid landscape screening; and
3.
Solid wood fencing must be constructed using metal posts set in concrete, or brick or stone columns.
B. Split rail, steel pipe, wrought iron and decorative metal fences are encouraged in Agriculture (A) and Single Family Estate (SF-E) districts.
C. Pre-cast and poured-in-place solid fencing shall require special approval by Director.
D. Barbed wire fences may be used without restrictions when in conjunction with agricultural and related activities; provided, however, no barbed wire fence shall be located on any platted property zoned for single family use.
E. Fencing in commercial and industrial districts which run adjacent and roughly parallel to the Pleasant Run, Beltline, Main Street, Bear Creek, Houston School Road, Bluegrove, Dallas Avenue, Bonnie View, Jefferson Lancaster-Hutchins and State Street South rights-of-way, shall be constructed of the primary masonry materials of the building (not including standard concrete block or concrete wall), wrought iron or living plant material. It shall not run in straight line without being off-set by a minimum of 6 feet every 100 feet. It shall be located no closer to the ROW than 6 feet, and shall include irrigation and landscaping.
(2) Residential Fences. The following standards shall apply to all residential uses except SF-E, TH-16 and MF-16.
A. Fences between houses may be 6 feet in height and solid, but may not extend closer to the street than 15 feet behind the front outside corner of the home.
B. Fences along a side street-
1.
May be no closer to the street than the rear corner of the home,
2.
May not overlap the house with a fence either from the front or the rear, and
3.
May be up to 6 feet in height at the rear of the building and may be solid.
C. Notwithstanding the above, picket fences are allowed in the front yard and to within 18 inches of any property line adjacent to a street.
D. Fences along a rear alley may be up to 6 feet in height and must be located at least 3 feet back from the property line. They may also be solid unless facing a trail or open space. The area between the fence and alley should be irrigated and must be planted with grass, ground cover, shrubbery or trees.
E. Allowed configurations:
1.
Picket fences in front yards shall be a minimum of 30% open and include corner posts. They may be a maximum of 42 inches in height with posts up to 48 inches in height. Materials include painted rot-resistant wood, metal or flat topped (non-crimped or capped) plastic/PVC or similar material with integrated color.
2.
Wood fences greater than four (4) feet in height shall be constructed using metal posts set in concrete.
14-55
3.
Wrought iron style metal fences must be constructed of minimum ½ inch material primarily oriented vertically. There shall be 4" to 6" spacing between vertical elements.
4.
The finished side of all perimeter fencing which is visible from a public area or right-of-way shall face outward.
(3) Subdivision Screening Walls
A. New Subdivisions. No new subdivisions may include a screening wall between the subdivision and a street right-of-way without approval of a Specific Use Permit. Residential units must face or side on to roadways. This may be achieved on major roadways by utilizing large lots (capable of including additional parking and on-site maneuvering), eyebrows or slip streets.
B. Subdivisions Approved or Platted Prior to the Effective Date of this Ordinance. Where a perimeter screening wall or fence is erected between any residential subdivision, TH-16 or MF-16 development and any public right-of-way, the following requirements shall apply:
1.
All residential subdivision fencing which abuts a thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry materials (not including concrete block or poured in place concrete, except for vertical column support), wrought iron or living plant material. It shall not run in straight line without being off-set by a minimum of 6 feet every 100 feet. It shall be located no closer to the ROW than 6 feet, and shall include irrigation and landscaping.
2.
No new fence or screening wall (which is parallel to, perpendicular to, approximately parallel to, or approximately perpendicular to an existing subdivision screening wall or fence) erected after the effective date of this ordinance shall be erected to a height which exceed the height of the subdivision screening wall or fence.
3.
Where a developer or homeowners’ association of an existing subdivision constructs a wrought iron or other similar non-opaque fence adjacent to any thoroughfare, no screening wall or fence shall be erected after the effective date of this ordinance within the required side or rear yard which is parallel to such wrought iron or similar non-opaque fence.
4.
No existing screening wall or fence shall be repaired, extended or modified unless such repairs, extensions, or modifications are done in a manner consistent with the color, material, or character of the existing screening wall or fence, and any such extension occurs along the entire length of such screening wall or fence, including where such screening walls or fences may be interrupted by streets, alleys, or other access ways.
(i) Chart of District Standards. The following chart of District Standards shall govern those standards listed unless in conflict with other provisions of this Development Code. 14-56
Chart of Development Standards
14-57
Sec. 14.502 Agriculture-Open Space District
(a) Agriculture (A-O) District
(1) Purpose. The Agricultural District is a reserved area in which the future growth of the City might occur. It is the intent of this district that agricultural land be held in that use for as long as is practical and reasonable to promote orderly growth. This zoning is suitable for areas where development is premature because of a lack of utilities, capacity, or service, or where the ultimate land use has not been determined.
The zone is also to be used:
A.
To protect those areas that are unsuitable for development because of physical problems or potential health or safety hazards such as flooding. The use of the land would be permanently restricted to low intensity agricultural uses until such time as the property is proven to be suitable for development and is rezoned.
B.
To provide a permanent greenbelt to preserve natural areas or open space buffer around uses that might otherwise be objectionable or pose environmental or health hazards.
C. No uses should be allowed that would be detrimental to urban land uses.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, farming and ranching-related activities and accessory uses, including the owner's single family dwelling on 5 acres or more provided that it can be served by septic and water provided on site, shall be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
Sec. 14.503 Residential Districts
(a) General Residential District Standards – All residential districts.
(1) Residential Unit Diversity
A. Requirement for Single Family Districts. In order to ensure a diversity of housing types for young couples, empty-nesters and retirees, a portion of the total number of lots and units in certain Single Family zoning districts shall meet the standards for Empty-Nester Units.
1.
In residential subdivisions in SF-4, SF-5 and SF-6 zoning districts, developments of 20 or more acres in size which are being developed to within 20% of the maximum allowable density, shall contain a minimum of 20 percent Empty-nester Units.
2.
Such units shall fall under the district’s overall density cap.
B. Empty-Nester Units may include single family lots or two-story townhouses and are characterized as
1.
Single family living units which are 1,000 to 1,400 s.f. in size; Townhouses must be at least 1,200 s.f. with no maximum size. An SUP shall be required for units down to 850 s.f.
2.
Lots which are between 30 and 50 feet wide; Townhouses must be a minimum of 20 feet in width. 14-58
3.
All such lots shall be within 300 feet of publicly accessible open space of at least 4,000 s.f. which has a minimum dimension of 50 feet. Single family or Townhouse lots must face or side onto this open space.
4.
Notwithstanding the above, Empty-Nester units may also include homes designed and built to appear like a traditional large home, but which may include up to four living units meeting the size limitations above.
(2) Residential Facing Streets. Newly created residential subdivisions shall face or side homes on to streets and open space. Such subdivisions shall not be designed or laid out in a manner that will result in placing the rear of homes next to roadways. This may be achieved on major roadways by utilizing large lots (capable of including additional parking and on-site maneuvering), eyebrows, slip streets or courts. Facing Homes on to Major Streets.)
Exterior Wall Materials
1. All buildings of 300 s.f. or more and over nine feet (9) tall shall have exterior walls constructed of at least eighty percent (80%) standard masonry construction, excluding windows and doors, unless the wall is on a porch, patio, courtyard, or breezeway, in which event, the wall may be of non-masonry construction. Hardy Plank or similar cementaceous material may be used for up to 50% of the masonry requirement. Buildings with less than 80% shall require approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Buildings less than 300 s.f. and under 9 feet in height may be constructed with non-masonry materials, or may be all metal with a baked-on pre-painted surface, but must be screened from a public street or open space.
3. Exceptions to these requirements, including buildings for farm animals, may be permitted on a case by case basis by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon submission and approval of elevation drawings of the subject structure, and material samples.
4. Barns used for agricultural or farm animal purposes in AO districts are excluded from this masonry requirement.
(3) Residential Garages and Carports.
A. Garages. In single family or duplex districts, parking garages must be located off an alley; or if accessed from the front street, must be located at least 20 feet behind closest corner of the front building façade for front entry garages, unless it is a “J-Swing” garage where the garage door is perpendicular to the street. “J-Swing” garages may only be permitted on lots which are 60 or more feet in width.
14-59
B. Carports. In single family or duplex districts, carports must be located at least 20 feet behind the front building façade and be architecturally integrated with the main residential structure.
C. Porte-cocheres. Porte-cocheres may be permitted provided that they are architecturally integrated with the primary structure.
D. Height. The garage or carport, attached or unattached, may not exceed the height of the main structure.
(b) Neighborhood Infill Standards
(1) Intent. The intent of Infill Standards is to preserve the community’s special neighborhood areas and to—
A.
Ensure compatible development on vacant lots and redevelopment of parcels, with the existing fabric of the neighborhood.
B.
Preserve and enhance the neighborhood’s unique character, and preserve property values.
(2) Applicability. These standards apply to neighborhoods which were subdivided into individual residential lots of 20,000 s.f. or less, prior to 1960.
(3) Standards.
A.
Setbacks. The setback from the front and side property lines shall be in the order of the average setbacks of other developed properties on the same block face. In no case shall the setback exceed or be less than any other property on the block face.
B.
Parking. On-site parking and the location of the residential garage shall conform to the predominant location in relationship to the site and primary building, as other sites on the block face.
C.
Roof style and pitch. The roof style and pitch shall conform to the typical roofs in the block face.
D.
Exterior Building Materials. Building materials shall reflect the materials in common use along the block face. However, Hardie Plank or a similar cementatious-fiber board plank in terms of warranty and finish may be used in place of wood siding. Such siding shall be similar in width and scale to the predominant siding on the block face.
E.
Amenities. Front porches, windows on the street, and chimneys may also be required, where they are common in the block face or neighborhood.
F.
Exceptions the following projects are exempt from the requirements of this sub-section:
1.
Any property that is being rebuilt within the original footprint and to within 10% of the same building area with the same exterior configuration and materials, and
2.
Any property located in a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay or Historic District.
(4) Determination of Conformity.
A.
The Director shall determine whether the proposed infill development meets the standards of this sub-section; or at his/her discretion, may refer such determination to the Commission.
14-60
B.
An appeal of the Director’s determination may be made to the Commission by the applicant. The Commission may, at its discretion, relax the standards above provided that it determines that the resulting development would be more appropriate and have a greater enhancement value for the block face and neighborhood.
C.
The Commission’s decision may be appealed to the City Council, whose determination shall be final.
(c) Single Family Estate (SF-E) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. This district is considered to be the proper zoning classification for large lot developments for single-family dwelling use in a rural setting.
B. Areas that are zoned for this use shall have or provide for water, wastewater, drainage and access to paved streets.
C. It is intended for areas that are properly buffered from non residential uses, and protected from pollution and/or environmental hazards or from high volume of non-single family traffic.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, large lot single family uses shall be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article 14.500 General and Article14.500 Residential Districts of this ordinance.
(d) Single Family Residential (Sf-4) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. This district is considered to be the proper zoning classification for large lot developments for single-family dwelling use. It is intended to be composed of single-family dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units.
B. Areas that are zoned for this use shall have or provide for water, wastewater, drainage and access to paved streets based on single-family use required by the allowed density.
C. It is intended for areas that are properly buffered from non-residential uses, and protected from pollution and/or environmental hazards or from high volume of non-single family traffic.
(b) Permitted Uses. In general, single-family dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units, may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(c) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article 14.500 General and Article14.500 Residential Districts of this ordinance.
(e) Single Family Residential (SF-5) District.
14-61
(1) Purpose.
A. This district comprises a major portion of the existing single-family dwelling development of the City. It is intended to be composed of single-family dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units.
B. Areas that are zoned for this use shall have or provide for water, wastewater, drainage and transportation capacities based on single-family use required by the allowed density.
C. It is intended for areas that properly transition to retail and service uses, and are protected from pollution and/or environmental hazards or from high volume of non-single family traffic.
(2) Permitted Uses In general, single-family dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units, may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article 14.500 General and Residential Districts of this ordinance.
(f) Single Family Residential (SF-6) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. This district is considered to be the proper zoning classification for areas of the undeveloped land remaining in the City appropriate for single-family dwelling use. It is intended to be composed of single-family dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units.
B. Areas that are zoned for this use shall have or provide for water, wastewater, drainage and transportation capacities based on single-family use required by the allowed density.
C. It is intended for areas that properly transition to retail and service uses, and are protected from pollution and/or environmental hazards or from high volume of non-single family traffic.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, single-family dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units, may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article 14.500 General and Article 14.500 Residential Districts of this ordinance.
(g) Duplex (Two-Family) Residential (2F-6) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. The Duplex Residential District is established to provide adequate space and site diversification for medium-density, duplex type residential development with two
14-62
dwelling units per lot, and at almost twice the density of a typical single-family development, and to adjust the development standards accordingly.
B. Duplex type development is a low to medium density use, and additional requirements for streets, water and fire protection, wastewater, drainage, and adequate open space shall be met before development to such use.
C. Duplex developments are not necessarily a buffer between single-family and commercial uses, and should properly transition to from non-residential uses like retail and service, and be protected from high volumes of non-residential traffic, or from pollution and/or environmental hazards.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, single-family and duplex dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units, may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article 14.500 General and Article 14.500 Residential Districts of this ordinance.
(h) Zero Lot Line Residential (Zl-7) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. The Zero Lot Line Residential District is established to provide adequate space and site diversification for medium-density residential development that is single-family, on separate lots, and typically owner occupied.
B. Zero Lot Line development is a medium density use. The increased requirements for street, water and fire protection, wastewater, drainage, and adequate open space should be met or provided for before zoning to this district.
C. Zero Lot Line developments must properly transition to retail and service uses, and be protected from high volumes of non-single family traffic, or from pollution and/or environmental hazards.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, single-family dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units, may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article 14.500 General and Article 14.500 Residential Districts of this ordinance.
(i) Town House Residential (TH-16) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. The Town House Residential District is established to provide adequate space and site diversification for high-density residential development that is single-family, on separate lots, and typically owner occupied.
14-63
B. Town house type development is a high density use, and additional requirements for streets, water and fire protection, wastewater, drainage, and adequate open space shall be met before development of such use.
C. Town house developments can provide a buffer or transition between single-family and commercial uses like retail and service, but should be properly protected from pollution and/or environmental hazards.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, single-family dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units, may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards.
A. No more than six dwelling units should be attached in any continuous row or group of units; however this may be varied if specifically addressed and approved as part of the Site Plan.
B. No required parking shall be allowed in the required front yard.
C. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article 14.500 General and Article 14.500 Residential Districts of this ordinance.
D. Articulation Requirements. Individual units should be articulated to distinguish them from each other. Facades shall meet the following minimum standards for articulation:
1. Horizontal Articulation. No building wall shall extend for a distance equal to 2 times the wall’s height without having an off-set of 20% of the wall’s height, and that new plane shall extend for a distance equal to at least 25% of the maximum length of the first plane.
2. Vertical Articulation. Each must include at least one of the following which varies from the adjacent unit: a varied eave line elevation, a gable, articulated stoop, entry feature or other approved variation which may be approved by the Director.
3. The Director or the Planning and Zoning Commission may vary these standards through approval of a particular design elevation, upon determining a “finding” that the composite elevation of townhomes will be improved and made more attractive by varying such standards.
(j) Multi-Family Residential (MF-16) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. The Multi-Family Residential District is established to provide adequate space and site diversification for medium density areas.
B. All Multi-family districts should be located within 1,200 feet of retail and other services; and no more than 500 units should be located within one mile of each other. These standards will help support a strong market for the units, and consequently on-going reinvestment, while helping to make sure that inappropriate concentrations of multi-family units are not created. The Downtown area is exempted from the spacing standard.
14-64
C. This zone allows medium density developments, and should be located where additional requirements for streets, water and fire protection, wastewater, drainage, and adequate open spaces are met. MF-16 uses should not run traffic through single-family neighborhoods, and should be located close to arterial or collectors capable of carrying the additional traffic.
D. Multi-Family developments are not necessarily a buffer between single-family and commercial uses, and should be property buffered from pollution and/or environmental hazards.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, duplex and apartment dwellings together with public, denominational and private schools, and public parks essential to create basic neighborhood units, may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards.
A. Refuse Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a refuse facility; measured along the designed pedestrian and vehicular travel way.
B. Open Space. Each lot of parcel of land, which is used for multifamily residents, shall provide open space on the same lot or parcel of land. Such open space shall be landscaped and improved for use by residents in engaging in recreation or social activity:
1.
Efficiency apartments and one-bedroom apartment units shall provide a minimum of 500 s.f. of usable open space per unit. For each additional bedroom over one (1), an addition 300 s.f. shall be provided.
2.
In meeting this requirement, a credit of 3 s.f. may be applied for each square foot utilized for swimming pools and adjacent decks, patios or lounge areas within 10 feet of a pool; developed or equipped children’s play areas; and usable portions of recreational buildings. At the time of Site Plan approval, the Planning and Zoning Commission and /or City Council may allow a credit not to exceed 10% of the total required usable open space for adjacent and immediately accessible public parks or open space. The combined credit for areas calculated at a 3:1 basis and for public parks shall not exceed 50% of the total usable open space for an individual lot or parcel.
3.
At the time of Site Plan approval, the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may give full or partial credit for open areas that exceed a 4:1 slope, it is determined that such areas are environmentally significant and that their preservation would enhance the development.
C. Other Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article 14.500 General and Article 14.500 Residential Districts of this ordinance.
Sec. 14.504 Commercial Districts
(a) General Commercial District Standards
14-65
(1) Mixed Use. Retail properties comprised of a total of 10 acres or more and zoned NS or R, may include residential loft units with a minimum of 800 s.f. in size and 2-story townhouses which are a minimum 1,200 s.f. in size, provided that they are integrated with the retail development and included on the approved Site Plan for the development. Such residential use may comprise up to 50% of the total amount of development on the site.
(2) Construction Materials.
A. Exterior Walls. Each exterior wall shall consist of 100% masonry materials as defined in Article 14.1300 Definitions - Masonry, excluding doors and windows, on walls which are visible from a public street or open space.
All buildings shall have exterior walls constructed of stone, brick, glass block, tile, cast metal, cast or cultured stone, or a combination of those materials. The use of other cementaceous products (e.g. stucco, Hardy Plank, or other similar materials approved by the Building Official) shall be limited to 50% of the buildings exterior finishes where it will be applied under the highest standards for quality and durability. However, stucco may not be located in the first 8 feet above grade on a façade visible from a street or public area.
Exceptions to this requirement may be permitted on a case by case basis by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council upon submission and approval of elevation drawings of the subject structure, and material samples.
(3) Maximum Building Height.
A. All Districts. The height limit for all structures shall be as established in the Districts governing the property on which the structures are located, and the exceptions to height setback standards below.
B. Building Height and Setback Exceptions for Commercial Districts.
Exceptions. The following features may be constructed 12 feet higher than the maximum height requirement of the zoning district in which the structure is located:
1.
Chimneys, church spires, elevator shafts, and similar appendages not intended as places of occupancy or storage.
2.
Flag poles and similar devices.
3.
Heating and air conditioning equipment, solar collectors and similar equipment, fixtures, and devices.
Provided that they are:
1.
Not more than one-third of the total roof area; and
2.
Set back from the edge of the roof a minimum distance of two feet for every foot by which such features extend above the roof surface of the building to which they are attached.
(4) Building Articulation.
A. Requirements. Facades shall meet the following minimum standards for articulation:
1.
Horizontal Articulation. No building wall shall extend for a distance equal to 3 times the wall’s height without having an off-set of 25% of the wall’s height, and
14-66
that new plane shall extend for a distance equal to at least 25% of the maximum length of the first plane.
2.
Vertical Articulation. No horizontal wall shall extend for a distance greater than 3 times the height of the wall without changing height by a minimum of 25% of the wall’s height. 14-67
FIGURE 1 COMMERCIAL BUILDING ARTICULATION EXAMPLE
14-68
(5) General Standards.
A. These criteria shall apply to new retail/office building construction in commercial districts only. They shall not apply to the use, re-use, modification or consolidation of existing retail and/or commercial space developed prior to November 1, 2004 or to the expansion of existing retail space existing as of November 1, 2004 by no greater than 10% of the existing ground floor area.
B. Buildings should be built adjacent to roadways and pedestrian routes without intervening parking areas.
C. Loading docks shall not be oriented towards streets, public open space or residential zoning districts. Where loading areas are located parallel to residential zoning districts, they must be screened by an architecturally integrated minimum 14-foot tall wall the entire length of the loading space.
D. On-Site Circulation
1.
On-site circulation should minimize the conflict between pedestrians and vehicles by placing driveways and service areas in locations that reduce the chance of interrupting on-site pedestrian movement.
2.
Buildings should be placed in a manner that screens the drive-through lanes and creates pedestrian pathways and spaces.
3.
In order to maintain on-site circulation, each drive-through lane is to be separate from pump islands and from routes necessary for entering and exiting the property.
E.. Where the property immediately abuts a residential zoning district, unless separated by a four-lane or larger thoroughfare, a minimum 10-foot wide landscaped edge must be installed for buildings 25,000 square feet to 50,000 square feet in area, a minimum 15-foot wide landscaped edge for buildings 50,001 square feet to 79,999 square feet in area and a minimum 30-foot wide landscaped edge for buildings 80,000 square feet and greater in area in addition to the screening required by the Landscape Regulations of the City of Lancaster for all aforementioned building sizes. The landscaped edge must include a combination of sidewalks, evergreen shrubs, and a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees (minimum 4” caliper) placed a minimum 25 feet on center. Planting may be grouped.
F. Open storage areas shall be connected to the building and screened with the same building materials as the primary building.
G. For those buildings over 80,000 square feet in area, the applicant must demonstrate that the building can be subdivided in a reasonable manner by submitting a plan indicating potential entrances and exits and loading areas for multiple tenants.
(6) Screening. Unless approved by Exception, the following items shall be screened as follows:
A. Off-street loading docks must be screened from all public streets and any residential district that abuts or is directly across a public street or alley from the lot.
14-69
The screening required under this Section must be at least six feet in height and may be provided by using a masonry fence (excluding tilt wall or concrete block unless otherwise approved by Exception), berms, plantings or a combination of the above.
B All refuse storage areas for trash dumpster shall be visually screened on three sides with an enclosure matching the main structure not less than 6 feet in height. The access area shall be screened with an opaque gate and shall not face a public street unless otherwise approved during Site Plan approved.
Dumpster storage should be located to the rear of the buildings with proper access. Trash dumpster shall not be located in any required parking space and shall allow proper access by service trucks. Dumpster pad sites shall be designed to City standards specified in the subdivision Standards of Design, as currently adopted or as may be amended in the future.
C. Pad mounted utility equipment, and air conditioning units, including roof mounted units, shall be screened from horizontal view from any adjacent public street and from any adjacent property. Utility equipment and air conditioning units shall be screened utilizing plantings, berms, or walls matching the main structure.
D. Above-ground storage tanks shall be screened utilizing plantings, berms, or walls matching the main structure.
(b) Neighborhood Service (NS) District
(1) Purpose.
A.
The (NS) Neighborhood Service District is established as a limited retail category intended for use near neighborhood areas for the purpose of supplying day-to-day retail needs of the residents in the area, such as food, drugs and personal services.
B.
The NS district occurs at limited corner locations on arterials in existing developments and is intended for small service areas in new developments. The average site is from ½ to one acre, up to 2 acres.
C.
Since the site is typically small, and surrounded by residential type land uses, this zoning would have the appearance of a spot zone. It is not an illegal spot zone, however, if it is called for in the comprehensive plan, or if it serves a need in the neighborhood. A similar neighborhood convenience center within 1/4 mile of a proposed center would be an indication that the need for such a center is already being met.
D.
While the uses allowed in this district are intended to be located within or adjacent to residential areas, care must be taken to insure that adjacent residential uses are protected. Uses with excessive amounts of traffic, noise, or litter are not intended for this district. Areas where two or more corners of an intersection are intended to have shopping facilities should be zoned a less restrictive district. The centers should be located at the intersection of collector type streets or larger that are capable of handling the additional traffic. The area, landscaping, and buffering requirements are more restrictive in this district in order to protect adjacent uses.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, retail businesses which supply day-to-day retail needs of the residents in adjacent neighborhoods, such as food, pharmaceuticals and personal services, 14-70
may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article IV Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Section (a) General and Section (d)(1) Commercial District Standards of this Article.
(c) Retail (R) District.
(1) Purpose.
A.
The Retail District is established to provide limited retail and service uses for one or more neighborhoods. The uses specified in this district include most types of retail activity and are located on, or at the intersections of, major thoroughfares. This district does not include strip commercial, large shopping centers, wholesaling operations, lumber yards, contractor yards, and warehousing with high volumes of truck traffic and low volumes of retail type traffic.
B.
This district will not be a major retail district, and will try to avoid intensive commercial uses and large volumes of retail traffic. The noise, traffic, litter, late night hours, and other influences that could be harmful to residential areas require adequate buffering from residential areas, and the traffic from such uses should not pass through residential areas, except on arterial or major collectors. There are restrictions on access to prevent traffic congestion or an adverse effect on major thoroughfares.
C.
Areas should not be zoned to this use unless they are located on or close to arterial or major collectors capable of carrying the additional traffic they will generate, and in areas where there is increased water, fire protection, wastewater and drainage capacity.
D.
This zone is a light retail zone, and it is intended that limited commercial uses fall in this district. Since the zone will be located close to residential areas, the development standards are stringent and require as high a standard of development as the R and NS districts.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, retail and service uses for one or more neighborhoods may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Section 1 General and Section 4.1 Commercial District Standards of this Article.
(d) Town Center (TC) District
(1) Purpose.
A.
The Town Center District is established to accommodate the existing development in the central area of the City, and to protect its character. It recognizes the unique characteristics of the downtown, its high level of pedestrian activity, and its space limitations for site development and parking.
B.
The use of this district should be limited to those areas that are currently developed as the downtown.
14-71
C.
Existing uses that are part of the Town Center District require less site area and off-street parking requirements since the properties in this district have a very high floor area ratio, and very little additional land for landscaping, off-street parking, and setbacks.
Note: No standards are established for the Town Center District at this time.
(e) Commercial Highway (CH) District
(1) Purpose.
A.
The Commercial Highway District is established to provide adequate space and site diversification for most types of commercial development in the City of Lancaster. Larger shopping centers and most of the existing commercial strips along major arterial roadways would be included in this district. The uses specified in this district include most types of retail activity and some wholesale with the exception of those uses which are not compatible with the retail shopping function. For example, contractor yards, and warehousing with high volumes of truck traffic and low volumes of retail type traffic are not included in this district.
B.
This district will be the major retail district, with intensive commercial uses and large volumes of retail traffic. The noise, traffic, litter, late night hours, and other influences that could be harmful to residential areas require adequate transitioning to residential areas, and the traffic from such uses should not pass through residential areas, except on arterial or major collectors.
C.
Areas should not be zoned to this use unless they are located on or close to arterial or major collectors capable of carrying the additional traffic they will generate, and in areas where there is increased water, fire protection, wastewater and drainage capacity.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, any retail business, personal service, professional service, or business service conducted within an enclosed building, excluding high truck traffic uses, may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards.
A.
Sale of Goods. All business establishments other than those selling a service, shall be retail or wholesale service establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold on premises where they are produced.
B.
Business Operations and Storage. All business operations including storage shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building unless specifically authorized for the use as listed. This excludes off street parking and loading, incidental display of retail items for sale, retail outlets where gasoline products are sold and drive-in businesses.
14-72
14-73
C.
No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Section 1 General and Section 4.1 Commercial District Standards of this Article.
(f) Commercial Service (CS) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. The Commercial Service District is established to provide adequate space and site diversification for commercial establishments may involve uses that would be objectionable in the other commercial districts or adjacent to residential districts. Included in this district are commercial uses that involve large volumes of truck traffic, outside operations and storage of materials and equipment, either for sale or as part of the business, excessive noise from heavy service operations, or any other possibly adverse influences.
B. This district is commercial in nature, but has some aspects that are similar to industrial uses. The noise, traffic, litter, late night hours, outside storage of materials and equipment, and other influences that could be harmful to residential areas require adequate buffering from residential areas, and the traffic from such uses should not pass through residential areas at all, if possible. These areas should not be located in close proximity to residential areas of any type.
C. Areas should not be zoned to this use unless they are located on or close to arterials capable of carrying commercial and truck traffic. They should be located close to major truck routes. Internal streets in such developments should be sized and strengthened to accommodate truck traffic. Fire protection should be adequate for large warehouse type operations, and the water, wastewater, and drainage systems should have enough existing capacity to support such development.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, commercial uses that may involve large volumes of truck traffic, outside operations and storage of materials and equipment may be allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards.
A. Outside Storage.
1.
All outside storage shall be placed behind the front façade of the main structure. This does not apply to uses that allow incidental display, in which case only the amount of goods necessary for display purposes shall be exempt from this requirement.
2.
All outside storage shall be screened from streets and public areas.
B. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Section 1 General and Section 4.1 Commercial District Standards of this Article.
Sec. 14.505 Industrial Districts
(a) General Industrial District Standards.
(1) Construction Materials. Exterior Walls - Each exterior wall shall consist of 100% masonry materials as defined in Article 14.1300 Definitions - Masonry, excluding doors and windows, on walls which are visible from a public street or open space, including a minimum of 20% stone.
All buildings shall have exterior walls constructed of stone, brick, glass block, tile, cast metal, cast or cultured stone, or a combination of those materials. The use of other cementaceous products (e.g. stucco, Hardy Plank, or other similar materials approved by the Building Official) shall be limited to 50% of the buildings exterior finishes where it is deemed important as a design feature and where it will be applied under the highest standards for quality and durability. However, stucco may not be located in the first 8 feet above grade on a façade visible from a street or public area.
Exceptions to this requirement, including allowing concrete tilt-up walls, may be permitted on a case by case basis by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council upon submission and approval of elevation drawings of the subject structure, and material samples.
(2) Maximum Building Height.
A.
All Districts. The height limit for all structures shall be as established in the Districts governing the property on which the structures are located, and the exceptions to height setback standards below.
B.
Building Height and Setback Exceptions for Industrial Districts.
Exceptions. The following features may be constructed 12 feet higher than the maximum height requirement of the zoning district in which the structure is located:
1.
Chimneys, church spires, elevator shafts, and similar appendages not intended as places of occupancy or storage.
2.
Flag poles and similar devices.
3.
Heating and air conditioning equipment, solar collectors and similar equipment, fixtures, and devices.
Provided that they are:
1.
Not more than one-third of the total roof area; and
2.
Set back from the edge of the roof a minimum distance of two feet for every foot by which such features extend above the roof surface of the building to which they are attached.
(3) Building Articulation.
A. Requirements. Facades which face streets shall meet the following minimum standards for articulation:
1.
Horizontal Articulation. No building wall shall extend for a distance equal to 4 times the wall’s height without having an off-set of 25% of the wall’s height,
14-74
and that new plane shall extend for a distance equal to at least 20% of the maximum length of the first plane.
2.
Vertical Articulation. No horizontal wall shall extend for a distance greater than 4 times the height of the wall without changing height by a minimum of 25% of the wall’s height.
14-75
FIGURE 1 INDUSTRIAL BUILDING ARTICULATION EXAMPLE
14-76
(b) Office Research Technology (ORT) District
(1) Purpose
A. The purpose of the Office Research Technology district is to create a light office/industrial zone that provides for the modern type of office and technology park development that would include research and development as well as light manufacturing and assembly. Limitations are placed on the uses in this district to significantly restrict the outside activities and storage of materials, noise, vibration, smoke, pollution, fire and explosive hazard, glare and any other potentially adverse influences.
B. The light manufacturing and assembly uses should be conducted within a totally enclosed building. The sites for such uses are typically a minimum of two acres and average 5 to 10 acres, with a significant amount of land dedicated to landscaping.
C. Because this is a light industrial zone with substantial screening and buffering requirements, these uses are suitable for high visibility locations such as along the freeway, or within a reasonable distance of residential areas. Residential uses should be discouraged from locating near the industrial district to protect the industries from residential complaints.
D. Though truck traffic should be minimal, areas zoned for this use should be located with access to arterials capable of accommodating some truck traffic. Each industry should work with the City to insure the water pressure and capacity is adequate to provide fire protection for that particular industry before such industry is developed. Industries should also work with the City to insure that the water, wastewater, and drainage capacity is adequate before the industry is developed.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, office, research and development as well as light manufacturing and assembly uses are allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards.
A. Manufacturing Operations and Storage. All business and light assembly and manufacturing operations including storage shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
B. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Section 1 General and Subsection 5.1 General Industrial District Standards of this Article.
(c) Light Industrial (LI) District.
(1) Purpose.
A. The purpose of the Light Industrial district is to create a limited industrial zone that provides for the modern type of industrial uses or industrial park. With the exception of hazardous materials manufacture, this zone allows the same uses as the MI, Medium Industrial District. Limitations are placed on the uses in this district to significantly restrict the outside activities and storage of materials, noise, vibration, smoke, pollution, fire and explosive hazard, glare and any other potentially adverse influences.
B. This zone is intended for industrial parks and larger, cleaner types of industries. The manufacturing uses should be conducted within a totally enclosed building. Any activities conducted outside should be screened and buffered, and no external effects
14-77
such as excessive noise or odor should extend beyond the property lines. The sites for such uses are typically a minimum of two acres and average 5 to 10 acres, with a significant amount of land dedicated to landscaping.
C. Because this is a limited industrial zone with substantial screening and buffering requirements, limited industrial uses are suitable for high visibility locations such as along the freeway, or within a reasonable distance of residential areas. Residential uses should be discouraged from locating near the industrial district to protect the industries from residential complaints.
D. Areas should not be zoned to this use unless they are located on or close to arterial capable of carrying commercial and truck traffic. They should be located close to major truck routes. Internal streets in such developments should be sized and strengthened to accommodate truck traffic. Each industry should work with the City to insure the water pressure and capacity is adequate to provide fire protection for that particular industry before such industry is developed. Industries should also work with the City to insure that the water, wastewater, and drainage capacity is adequate before the industry is developed.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, industrial parks and larger, cleaner types of industrial uses are allowed. However, no building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the use tables and requirements in Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(3) Special Standards.
A.
Manufacturing Operations and Storage. All business and manufacturing operations including storage shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building unless specifically authorized for the use as listed.
B.
No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Section (a) General and General Industrial District Standards of this Article.
(c) Medium Industrial (MI) District
(1) Purpose.
A. The purpose of the Light Industrial district is to create a limited industrial zone that provides for the modern type of industrial uses or industrial park. Limitations are placed on the uses in this district to significantly restrict the outside activities and storage of materials, noise, vibration, smoke, pollution, fire and explosive hazard, glare and any other potentially adverse influences such as the use of hazardous materials.
B. This zone is intended for industrial parks and larger, cleaner types of industries. The manufacturing uses should be conducted within a totally enclosed building. Any activities conducted outside should be screened and buffered, and no external effects such as excessive noise or odor should extend beyond the property lines. The sites for such uses are typically a minimum of two acres and average 5 to 10 acres, with a significant amount of land dedicated to landscaping.
C. Because this is a limited industrial zone with substantial screening and buffering requirements, limited industrial uses are suitable for high visibility locations such as along the freeway, or within a reasonable distance of residential areas. Residential uses should be discouraged from locating near the industrial district to protect the industries from residential complaints.
D. Areas should not be zoned to this use unless they are located on or close to an arterial capable of carrying commercial and truck traffic. They should be located close to major 14-78
truck routes. Internal streets in such developments should be sized and strengthened to accommodate truck traffic. Each industry should work with the City to insure the water pressure and capacity is adequate to provide fire protection for that particular industry before such industry is developed. Industries should also work with the City to insure that the water, wastewater, and drainage capacity is adequate before the industry is developed.
(2) Permitted Uses. In general, industrial parks and larger, cleaner types of industrial uses are allowed.
(3) Special Standards. No building or land may be used, unless in accordance with the development standards in this Article.
Sec. 14.506 Special Districts
(a) General Overlay District Standards.
(1) Applicability. Overlay districts are applied to land which has a traditional district already applied. It establishes additional uses and standards which may be either more or less restrictive than the underlying zoning district. The overlay district governs in all cases where it sets out a particular use or standard. Otherwise, standards and uses in the underlying district will govern.
(b) Historic Preservation Overlay (HPO) District.
(1) Purpose. The protection, enhancement and perpetuation of districts and landmarks of historical and cultural importance and significance are necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational and general welfare of the public. It is recognized that within the City of Lancaster numerous areas, sites and structures represent the unique confluence of time and place that shaped the identity of generations of citizens, collectively and individually, and produced significant historic, architectural and cultural resources that constitute their heritage, and therefore this overlay district is intended to:
A. Protect and enhance the district and landmarks which represent distinctive elements of Lancaster's historic, architectural and cultural heritage;
B. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;
C. Protect and enhance Lancaster's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided;
D. Insure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of the City;
E. Promote economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most appropriate use of such property within the City;
F. Stabilize and improve values of such properties;
G. Promote education of local history and proper methods of preservation;
H. Assist in providing access to available funding mechanisms and resources that may be of benefit to properties within the historic district; and
I. Provide guidance to property owners restoring, rehabilitating or reconstructing historic sites or structures within the city.
(2) Core Principals, Design Guidelines and Construction Standards. In considering any application for a permit or Certificate of Appropriateness, the approving authority shall use the 14-79
following core principals, general design guidelines, and specific design standards (including specialized sub-area standards), as appropriate to evaluate the request. Core Principals are derived from the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings and are intended to demonstrate desired outcomes consistent with the purpose of historic preservation. Design Guidelines may apply to all historic districts, historic landmarks or they may vary between historic districts or landmarks as needed to preserve and protect unique cultural, historic, architectural or archeological traits distinguishing an area or site. Design Guidelines may contain both mandatory and non-mandatory provisions. Design Standards are mandatory elements that must be applied and/or evaluated for compliance within a specified historic district, sub-area within a historic district or as may be established for a designated historic landmark.
A. Core Principles
1.
Every reasonable effort should be made by the property owner to adapt the property in a manner which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, object or site and its environment.
2.
The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, object or site and its environment should not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible.
3.
Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, object, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance should be recognized and respected.
4.
Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, object or site should be kept where possible.
5.
Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should reflect the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historical, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structure.
6.
The surface cleaning of structures should be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods which would damage the historic building materials should not be undertaken.
7.
Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties should not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historic, architectural or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the property, neighborhood or environment.
8.
Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to buildings, structures, objects or sites should be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the building, structure, object or site would be unimpaired.
B. General Design Guidelines. The following guidelines are considered minimal and general in nature and will be considered in the review of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness within any Historic District or Historic Landmark. New residential or non-residential construction shall also comply with any Specific Design Guidelines or
14-80
Standards that may be adopted for a particular historic district, specialized sub-area within a historic district or landmark.
1.
Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction should be compatible with the original architectural style and character of the landmark or structure, and with the surrounding structures in the historic district.
2.
Proportions of Windows and Doors. The proportions and relationships between doors and windows should be compatible with the original architectural style and character of the landmark or structure, and with the surrounding structures within the historic district.
3.
Relationship of Building Masses and Spaces. The relationship of a structure within an historic district to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible.
4.
Roof Shape. The design of the roof should be compatible with the original architectural style and appearance of the landmark or structure, and with the surrounding structures in the historic district.
5.
Landscaping. Landscaping should be compatible with the original architectural character and appearance of the landmark or structure, and with the surrounding structures and landscapes in the historic district.
6.
Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction or partial demolition should be compatible with the original architectural style and character of the landmark or structure, and with the surrounding structures in the historic district.
7.
Directional Expression. The facade of a structure within an historic district after alteration construction, or partial demolition should fit into the pattern of facades in the historic district with regard to the structure's general orientation on the lot and to the street, the setback of the structure from the street, the orientation of the main entrance and the orientation and dimension of porches. The directional expression of a landmark or structure within an historic district after alteration, construction or partial demolition should be compatible with its original architectural style and character.
8.
Architectural Details. Architectural details including materials, colors and textures should be treated so as to make a landmark compatible with its original architectural style and character and to preserve and enhance the architectural style or character of a landmark or historic district.
C. Historic Town Square Design Standards. For commercial buildings in the Historic Town Square District, the Committee shall consider the following guidelines in reviewing an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness. All new commercial construction shall comply with the standards contained in the adopted Design Guidelines for New Commercial Construction in the Historic Town Square District.
1.
Construction materials. All buildings shall be of masonry construction or masonry veneer to appear as traditional masonry construction.
2.
Exterior finishes. Exterior treatment may be either brick or stucco. However, existing brick of exterior grade shall not be stucco. Existing unpainted brick shall not be painted except where necessary to provide a uniform color (for example, to hide repair work). Unpainted brick should be compatible with existing Ferris Red brick buildings. Modern (multi-color) brick blends are prohibited. If the brick or stucco is painted, the building body and its trim shall be of colors complimentary to 1890's-1930's commercial buildings. The use of stone shall be limited to coping and trim.
14-81
3.
Windows. Upper facade windows shall be placed symmetrically on the facade. Window framing materials shall be appropriate to the architectural style of the building. Windows other than transoms and display windows fronting onto the Town Square, shall be rectangular with the proportion of the height being no smaller than two and one-half times (21/2) the width and no larger than four (4) times the width. Display windows shall be of a height consistent with other historic buildings in the Town Square.
4.
Doors. Each main or principal door shall have a transom above it. All doors and frames shall appear to be of wood construction, with or without glass, and of a design complimentary to 1890's-1930's commercial architecture.
5.
Roof. The roof shall be a flat roof, not to exceed a 1.5":12" slope or acceptable engineered design. Roofs are encouraged to drain away from the Square. Building walls shall extend to parapets which shall enclose the roof area, masking the appearance of rooftop units from the Square. If visible from a public right-of-way, down spouts or scuppers shall be painted.
6.
Height. The height of the building shall not be greater than two (2) stories, or thirty-five (35) feet in height. Towers and decorative ornaments shall not exceed a height greater than twenty (20) percent of the height of the building.
7.
Canopies. Canopies shall be constructed of permanent metal or masonry construction which meet fire codes and shall comply with Building Codes, and shall not be constructed of a temporary material such as canvas. A private canopy constructed over public property may not be supported from the ground. A canopy constructed over private property may be attached to the building or supported from the ground. The design and color shall be complimentary to commercial building canopies of the 1890's-1930's. The height, width and spacing of supports shall be compatible with existing public canopies on the Town Square.
8.
Accessory structures. Accessory structures, such as canopies, gazebos and kiosks, shall be permitted in interior open spaces visible from the public right-of-way. They shall be consistent with or complimentary to the commercial architecture of the 1890's-1930's.
9.
Landscaping and accessory items. Landscaping and accessory items including but not limited to public lighting, trash bins, park benches, decorative railings/chains, public barriers, planters, flower boxes, ash trays, public fountains and statues and yard art shall be permitted in interior open spaces visible from the public right-of-way. They shall be complimentary to the architecture of the 1890's-1930's. For reasons of public safety, landscape planting on public property by private individuals or businesses shall be subject to review if the plantings will exceed thirty (30) inches upon maturity.
10.
Minimum Front Yard Setback. none
11.
Minimum Rear Yard Setback. none
12.
Minimum Side Yard Setback. none
13.
Minimum Lot Depth. 45 feet
14.
Minimum Lot Frontage. 25 feet
15.
Maximum Density. FAR 2:1
16.
Signs. See Article 14.700. Signs – Historic District
14-82
D. Ordinary Maintenance and Repair
1. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of an historic landmark when such repair does not eliminate, alter, or replace a distinguishing interior or exterior architectural, cultural or historic feature of the landmark.
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of buildings, structures or features within a property within an historic district which does not involve an alteration, construction or removal resulting in a change in exterior architectural appearance of the property. .
3. The definition of ordinary maintenance and repair applies, whenever appropriate, to the appurtenances and environmental setting of the property, as well as the building, structure or object itself. Specific items considered ordinary maintenance and repair include the following:
a.
Repair or replacement of roofs, gutters, siding, external doors and windows, trim, lights and other appurtenant fixtures with like materials of like design.
b.
Landscaping not requiring other city permits or approval.
c.
Paving repair using like materials of like design.
d.
Repainting of surfaces.
E. Demolition by Neglect
1. Exterior Neglect. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within an historic district shall permit the exterior of the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the Committee, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself.
Examples of such deterioration include:
a.
Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
b.
Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
c.
Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
d.
Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
e.
Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof or foundations, including broken windows or doors.
f.
Deterioration of paint including significant, cracking, flaking, separation, or discoloration.
g.
Intrusion or growth of trees, vines, or other plants that have caused damage to a structure or that creates an unreasonable risk of damage to a structure.
2. Interior Neglect. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within an historic district shall permit the interior portions of the structure or property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the Committee, produce a detrimental effect upon the structural integrity of such structure or property which could make demolition necessary for the public safety.
14-83
(c) Neighborhood Preservation Overlay (NPO)
(1) Purpose and Intent
A. Within the City of Lancaster there are many unique and distinctive residential neighborhoods which contribute significantly to the overall character and identity of the City. They are worthy of preservation and protection, but may lack sufficient historical, architectural or cultural significance at the present time to be designated as historic districts. As a matter of public policy, the City Council aims to preserve, protect, enhance, and perpetuate the value of these residential neighborhoods through the establishment of Neighborhood Preservation Overlays.
B. The purposes of a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay in residential neighborhoods or commercial districts are as follows:
1.
To protect and strengthen desirable and unique physical features, design characteristics, and recognized identity and charm;
2.
To promote and provide for economic revitalization;
3.
To protect and enhance the livability of the City;
4.
To reduce conflict and prevent blighting caused by incompatible and insensitive development, and to promote new compatible development;
5.
To stabilize property values;
6.
To provide residents and property owners with a planning tool for future development;
7.
To promote and retain affordable housing;
8.
To encourage and strengthen civic pride; and
9.
To ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and redevelopment of the City.
(2) Designation Criteria. To be designated as a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay, the area must meet the following criteria:
A. Contain a minimum of one blockface (all the lots on one side of a block);
B. At least 75% of the land area in the proposed Overlay was improved prior to 1980, and is presently improved; and
C. Possess one or more of the following distinctive features that create a cohesive identifiable setting, character or association:
1. Scale, size, type of construction, or distinctive building materials;
2. Spatial relationships between buildings;
3. Lot layouts, setbacks, street layouts, alleys or sidewalks;
4. Special natural or streetscape characteristics, such as creek beds, parks, greenbelts, gardens or street landscaping;
5. Land use patterns, including mixed or unique uses or activities; or
6. Abuts or links designated historic landmarks and/or districts.
(3) Zoning Authority.
A. Separate ordinances are required to designate each Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District. Ordinances designating each Overlay shall identify the designated boundaries, applicable Designation Criteria and design standards for that Overlay, and be consistent with any existing Neighborhood and/or Community plans.
14-84
B. Neighborhood Preservation Overlays are designed as overlays to the regular zoning districts. Property designated within these Overlays must also be designated as being within one or more of the regular base zoning classifications. Property designated as a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay may have additional designations. Such property shall comply with all applicable use restrictions.
C. Zoning designation. The zoning designation for property located within a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay shall consist of the base zone symbol and the overlay district symbol (NPO) as a suffix. Neighborhood Preservation Overlays shall be numbered sequentially to distinguish among different Overlays, i.e., SF-4 (NPO-1), SF-6 (NPO-2), etc.
1. The designation of property within a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay places such property in a new zoning Overlay classification and all procedures and requirements for zoning/rezoning must be followed.
2. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of a specific Neighborhood Preservation Overlay ordinance and the regular base zoning district regulations, the provisions of the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay ordinance shall control.
(4) Initiation Procedures.
A. A zoning change application for designation as a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay shall be initiated at the direction of the:
1.
Request of owners representing 55% of the land area within the proposed Overlay, or
2.
Request of 51% of property owners within the proposed Overlay, or
3.
The Director, pursuant to a Neighborhood or Community Plan adopted by Council.
B. Following initiation for designation of a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay, the Director shall prepare a Neighborhood Preservation Plan for the proposed Overlay that includes:
1.
Maps indicating boundaries, age of structures and existing land use within the proposed Overlay;
2.
Maps and other graphic and written materials identifying and describing the distinctive neighborhood and building characteristics of the proposed Overlay;
3.
A list of all property owners (with legal addresses), neighborhood associations and/or other organizations representing the interests of property owners in the proposed Overlay; and
4.
Design standards.
C. All property owners within the proposed Overlay shall be afforded the opportunity to participate in drafting the Neighborhood Preservation Plan, which will be approved as part of the zoning ordinance creating a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay.
(5) Design Standards.
A.
The preservation plan approved as part of the zoning ordinance creating a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay shall include Design Standards for new construction of any 14-85
building or structure, or the relocation or rehabilitation to the street facade of an existing building or structure.
B.
The Neighborhood Preservation Plan and requisite Design Standards shall not apply to those activities which constitute ordinary repair and maintenance, i.e., using the same or similar material and design.
C.
The Design Standards for the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay must include at a minimum (or note the inapplicability), the following elements governing the physical characteristics and features of all property (public or private) within the proposed Overlay:
1.
Building height and/or number. of stories;
2.
Building size, massing;
3.
Principal elevation features;
4.
Lot size, coverage;
5.
Front and side yard setbacks;
6.
Off-street parking and loading requirements and location, and
7.
Roof line and pitch;
D. In addition, the Design Standards may include, but shall not be limited to, the following elements:
1.
Building orientation;
2.
General site planning (primary, ancillary structures);
3.
Density;
4.
Floor area ratio;
5.
Architectural style and details;
6.
Porches, chimneys or other features
7.
Building materials;
8.
Garage entrance location;
9.
Window/dormer size and location;
10.
Landscaping;
11.
Fences and walls;
12.
Entrance lighting;
13.
Driveways, curbs and sidewalks;
(6) Neighborhood Ordinance Administration. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official for new construction or an alteration, or additions to the street facade of an existing building or structure, within a designated Neighborhood Preservation Overlay without the submission and approval of design plans and the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance by the Director.
14-86
ARTICLE 14.507. INFILL STANDARDS
(a) Intent
The intent of Infill Standards is to preserve the community’s special neighborhood areas and to:
(1) Ensure compatible development on vacant lots and redevelopment of parcels, with the existing fabric of the neighborhood.
(2) Preserve and enhance the neighborhood’s unique character, and preserve property values.
(b) Applicability
These standards apply to neighborhoods which were subdivided into individual residential lots of 20,000 s.f. or less, prior to 1960.
(c) Standards
(1) The setback from the front and side property lines shall be in the order of the average setbacks of other developed properties on the same block face. In no case shall the setback exceed or be less than any other property on the block face.
(2) On-site parking and the location of the residential garage shall conform to the predominant location in relationship to the site and primary building, as other sites on the block face.
(3) The roof style and pitch shall conform to the typical roofs in the block face.
(4) Exterior Building Materials. Building materials shall reflect the materials in common use along the block face. However, Hardie Plank or a similar cementitious-fiber board plank in terms of warranty and finish may be used in place of wood siding. Such siding shall be similar in width and scale to the predominant siding on the block face.
(5) Front porches, windows on the street, and chimneys may also be required, where they are common in the block face or neighborhood.
Exceptions. The following projects are exempt from the requirements of this sub-section:
(6)
Any property that is being rebuilt within the original footprint and to within 10% of the same building area with the same exterior configuration and materials, and
(7)
Any property located in a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay or Historic District.
(d) Determination of Conformity
D.
The Director shall determine whether the proposed infill development meets the standards of this sub-section; or at his/her discretion, may refer such determination to the Commission.
E.
An appeal of the Director’s determination may be made to the Commission by the applicant. The Commission may, at its discretion, relax the standards above provided that it determines that the resulting development would be more appropriate and have a greater enhancement value for the block face and neighborhood.
F.
The Commission’s decision may be appealed to the City Council, whose determination shall be final.
14-87
14-88
ARTICLE 14.600. PARKING AND LOADING
Sec. 14.601 Purpose
(a) Parking. The purpose of this Article is to regulate the number of required off-street vehicular parking spaces within the designated districts so as:
•
to provide for the needs of occupants, customers, visitors or others involved in the use or occupancy of any building, structural improvement or place of assembly;
•
to eliminate undue use of the street system for parking purposes;
•
to avoid the construction of unnecessary parking spaces;
•
to avoid the occurrence of nonresident on-street parking in adjoining neighborhoods;
•
to protect the environment by promoting trip reduction and efficient land use through an analytic process in which the amount of parking may be limited to what is realistically needed for the uses on the site, thus reducing concrete/asphalt areas, heat islands and air pollution; and,
•
to promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
(b) Loading. It is also the purpose of this Article to require allocation of sufficient off-street/on-site loading facilities by businesses and industry to ensure that the loading and unloading of vehicles will not interfere with traffic flow or block roadways or fire lanes.
Sec. 14.602 Applicability
(a) Construction or Creation of Use. Any building, improvement, or use of land approved or erected shall include the necessary off-street parking spaces, and require off-street/on-site loading facilities subject to the standards established in this Article.
(b) Change of Use. Whenever any building, improvement, or use of land is proposed to be changed to a new use, the provision of off-street parking and loading shall be required for the new use in accordance with this Article.
(c) Expansion of an Existing Use. If any building, improvement, or use of land is expanded, the provisions for parking and loading shall be provided for the portion of land use and/or building that has been added.
(d) Renovation or Redevelopment. Notwithstanding Subsection 2.2 above, if any building, improvement, or use of land is repaired, renovated, altered, expanded or redeveloped, and the cost of such changes exceed fifty (50%) percent of the fair market value of the building improvement prior to the subject improvements, the parking and loading facilities set forth in this Article shall be made conforming, unless a specific Use Permit has been approved for such reduction in the provision of parking or loading.
Sec. 14.603 Commercial Parking
(a) Calculation of Spaces.
(1) Fractional Number of Spaces. In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional spaces shall be counted to the nearest whole space. Parking spaces located in buildings used for repair garages or auto laundries shall not be counted as meeting the required minimum parking.
(2) Requirements for Uses Not Listed. The off-street parking requirements for a use not specifically listed in the schedule below shall be the same as required for a use of a similar nature as determined by the Director.
(b) Paving Materials. All required parking and loading areas, public and private drives, and fire lanes shall be constructed per the City’s Subdivision Regulations (Article 14.1600 of the Lancaster Development Code), General Design Manual and Standard Construction Details, and the Fire Code, as amended and at the approval of the City Engineer and the Fire Marshal.
(c) Parking Access from a Public Street.
(1) Site-Specific Requirements. In all districts (except all single-family, duplex and multifamily districts), building plans shall provide for entrance/exit drive(s) appropriately designed and located to minimize traffic congestion or conflict within the site and with adjoining public streets as approved by the city engineer. Where based upon analysis by the city manager, projected volumes of traffic entering or leaving the proposed development are likely to interfere with the projected peak traffic flow volumes on adjoining streets, additional right-of-way and paving in the form of a deceleration lane or turn lane may be required to be furnished by the developer in order to reduce such interference.
(2) Site Plan Review. In the approval of a Site Plan as required in Article V. Development Standards, consideration shall be given to providing entrance/exit drives which extend into the site to provide adequate queuing of vehicles on the site. Such drives shall have curbs or other barriers to prohibit access from parking areas and other drives.
(3) Access to Residential Areas. Access from residential neighborhoods to retail uses is encouraged, but vehicular access to nonresidential uses shall not be permitted from alleys serving residential areas.
(d) Location of Commercial Parking and Loading Spaces. The required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served; except, off-street parking may also be located as follows:
(1). Parking May be Located Off-Site
A. When an increase in the number of off-street parking spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use, or where off-street parking spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required off-street parking spaces may be located at a distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from the building being served; provided, however, that a written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as provided below.
B. The distance from the land use requiring parking to the off site parking site shall be measured along the shortest legal pedestrian path between one site and the other.
C. All off-site parking must first be approved by Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use, or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or
14-89
establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from an institutional building served and not to exceed six hundred (600) feet from any other nonresidential building served.
(2) Joint Use of Parking.
A. Notwithstanding “2.” Below, no more than fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, nightclubs, cafes or similar uses and not more than eighty (80) percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium or similar uses may be provided and used jointly by similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed.
B. Parking adjustments may be allowed according to the following percentages by time of day:
14-90
FIGURE 1 PARKING ADJUSTMENT PERCENTAGES BY TIME OF DAY
TIME OF DAY
OFFICE
RETAIL
RESTAURANT
THEATER
HOTEL
6 AM - 12 Noon
1.00
0.97
0.50
0.30
1.00
12 Noon - 1 PM
0.90
1.00
0.70
0.70
0.30
1 PM - 4 PM
0.97
0.97
0.60
0.70
0.45
4 PM - 6 PM
0.47
0.82
0.90
0.80
0.70
6 PM - 8 PM
0.07
0.89
1.00
1.00
1.00
8 PM - 12 Midnight
0.03
0.61
1.00
1.00
1.00
FIGURE 2 JOINT USE PARKING EXAMPLE:
1. A sample mixed use Development comprised of Office at 50,000 sf
Retail at 20,000 sf
Restaurant at 8,000 sf
2. Individual Parking Requirements =
Office at 1 space per 300 = 50,000 / 300 = 167
Retail at 1 space per 250 = 20,000 / 250 = 80
Restaurant at 1 space per 45 = 8,000 / 45 = 178
425
3. Shared Parking Requirement =
TIME OF DAY
OFFICE
RETAIL
RESTAURANT
TOTAL
6 AM - 12 Noon
1.00X167= 167
0.97X80= 77.6
0.50X178= 89
334
12 Noon - 1 PM
0.90X167= 150
1.00X80= 80
0.70X178= 125
355
1 PM - 4 PM
0.97X167= 162
0.97X80= 77.6
0.60X178= 107
347
4 PM - 6 PM
0.47X167= 78
0.82X80= 65.6
0.90X178= 160
304
6 PM - 8 PM
0.07X167= 12
0.89X80= 71.2
1.00X178= 178
262
8 PM - 12 Midnight
0.03X167= 5
0.61X80= 48.8
1.00X178= 178
232
4. Parking Required = 355 spaces. (Highest total for any time period.) This is a reduction of 70 spaces (15.7%) over the individual parking requirements.
14-91
(3) Off-Site Parking Agreement.
A. When the required off-street parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or when the required off-street parking spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more establishments, a written agreement which assures the retention of such spaces for this purpose, and for a period of not less than 2 years, shall be drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and filed with the application for a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy if a change in use is involved.
B. If the off site parking is terminated for any reason, then alternative parking meeting the standards of this Article, shall be required, or the property shall lose its Certificate of Occupancy.
(4) Parking in Front Yards of Non-Residential. In any non-residential district, the required off-street parking space may be located in the required front yard provided that it meets landscaping and screening requirements in Article 14.800 Landscape Standards.
(e) Lighting of Parking and Loading Areas.
(1) Spill-Over Lighting. All lighting facilities shall be so arranged as to reflect the illumination away from any adjacent property. Such lighting facilities shall provide illumination within parking areas not to exceed a maintained average of one and a half (1.5) foot-candles at ground level, and shall distribute not more than two-tenths (0.2) of one foot-candle of light upon any adjacent residential property. (Also, see Article 14.700, Outdoor Lighting for Non-Residential Properties.)
(2) Lighting as a Nuisance or Safety Hazard. All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not intrude on residential property or create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or other public way
(f) Pay Parking Lots. No charge may be made for at-grade parking spaces except for special events, unless approved by City Council as part of a Specific Use Permit.
(g) Shared Parking/Cross Access. In master planned retail centers, cross-access and shared parking agreements are required for final platting.
Sec. 14.604 Residential Parking
(a) Lots Less than Five Acres.
(1) Location. All required residential parking shall be located onsite.
(2) Parking in Front Yards of Residential and Agriculture. No required off-street parking space shall be located in the required front yard in any residential or agricultural district.
(3) Storage of Vehicles. On lots less than five (5) acres, trailers, motor homes, trucks (greater than 1.5-ton capacity), camper cabins, motorcycles, boats, farm machinery, inoperable motor vehicles, or similar equipment, shall not be parked or stored on any residentially or agriculturally zoned lot or on the adjacent street except when in conformance with the following provisions:
A.
Such equipment shall be located beside or behind the primary structure and back from the nearest corner of the front façade of the house a minimum of 20 feet, and
B.
Be wholly contained in an enclosed garage or carport; or be screened with a minimum 7-foot solid fence or landscaping, from view of public rights-of-way and adjoining properties, and
C.
If located on a lot which is less than 2 acres, it shall be parked on an approved surface of concrete, asphalt or stabilized gravel.
14-92
D.
Equipment taller than 8 feet above grade shall respect the building setback lines but may be placed up to 3 feet from an alley property line.
(4) Loading and Unloading. Notwithstanding other requirements of this Section, such equipment may be parked anywhere on a residential, agricultural or commercial premises not to exceed 48 hours for the purpose of loading and unloading only.
(5) Living or Sleeping. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on any lot not approved for such purposes.
Sec. 14.605 Off -Street Parking Requirements
(a) Off-Street Parking Requirements.
(1) Parking Requirements. The Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements in Figure 3 establishes parking requirements for all zoning districts.
(2) Notwithstanding 1 above, the maximum allowed parking on a non-single-family or duplex lot may not exceed the minimum parking requirement plus an additional 10%, without approval of an Exception by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(b) Conventions Used in Parking Requirement Schedule.
(1) Square Feet. “s.f.” means gross square feet of building, unless otherwise noted.
(2) Site Area Parking Requirements. The parking requirement for a use of site area is based on the net site area exclusive of parking and buildings.
(3) Land Uses. Land uses listed under “Permitted Uses” in the accompanying schedule does not mean that this use is permitted within the City. Please refer to Article 14.400 Permissible Uses.
(c) Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Head-In Parking. An off-street parking space shall not be located on a public street. Head-in parking adjacent to a public street wherein the maneuvering of the vehicle in parking or leaving a parking space is done directly onto a public street, shall not be allowed in non-residential zoning districts nor shall it be allowed in conjunction with multi-family residential land uses unless specifically approved as part of a special district zoning ordinance such as for the downtown.
(2) Parking Spaces and Aisle Surfaces. All parking spaces, aisles and maneuvering areas shall have an all-weather surface, whether enclosed or unenclosed, and shall be connected by an all-weather surfaced driveway to a street or alley.
(3) Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions. All parking spaces and aisle dimensions shall conform to FIGURE 5 OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARD DIAGRAM unless specifically approved by the City Engineer.
(4) Site Access for Vehicles. Access to a lot or tract shall conform to the Access Control Guidelines in the Driveway Ordinance. A driveway conforming to City Driveway Standards shall be constructed for each approved access point. A permit much be obtained from the City to construct a driveway within the City.
(5) Wheel Stops. All parking, loading spaces and vehicle sales areas on private property shall have a vehicle stopping device installed so as to prevent parking of motor vehicles in any required landscaped areas, to prevent any parked vehicle from overhanging a public right-of-way line or public sidewalk. The requirement shall apply only where spaces are adjacent to the walks, right-of-way, and landscaping. Parking shall not be permitted to overhang public right-of-way in any case.
14-93
14-94
(6) Parking in Historic Preservation Area A. When the use of a legal nonconforming building located in Historic Preservation Area A changes, the number of required off-street parking spaces shall not exceed the number of spaces which existed prior to the change of use. If the number of off-street parking spaces existing prior to the change in use was less than the required number of spaces, the use may not be expanded to such an extent that the number of off-street parking spaces is reduced further.
(7) Use of Parking Spaces-All Districts. Required off-street parking spaces shall be used only for these respective purposes and shall not be used for storage or display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials or products for sale.



Intentionally left blank
14-98
Figure 5 Off-Street Parking Standard Diagram 14-99
(d) Handicapped Parking. In each parking facility, a portion of the total number of parking spaces shall be specifically designated as handicapped accessible parking spaces and reserved for vehicles licensed by the State for use by the handicapped. The following parking and passenger loading standards shall apply to any new construction within the City.
(1) Spaces Required:
FIGURE 4 HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENT
TOTAL REQUIRED PARKING IN LOT
REQUIRED NUMBER OF HANDICAPPED SPACES
1-25
1
26 - 50
2
51 - 75
3
76 - 100
4
101 - 150
5
151 - 200
6
201 - 300
7
301 - 400
8
401 - 500
9
501 - 1,000
2 % of Total
1,001 and over
20 Plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
(2).Construction Standards. Parking spaces and facilities intended for use by the handicapped shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards established by State Law, City Ordinances and the American Disabilities Act (ADA).
(3) Size of Spaces. Accessible parking spaces shall be at least 108 inches wide and shall be served by a pedestrian maneuvering access aisle at least 60 inches wide. The access aisle shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. Accessible parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding 2% in any direction.
(4) Van Accessible Spaces. One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be served by an access aisle not less than 108 inches wide and provide a minimum vertical clearance of 98 inches at the parking space and along at least one vehicle access route to such parking space from site entrance and exit. All such spaces shall be designated “Van Accessible” and may be grouped on one level of a parking structure.
(5) Sign Handicapped Accessible Spaces. Accessible spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing a symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space.
(6) Accessible Routes to the Building or Facility. At least one accessible route within the boundary of a site shall be provided from public transportation stops (if available), accessible parking and accessible passenger loading zones, and public streets or sidewalks to the accessible building entrance. The accessible route shall, to the maximum extent feasible, coincide with the route for the general public.
14-100
(7) Accessible Routes on Site. At least one accessible route shall connect accessible buildings, facilities, elements and spaces that are on the same site.
(8) Accessible Route Design Standards. An accessible route shall have a minimum clear width of 36 inches and provide adequate space for a wheel chair turn around. If an accessible route has less than 60 inches clear width, then passing spaces of at least 60 inches by 60 inches shall be located at reasonable intervals, not to exceed 200 feet. A “T” intersection of two corridors or walks is an acceptable passing place.
Sec. 14.606 Off-Street Loading Requirements
(a) Applicability. All non-residential structures which contain a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more shall provide and maintain off-street loading facilities on the same lot. Such off-street loading facilities shall be located adjacent to a public way or private service drive, in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Unless an alternative is supported by design standards and approved as part of the Detailed Site Plan, no area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities.
(2) Any loading dock or loading area must provide a maneuvering area located entirely on private property, and shall not utilize any public right-of-way, and shall not block any drive, aisle or fire lane.
(3) Loading docks that are within 400 feet of a residential district shall be equipped with noise attenuation devices and screened from view of adjacent residential lots.
(b) Lighting of Loading Areas. All lighting facilities shall be so arranged as to reflect the illumination away from any adjacent property. Such lighting facilities shall provide illumination within loading areas not to exceed one (1.5) foot-candle at ground level, and shall distribute not more than two-tenths (0.2) of one foot-candle of light upon any adjacent property.
All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not intrude on residential property or create a hazard to motorists on any street alley or other public way.
(c) Dumpster Trash Receptacles. All driveways to trash receptacles shall be designed to accommodate the weight of a 56,000 gross vehicular weight (G.V.W.) sanitation truck. Lifting aprons shall be provided in front of each trash receptacle location to accommodate the front wheels of the sanitation truck. Access to the trash receptacle and lift apron shall be in a "straight in" manner, or other manner as approved by the City Engineer. Trash receptacles shall not be located beneath any overhead utility line.
(d) Size. Loading spaces shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width, sixty-five (65) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height except as may otherwise be approved by the City Engineer.
(e) Use of Loading Spaces. Required off-street loading spaces shall be used only for these respective purposes and shall not be used for storage or display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials or products for sale.
(f) Off-Street Loading Requirements. Any use that receives or distributes material, supplies or merchandise by motor vehicle shall provide off-street loading space in accordance with the following requirements, unless otherwise approved by the Director or Designee based on the anticipated size and type of use.
14-101
(1) Retail, Commercial and Industrial Uses.
FIGURE 6 COMMERCIAL OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
GROSS FLOOR AREA (S.F.)
MINIMUM REQUIRED LOADING SPACES
0 to 10,000
None
10,001 to 40,000
1
40,001 to 100,000
2
100,001 to 160,000
3
160,001 to 240,000
4
240,001 to 320,000
5
320,001 to 400,000
6
400,001 +
Special Parking Study
(2) Auditoriums, Exhibitions Halls, Hotels, Restaurants and Sports Arenas.
FIGURE 7 RESTAURANTS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES LOADING REQUIREMENTS
GROSS FLOOR AREA (S.F.)
MINIMUM REQUIRED LOADING SPACES
0 to 10,000
None
10,000 to 150,000
2
150,001 to 300,000
4
300,001 to 600,000
5
600,000 +
Special Parking Study 14-102
ARTICLE 14.700. ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE
Sec. 14.701 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to set forth regulations which protect the public from the potential negative effects of industrial and intense commercial development by regulating smoke and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire or explosive materials, toxic and noxious matter, vibration, open storage, glare and fuel supply in the vicinity of such sites.
Sec. 14.702 Applicability
The following performance standards shall apply to all zoning districts in the City of Lancaster.
Sec. 14.703 Outdoor Lighting for Non-Residential Properties
(a) Definitions.
Candela means a measurement quantified in unit(s) of luminous intensity in any given direction. It is also commonly referred to as candlepower(s).
Floodlight means an artificial illumination in broad beam, above fifteen (15) watts with a light source that extends more than (2) inches below the horizontal plane of the laminar.
Foot candle means the amount of illumination provided by one (1) lumen uniformly distributed on one (1) square foot of surface.
Full Cut-Off means a light source that does not extend below the horizontal plan of the luminaire.
Light Source means the device which produces visible energy, such as a bulb.
Lumen means the quantity of luminous flux intercepted by a surface of one (1) square foot, all points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform source of one (1) candela. A one-candela source provides 12.57 lumens.
Luminaire means a complete lighting unit including a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, reflective, and decorative parts.
Partial Cut-Off means a light source that extends no more than one (1) inch below the horizontal plan of luminaire.
Standard means the light pole and base.
TCEQ means Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
Temporary Holiday Lighting means the type of lighting typically used during the holiday periods.
(b) Prohibited Lighting. It shall be unlawful to display or operate the following:
(1) An unshielded light source, including bare bulbs, above 15 watts, except for temporary holiday lighting.
(2) The operation of search lighting is prohibited except it shall be permitted for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days from grand openings and promotional events with permission of the Building Official.
(c) Minimum Requirements. 14-103
(1) Glare. In order to preserve the night sky and to reduce glare on roadways, pedestrian areas and adjacent development, light sources (e.g. light bulbs) shall be oriented down and toward the center of the site or shielded so as to not be visible from the property line. This applies to refractory lenses which extend beyond the lighting fixture and are designed to redirect the lighting source horizontally. This does not apply to neon or internally lit signs, or to decorative lighting with 15 watts or less per bulb.
(2) Luminaries. Light sources shall be of a down-light type, indirect, diffused, or shielded type luminaries and/or so installed as to reduce glare effect and consequent interference with use of adjacent properties and boundary streets. Bare bulbs above fifteen (15) watts or strings of lamps are prohibited, except for temporary lighting not exceeding forty-five (45) days per year and as provided by other ordinances of the city.
(3) Off-Street Parking areas. All off-street parking areas for nonresidential uses in nonresidential districts which are used after dark shall be illuminated beginning one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and continuing throughout the hours of use or until midnight, whichever is earlier. In case only a portion of a parking area is offered for use after dark, only that part is required to be illuminated in accordance with these standards. However, the portion offered for use shall be clearly designated. Lighting within the parking areas shall meet the following minimum requirements. No intermittent or flashing lights are permitted.
Intensity:
A.
On the parking area surface, an average of at least two (2) foot-candles, initial measurement, and a minimum average of one (1) foot-candle on a maintained basis.
B.
Minimum at any point on the parking area surface to be at least six-tenths (0.6) foot-candles initial, and at least three-tenths (0.3) foot-candles maintained, or one-third (1/3) of the average, whichever is greater.
(4) Building and Pole Mounted Lighting. All building and pole mounted luminaries exceeding fifteen (15) watts shall be directed down with either a partial cut-off or full cut-off source. See Exhibits A and B.
(5). Height. No light pole, base or combination thereof shall exceed thirty (30) feet.
(6) Light at Residential Property Line. The allowable maximum light intensity measured at three (3) feet above grade at the property line of a residentially zoned lot shall be 0.25 of one foot candle.
(7) Exemptions.
1. Historic or antique-style pedestrian light fixtures approved by the city are excluded from these standards.
2. Low Wattage holiday special lighting shall be permitted for a maximum time period of forty-five (45) days for each holiday used.
(d) Plan May be Required. A photometric plan describing compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may be required by the Director or Building Official if adjacent to residential areas. If required, it shall be submitted to the Director prior to the issuance of any building permit or certificate of occupancy that proposes additional lighting. This plan shall be prepared by an appropriate lighting designer such as a lighting engineer, architect or other qualified lighting designer. Upon installation of the lighting, the designer shall provide a letter certifying that the lighting is installed in accordance with the approved design and this ordinance. The Director
14-104
shall have the authority to interpret and determine compliance with this ordinance. The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant exemptions to the provisions of this Article if compliance will result in substantial financial hardship or inequity, so long as said exemption is without harm to the public. Decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.
(e) Nonconforming Lighting. Luminaries installed prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from the requirements herein.
(f) Exemptions. Lighting installed by or for a governmental agency for the public benefit that is used for activities for the public benefit such as right of way, ball fields, airports and parks shall be exempt. However, parking lot lighting for these activities shall meet the requirements of the ordinance.
14-105
Exhibit A
AMPLE OF FULL CUT-OFF BUILDING MOUNTED FIXTURE
AMPLE OF PARTIAL CUT-OFF LIGHT STANDARD
AMPLE OF PARTIAL CUT-OFF BUILDING MOUNTED FIXTURE
AMPLE OF FULL CUT-OFF LIGHT STANDARDS
Exhibit B
14-106
Sec. 14.704 Noise
(a) Noise, General. At no point either on the boundary of the zone or at 125 feet from the property line of the plant or operation, whichever distance is greater, shall the sound pressure level of any operation of plant (other than background noises produced by sources not under control of this ordinance, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below.
(b) Noise Level at Residential Property Lines. Notwithstanding 4.1 above, noise levels measured at residential property lines shall not exceed the following:
(1) Nighttime Noise Level. Noise levels shall not exceed 49 DBA at a residential property line between 7 PM and 7 AM, however, construction noise shall be limited to between 6 AM and 9 PM.
(2) Daytime Noise Level. Noise levels shall not exceed 56 DBA at a residential property line.
(3) Octave Band Standards. Noise in any octave band shall not exceed standards set out in the following chart:
(4) Higher Ambient Noise Levels. Where ambient noise levels from traffic or multiple sources already exceed the standards, the subject source may not increase that existing noise level.
(5) Public Facilities and Activities Excluded. Public facilities and activities are excluded from this standard. Such activities may include:
A.
Any activity the City or its agents conduct in pursuit of its usual activities such as trash removal, police and fire protection.
B.
Airport activity directly related to flight operations.
C.
Any public event such as concerts and other events sponsored by a public or non-profit organization. 14-107
14-108
FIGURE 3 NOISE STANDARDS
At no point along the bounding property line of any lot or parcel in a residential district shall the sound pressure level of any operation or activity exceed the decibel limits specified in the octave band groups designated in the following table:
OCTAVE BAND RANGE DECIBEL BAND LIMIT (CPS) (DB RE 0.0002 MICROBAR)
37 - 75 80
75 - 150 68
150 - 300 61
300 - 600 55
600 - 1200 51
1200 - 2400 48
2400 - 4800 45
4800 - 9600 43
‘A’ scale (for monitoring
purposes only) 56
Noise level adjustments:
Nighttime Noise—7 PM and & 7 AM Subtract 7 db
Impulsive Noise — Subtract 7 db
(Meter reading changes at a rate greater than 10 db per second)
(c) Measurement. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter and associated octave band filter, manufactured and calibrated according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat or C network of the sound level meter and the fast meter movement of the octave band analyzer. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed provided that such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of being so measured shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound-level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (2) decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent users.
Sec. 14.705 Smoke and Particulate Matter
(a) Standards. No industrial operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission for more than three minutes in any one hour, of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are:
(1) In violation of the standards specified by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), or subsequent agency; or
(2) Of such capacity as to obscure an observer’s view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in “A” above except that, when the presence of steam is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the outside atmosphere, performance shall be considered to comply with this Section.
(b) Combined Standards. The emission of particulate matter from all sources in a district subject to this Article shall not exceed the level specified by the TCEQ, or subsequent agency.
(c) Standards Measured at Property Line. Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter; or which involve dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment including but not limited to paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting shall be so conducted such that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary property line or the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding standards set by the TCEQ.
Sec. 14.706 Odorous Matter
(a) Applicability. No use shall be operated in any zoning district in such a manner that the emission of odorous matter occurs in such quantity or volume as to produce a nuisance, source of discomfort or hazard beyond the bounding property lines of such use.
(b) Determination. The odor threshold as herein referred to shall be determined by observation by a person or persons designated by the City Manager. In any case, where the operator of an odor-emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by the American Society for Testing Materials ASTMD 1391-57 entitled Standard Method for Measuring Odors in Atmosphere shall be used.
Sec. 14.707 Toxic, Caustic And Noxious Matter
No industrial operation or other use shall emit toxic, caustic or noxious matter in any concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which operation or use is located. The requirements of the TCEQ shall be met.
Sec. 14.708 Vibration
Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along the nearest adjacent property line, earthborn vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column I (below) are prohibited. In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along a zone boundary line, earthborn vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column II are prohibited. Vibrations shall be expressed as resultant displacement in inches.
14-109
Figure 4 Vibration Standards
Frequency (Cycles-per-Second)
Displacement I(Inches)
Displacement II (Inches)
0 - 10
008
004
10 - 20
005
002
20 - 30
002
001
30 - 40
002
001
40 and over
001
001
This tabulation is for steady state vibration; which is defined as continuous vibration in contrast to discrete pulses. Impact vibration, that is, discrete pulses which do not exceed 100 pulses per minute, shall not produce in excess of twice (2 times) the displacement stipulated above.
Sec. 14.709 Fire or Explosive Hazard Material
(a) Explosive Material. No industrial use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except that chlorates, perchlorates, phosphorous, and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists, or wholesalers may be permitted.
(b) Flammable Material. The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film solvents and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of the City of Lancaster, as well as the Water Pollution Control standards and regulations.
The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted in accordance with applicable City codes and ordinances. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted in accordance with applicable City codes and ordinances provided the following condition is met:
Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or manufactured within complete enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or gases which produce flammable or explosive vapors, shall be permitted in accordance with Table A.3 (exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers) and the City's fire prevention code as interpreted by the City Fire Marshall.
14-110
Table
INDUSTRIES ENGAGED IN STORAGE & DISTRIBUTION OF SUCH MATERIALS:
PROHIBITED ABOVE GROUND
100,000 GALS. UNDER GROUND
Materials having a flash point above 190° Fahrenheit
Prohibited
100,000 gals.
From and including 105 degrees Fahrenheit to and including 190 degrees Fahrenheit
Prohibited
40,000 gals.
Materials having a flash point below 105° Fahrenheit
Prohibited
20,000 gals.
INDUSTRIES ENGAGED IN UTILIZATION AND MANUFACTURE OF SUCH MATERIALS:
Materials – flash point >190°
10,000
50,000 gals.
From and including 105° thru and including 190
1,000
20,000 gals.
Materials – flash point > 105°
500
10,000 gals.
14-111
14-112
Sec. 14.710 Water and Waste Pollution
(a) Water Pollution: No operation or activity shall discharge or cause to be discharged, liquid or solid waste into public waters unless in conformance with the provisions of the TCEQ.
(b) Liquid or Solid Waste: No discharge at any point will be allowed into any public sewer, private sewer disposal system, or stream or into the ground, except in accordance with standards approved by the State Health Department or standards equivalent to those approved by such department, for similar uses, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements. All discharges shall comply with all applicable City Ordinances.
ARTICLE 14.800 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
Sec. 14.801 Purpose
(a) Purpose. Landscaping is accepted as adding value to property and is in the interest of the general welfare of the city. The City Council of the City of Lancaster has declared that a goal for the city is to provide an optimal quality of life for all citizens of Lancaster by improving the appearance of the city through increased public and private landscaping and reducing litter.
(b) Intent. These landscaping regulations provide standards and criteria for new landscaping with live plant material, and are intended to promote the value of property, enhance the general welfare, improve the physical appearance of the city, and enhance the community's ecological, environmental and aesthetic qualities. It is further the intent of this Article to
??
To establish requirements for the installation and maintenance of landscaping elements and other means of site improvement on existing and newly developed property in order to enhance the community's ecological, environmental and aesthetic qualities:
??
To reduce the negative effects of increases in air temperatures, glare, noise, erosion and sedimentation caused by expanses of impervious and non-vegetated surfaces within the urban environment;
??
To preserve and improve the natural urban environment by recognizing that the use of landscaping elements can contribute to the processes of air purification; oxygen regeneration; groundwater recharge; storm water runoff retardation; and the abatement of noise, glare and heat; and
??
To safeguard and enhance property values and protect public and private investment.
??
To support water conservation.
Sec. 14.802 Application of Article
(a) Applicability.
(1)
This Article does apply to:
Except as otherwise provided in Subsection 2.1.B, this article applies to all uses on a lot when an application for a building permit for work on the lot is made, unless the application is for:
(2)
This article does not apply to:
a.
Any property with a previously approved landscape and/or site plan prior to adoption of this ordinance, unless such plan is required to be resubmitted for consideration; and
b.
Lots containing only single-family and/or duplex uses;
c.
Restoration of a building that has been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, riot, act of the public enemy, other natural disaster, or accident of any kind, if said structure may be restored under the nonconforming use provisions of the Comprehensive 14-113
Zoning Ordinance. For purposes of this Subsection, restoration means the act of putting back into a former or original state; and
d.
Construction work on an existing structure that does not increase the total floor area of all buildings on the lot by 20 percent or more.
(3) Planned Development Districts. Landscaping requirements consistent with the standards and purposes of this article shall be a part of all ordinances establishing or amending planned development districts, unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
(4) Exceptions. An Exception maybe granted to the landscaping requirements of this article by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon making a special finding that the resulting landscape will provide an improved amenity for both the general public and users of the facility being landscaped.
(5) Permits.
a.
No permit shall be issued for building, paving, grading, construction or reconstruction until a detailed landscape plan complying with this section is approved by the building official. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the approved landscape plan.
b.
If the Building Official determines that it would be impractical to plant trees, shrubs or grass or to lay turf, due to adverse weather conditions or the season of the year, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued. Issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy will be subsequent to receipt of a letter of agreement from the property owner, tenant and/or agent agreeing to compliance with the terms of this section stating when the installation shall occur, and a letter of credit or bond for 150% of the estimated cost of the landscaping. All required landscaping shall be installed within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy.
Sec. 14.803 Landscape Plan Submission
(a) Landscape Plan Required. A landscape plan shall be submitted to the City prior to the issuance of a building, paving, grading or construction permit. The Director or designee shall review the landscape plan to determine compliance with the criteria of these regulations. If the plans are not in compliance, they shall be disapproved and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the changes necessary for compliance.
(b) Plan Content. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a person knowledgeable in plant material usage and landscape design (e.g. landscape architect, landscape contractor, landscape designer) and shall contain the following minimum information in the form and number as prescribed by the City:
(1)
Date, scale, north arrow, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of both the property owner and the person preparing the plan.
(2)
Project name, street address, and lot and block description.
(3)
Location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the lot, street address, approximate centerline of existing water courses and the location of the 100-year flood plain, if applicable; the approximate location of significant drainage features; and the location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, utility easements, driveways and sidewalks on or adjacent to the lot.
14-114
(4)
Location, height, and material of proposed screening and fencing (with berms to be delineated by one-foot contours).
(5)
Locations and dimensions of proposed landscape buffer strips.
(6)
Complete description of plant materials shown on the plan, including names, locations, quantities, container or caliper sizes at installation, heights, spread, and spacing. The location and type of all existing trees on the lot over six inches in caliper must be specifically indicated.
(7)
Complete description of landscaping and screening to be provided in or near off-street parking and loading areas, including information as to the amount (in square feet) of landscape area to be provided internal to parking areas, the total square footage included in the parking area, and the number and location of required off-street parking and loading spaces.
(8)
a computation or table showing the landscaping that is required and the landscaping being provided.
(9)
Location and description, by type and size, of existing trees proposed to be retained. Such trees shall be marked and drip-line of said trees shall be protected prior to and during all construction, including all dirt work.
(10)
Size, height, location and material of proposed seating, lighting, planters, sculptures, water features and landscape paving and other site amenities.
(11)
Identification of visibility triangles on the lot for all driveway intersections with public streets.
Sec. 14.804 Mandatory Provisions
(a) Right-of-way Landscaping Requirements
(1) Streetscape Buffer. A Street Landscape Buffer strip with a minimum width of 6 feet, must be provided along the entire length of the property to be developed, between the back-of-curb and sidewalk, that is adjacent to any residential land use. This shall also apply to all commercial land uses where there is no adjacent on-street parking. This shall be exclusive of driveways and access-ways.
(2) Street Tree Requirement. Large shade trees, as defined in the Approved Plant List for rights-of-way, shall be provided in the required buffer in numbers equal to one tree for each fifty feet of street frontage.
(3) Other Landscaping. All street rights-of-way located adjacent to the development shall be improved with grass or ground cover material and shall be maintained. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to design the irrigation system within the lot to ensure that the grass placed in the right-of-way is watered and maintained and to ensure that minimal water will enter the street itself. The designer of the irrigation system shall base the design on the ultimate proposed width of the street when designing the system. The plans for design of the irrigation system shall be approved by the City prior to installation.
(b) Required Site Landscaping
14-115
(1) Minimum Landscaping Requirements
A.
Area Required. For all nonresidential and multi-family (with more than 6 units) parcels, at least twenty percent (20%) of the site shall be permanently landscaped. All of the required landscaped area shall be located in the Street Yards, side yards and parking lots.
B.
Trees Required. At least one large tree shall be provided as follows:
1.
Street Yards Less than 10,000 square feet. In Street Yards of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, one (1) tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of Street Yard.
2.
Street Yards More than 10,000 square feet. In Street Yards of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, ten (10) trees plus one (1) tree per two thousand (2,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of Street Yard area over ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
3.
Credits for Existing Trees. Any trees listed in the City approved Plant List that are preserved on a site may be credited toward meeting the tree requirement of any landscaping provision of this section according to the following table:
CIRCUMFERENCE OF EXISTING TREE
CREDIT TOWARD TREE REQUIREMENT
6" to 8"
1.0 tree
9" to 30"
1.5 trees
31" to 46"
2.0 trees
47" or more
3.0 trees
Note 1: Tree circumference shall be measured four and one-half feet (41/2') above natural grade.
4.
Ornamental Trees. Two (2) ornamental trees, as listed in the City approved Plant List, may be substituted for one (1) required large tree. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the required large trees may be substituted by installing ornamental trees. Ornamental trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height at the time of planting.
5.
Shrubbery Required. At least one shrub shall be required for every fifty (50) square feet of the required landscape area. Placement of such shrubbery shall be taken into consideration as to the plant at full maturity, and be located so as not to conflict with vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility. 14-116
6.
Ground Cover Required. At least ten percent (10%) of the required landscape area shall be maintained in ground cover. The remaining landscape area shall be maintained in lawn grasses and mulch used around bedding plants, shrubs and trees.
C. Location of Landscaping. No less than 30% of the total requirement shall be located in front of and along the side of buildings with street frontage in Multi-family and Commercial zoning districts, including the ORT district. 100% of the total requirement shall be located in front of and along the side of buildings with street frontage in Industrial zoning districts, not including the ORT district.
D. Detention Basins. Detention basins shall be landscaped in a natural manner using grown cover, grasses, shrubs and trees in all dry land areas. There shall be a minimum of 1 tree for each 750 square feet of dry land area.
(c) Landscaping for Non-residential Land Uses.
(1) Screening of Parking. Where on-site parking is located adjacent to a street, roadway or public open space, a minimum ten-foot (10') landscape buffer is required between the property lines and any parking, paving or internal driveways. Driveway openings are permitted in the landscape buffer area. The area of the landscaped buffer may be included in the total required landscape area for the lot.
A.
Location. The landscaped buffer requirement shall apply to all sides of the lot adjacent to a public street, open space or right-of-way.
B.
Screen. The screening shall be between a minimum height of three (3) feet and a maximum of four (4) feet above the grade of the parking lot and located adjacent to the parking lot. Screening shall be opaque and consist of shrubs and/or berms.
C.
Materials. Shrubs shall be capable of reaching a height of three (3) feet within eighteen (18) months of planting, and shall be planted no more than thirty-six (36) inches on center. Berms shall comply with provisions set forth in Section 14.805. Screening walls shall be masonry.
(2) Internal Parking Lot Landscaping. It is the intent of this sub-section to encourage the high quality design and construction of parking areas in the City. It is also the intent of this section to aid in the abatement of noise, glare and heat associated with large expanses of hard paved surfaces and motor vehicles.
A. Parking Lot Landscape Area. Parking lot landscape area requirements shall be on the percentage of parking located between the building façade and the R.O.W.:
Less than 25% = 15 sq. ft. per parking stall
25% - 75% = 20 sq. ft. per parking stall
Greater than 75% = 30 sq. ft. per parking stall
Notwithstanding the standards above, the parking lot landscaping area requirement may be reduced by 50% for that portion of parking located behind the building’s, or development’s, primary façade.
B. Distribution of Islands, Peninsulas and Medians. The number, size and shape of islands, peninsulas and medians, in both street and non-Street Yards shall be at the discretion of the property owner or applicant. All required islands, peninsulas and 14-117
medians shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout such parking areas. However, the distribution and location of landscaped islands, peninsulas and medians may be adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other natural features so long as the total area requirements for landscaped islands, peninsulas and medians for the respective parking areas above are satisfied.
1. Planter islands shall have a minimum width of 10’ from edge of pavement to edge of pavement unless used as a landscape buffer between parking bays, which shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width.
2. No required parking space may be located more than 80 feet from the trunk of a large canopy tree. Notwithstanding the minimum planter dimension above, where required to meet this standard, the minimum size tree planting area shall be five (5) feet square and only trees approved for use in street rights-of-way may be used.
AMPLE OF A LANDSCAPE BUFFER BETWEEN PARKING BAYS
3. The center of no tree may be planted closer than 2 ½ feet to the pavement.
C. Planting Requirements. All planter islands in parking areas shall contain a minimum of one (1) canopy tree with the remaining area in shrubs, ground cover, grasses or seasonal color. Planter islands which have light poles for lighting the parking areas may substitute two (2) understory/accent trees for the required canopy tree.
(4) Screening of Off-Street Loading Docks
A.
Off-street loading docks in Commercial and Industrial zoning classifications must be screened from all public streets and open space, and any residential district that abuts or is directly across a public street or alley from the lot.
B.
Screening may be achieved by any method listed above, but must be at least 8 feet in height.
(5) Screening of Trash Dumpsters. All refuse storage areas for trash dumpsters shall be visually screened by a solid masonry fence not less than 6 feet in height. Six-inch concrete filled steel protective poles shall be placed at possible impact areas. The access area shall not face a public street unless otherwise approved during site plan approval.
Dumpster storage should be located to the rear of building with proper access. Trash dumpsters shall not be located in any required parking space and shall allow proper access by service trucks. Dumpster pad sites shall be designed to City standards specified in the Subdivision Standards of Design.
14-118
(6) Screening from Residential Uses
A.
Any Commercial or Industrial use or parking lot that has a side or rear contiguous to any Residential district, shall be screened with a masonry fence (excluding tilt wall or concrete block unless approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission) which is a minimum of six (6) feet in height, unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Berms in conjunction with a fence can be utilized to meet this requirement. Any ordinances concerning sight obstructions of intersections shall be applicable to the screen where it is intersected by a street, alley or driveway.
B.
Prior to construction of any required screens, complete plans showing type of material, depth of beam, and structural support shall be reviewed by the Director to determine whether or not:
1.
The screen will withstand the pressures of time and nature;
2.
The screen adequately accomplishes the purpose for which it was intended.
3.
Plans shall be sealed by a Registered Engineer or they shall conform to the City’s standard design for screening walls.
C.
Such screen shall be constructed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any building or portion thereof.
D.
The areas adjacent to the required screening wall, or areas adjacent to a public street or right-of-way, shall be maintained by the property owner in a clean and orderly condition, free of debris and trash in accordance with the applicable codes of the City.
14-119
(7) Special Requirements for Facilities with Gasoline Sales.
A.
Gasoline service stations, retail gasoline sales and other similar uses as determined by the Director shall require a minimum landscaped area of fifteen percent (15%) of the total lot area.
B.
Gasoline service stations and other retail gasoline sales shall also provide a minimum six hundred (600) square foot landscaped area at each driveway intersection and at each corner of the lot adjacent to a street frontage. This additional landscaped area may be counted toward the minimum fifteen percent (15%) requirement.
(d) Dimensions of Landscaping. All required landscaping shall be no less than 5 feet wide and a minimum of 25 square feet in area.
Sec. 14.805 Landscape Materials & Standards
(a) General
(1)
No Artificial Plant Material. No artificial plant materials may be used to satisfy the requirements of this article.
(2)
Approved Plant List.
A.
Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the City of Lancaster Plant List, and the American Standard for Nursery Stock. Other alternative species may be approved if appropriate documentation is submitted substantiating the quality as being similar to those species specified in the City of Lancaster Plant List. Grass seed, sod and other material shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests and insects. Plant materials used to satisfy the requirements of this article must comply with the following minimum size requirements at the time of installation:
B.
All required landscaped open areas shall be completely covered with living plant material. Landscaping materials such as wood chips and gravel may only be used under trees, shrubs and other plants.
C.
Trees. All trees shall comply with the following:
1.
The spread of crown of a tree is defined as average diameter horizontal width of the tree foliage (see Illustrations).
2.
A large tree shall have a spread of crown at maturity of greater than fifteen feet (15'). At the time of planting, a large tree shall be at least seven feet (7') in height and measure at least three inches (3") in caliper when measured six inches (6") above the ground.
3.
An ornamental tree shall have a spread of crown at maturity of fifteen feet (15) or less. At the time of planting, a small tree shall be at least five feet (5') in height and measure at least one inch (1") in caliper when measured six inches (6") above the ground.
D. Shrubs. Shrubs except of the dwarf variety shall be a minimum of two feet (2') in height when measured immediately after planting. Hedges, where installed for screening purposes, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous,
14-120
unbroken, solid visual screen which will reach the required height within one (1) year after the time of planting.
E. Vines. Vines not intended as ground cover shall be a minimum of two feet (2') in height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet landscape screening requirements.
F. Grass. Grass areas shall be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydro-mulched or seeded. However, solid sod shall be used in swales, on earthen berms or in other areas subject to erosion.
G. Ground Cover. Ground cover used in lieu of grass in whole and in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably completed coverage within one (1) year of planting.
H. Berms. Earthen berms shall have side slopes not to exceed 33 percent or 3:1 slope. All berms shall provide necessary drainage provisions which shall also be shown on any required site drainage plans.
I. Obstruction Prohibited. All placement of landscaping materials, with the exception of turf and grass covered areas, shall be designed so that any interference with pedestrians loading and unloading in designated parking areas is minimized; and so that the normal parking of vehicles and opening of doors in designated parking areas will not open into or damage the landscaping materials.
J. Height. For purposes of this sub-section, “height” is measured from the root crown or, if the plant is in a container, from the soil level in the container.
(b) Xeriscape Landscaping:
(1)
Xeriscape landscaping is an innovative, comprehensive approach to landscaping to promote water conservation. Xeriscape landscaping incorporates seven basic principles: planning and design, soil analysis, appropriate plant selection, practical turf areas, efficient irrigation, use of mulches and appropriate maintenance.
(2)
In order to reduce excessive water use, Xeriscape landscaping is encouraged. The total square footage of the required landscape area may be reduced by twenty percent (20%) if all landscaping materials have lower water demand, as shown in the City approved Plant List.
(c) Protection of Landscape Areas
(1) Protection of Landscaping. Required landscape areas must be protected from vehicular traffic through the use of concrete curbs, or other permanent barriers. Vehicular wheels shall be prevented from extending into landscaped areas.
(2) Nonresidential Development
A.
During any construction or land development, the developer shall clearly mark all trees to be preserved on site and may be required to erect and maintain protective barriers around all such trees or group of trees. No living trees greater than eight inches (8") in caliper may be cut, destroyed or damaged on the development site until approved as part of the landscape plan.
B.
The developer shall not allow the movement of equipment or the storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill to be placed within the drip line of any trees.
14-121
C.
During the construction stage of development, the developer shall not allow the cleaning of equipment or material under the canopy of any tree or group of trees to be preserved. The developer shall not allow the disposal of any waste material such as, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete or mortar under the canopy of any tree or group of trees to be preserved.
D.
No attachments, nails, screws or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any tree.
(3) Residential Development
A.
Prior to any land development, the developer shall clearly mark all trees to be preserved on site and may be required to erect and maintain protective barriers around all such trees or groups of trees. No living trees greater than eight inches (8") in caliper may be cut, destroyed or damaged on the development site until approved as part of the preliminary plat.
B.
No land may be proposed for development within twenty-four (24) months of having been cleared for agricultural purposes.
C.
During the construction stage of development, the developer shall not allow the cleaning of equipment or material under the canopy of any tree or groups of trees to be preserved. The developer shall not allow the disposal of any waste materials such as but not limited to paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete or mortar under the canopy of any trees or groups of trees to be preserved.
D.
No attachments, nails, screws or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any tree.
(d) Irrigation Requirements.
(1) General.
A.
All landscape irrigation shall be designed by a registered licensed irrigator.
B.
The owner shall be responsible for the health and vitality of plant material through irrigation of all landscaped areas and plant materials, and shall
1.
Provide a moisture level in an amount and frequency adequate to sustain growth of the plant materials on a permanent basis.
2.
Be in place and operational at the time of the landscape inspection for Certificate of Occupancy.
3.
Be maintained and kept operational at all times to provide for efficient water distribution.
(2) Irrigation Methods
A. Landscaped Areas. One of the following irrigation methods shall be used to ensure adequate watering of plant material in landscaped areas:
1.
Conventional System. An automatic or manual underground irrigation system which may be a conventional spray or bubbler type heads.
14-122
2.
Drip or Leaky-Pipe System. An automatic or manual underground irrigation system in conjunction with a water-saving system such as a drip or a leaky pipe system.
3.
Temporary and Above Ground Watering. Landscape areas utilizing xeriscape plants and installation techniques, including areas planted with native grasses and wildflowers, may use a temporary and above ground system, and shall be required to provide irrigation for the first two growing seasons only.
B. Natural and Undisturbed Areas. No irrigation shall be required for undisturbed natural areas or undisturbed existing trees.
Sec. 14.806 Public Right Of Way Visibility
(a) Visibility Triangles. A landscape plan showing the plan of the street on both sides of each proposed drive/street to the proposed development with the grades, curb elevations, proposed street/drive locations, and all items (both natural and man-made) within the visibility triangles as prescribed below shall be provided with all site plans, if they are not on engineering plans that are submitted at the same time. This plan shall show no horizontal or vertical restrictions (either existing or future) within the areas defined below.
(b) Visibility Triangles – Defined. No fence, wall screen, billboard, sign face, tree or shrub foliage, berm, or any other item, either man-made or natural shall be erected, planted, or maintained in such a position or place so as to obstruct or interfere within the following minimum standards; however, on non-residentially zoned lots, a single pole for mounting a sign may be placed within this area provided the pole does not exceed 12-inches in diameter, and provided every portion of the sign has a minimum height clearance of 9 feet:
1.
Vision at all intersections which intersect at or near right angles shall be clear at elevations between twenty-four (24) inches and nine (9) feet above the top of the curb elevation, within a triangular area formed by extending the two curb lines from their point of intersection, for the following minimum distances for the applicable intersection, and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle. If there are no curbs existing, the triangular area shall be formed by extending the property lines from their point of intersection for a distance as prescribed below, and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle as shown below.
2.
Intersection of Two Public Streets – the minimum required distance from the curb shall be 30 feet and the minimum distance from the property line on streets without a curb shall be 20 feet.
3.
Intersection of a Public Street and an Alley – the minimum required distance measured from the property line shall be 15 feet, or 25 feet from street curb.
4.
Intersection of Private Drive and Public Street – the minimum required distance from the curb shall be 15 feet and the minimum distance from the property line on streets without a curb shall be 10 feet.
5.
Intersection of Private Drive and an Alley – the minimum required distance measured from the property line shall be 10 feet.
14-123
(c) Sight Distance Requirements. The City hereby adopts the standards for both vertical and horizontal sight distance requirements set forth in the 1984 Edition of AASHTO Green Book, “A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets” for the construction of both public street intersections and private drive intersections, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, a proposed street or drive intersection may not meet these standards, additional engineering information exhibiting how the standards have been addressed may be required for submission and approval by the City’s Engineer.
14-124
Sec. 14.807 Completion of Landscaping
(a) In Accordance with Approved Plans
Except as otherwise provided in Subsection 7.2, all landscaping must be completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan before a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued for any building on the lot.
(b) Escrow and Assurance
If, due to circumstances beyond the property owner’s control, the required landscaping cannot be installed prior to completion of the building and if the property owner provides the building official with documented assurance that the landscaping will be completed within six months and the funds required to complete the project are placed in escrow with the City, the building official may issue one six-month temporary Certificate of Occupancy and permit the property owner to complete his landscaping during the six month period. For purposes of this Subsection, “documented assurance” means a copy of a valid contract to install the landscaping in accordance with the landscape plan within the six month period. The City shall hold the funds in escrow until such time as the landscaping is completed in accordance with the approved plan.
(c) Forfeiture of Escrow
If a temporary Certificate of Occupancy is issued under Subsection 7.2. and, at the end of the six month period, no permanent Certificate of Occupancy has been issued because the landscaping has not been installed in accordance with the landscape plan, the property owner shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance, the funds placed in escrow shall be forfeited, and the City shall issue a citation for said violation, unless an extension is granted by the City Manager.
Sec. 14.808 General Maintenance
(a) Maintenance Requirement
(1) Maintenance of Landscaping
A.
The owner, tenant and/or their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. The owner, tenant and/or their agent is responsible for regular mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping.
B.
All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other such material or plants not a part of the landscaping. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year.
(2) Replacement of Dead Plant Materials. Plant materials which die shall be removed and replaced with plant material of similar variety and size within sixty (60) days. Trees with a trunk diameter in excess of six inches (6") measured twenty-four inches (24") above the ground may be replaced with ones of similar variety having a trunk caliper of no less than three inches (3") measured twenty-four inches (24") above the ground. A time extension may be granted by the building official for conditions relating to a season of the year per the requirements of this section.
14-125
(b) Enforcement. Failure to maintain any landscape area in compliance with this section is considered a violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to penalties of this Ordinance. If at any time after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy the approved landscaping is found to be in nonconformance to the standards and criteria of this section, the building official or designee shall issue notice to the owner, tenant and/or their agent citing the violation and describing the action required to comply with this section.
(c) Utility Lines and Rights-of-Way. Any damage to utility lines resulting from the negligence of the property owner, his agents, or employees in the installation and maintenance of required landscaping in a utility easement is the responsibility of the property owner. If a public utility disturbs a landscaped area in a utility easement, it shall make every reasonable effort to preserve the landscaping materials, and return them to their prior locations after the utility work. If, nevertheless, some plant materials die, it is the obligation of the property owner to replace the plant materials.
14-126
14-127
Sec. 14.809 Recommended Plant List
ARTICLE 14.900 TREE PRESERVATION
Sec. 14.901 General Provisions
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote site planning which furthers the preservation of trees and natural areas; to protect trees during construction; to facilitate site design and construction; contribute to the long-term viability of existing trees; and to prohibit clear cutting of trees. It is the further purpose of this ordinance to achieve the following broader objectives:
1.
Prohibit the clearing of trees and natural areas.
2.
Protect and increase the value of residential and commercial properties within the City as well as forest value.
3.
Maintain and enhance a positive image, which will encourage further development in the City.
4.
Protect healthy quality trees and promote, enhance the ecological, environmental and aesthetic qualities of the City in future development.
5.
To encourage the increase of arboreal elements in design plans so as to improve both aesthetic and healthful conditions within the City.
6.
To further the preservation of trees and natural areas by protecting them during the planning, site design, construction and maintenance phases of any residential or commercial development within the city of Lancaster, Texas, with specific exemptions as outlined in Section 5.
7.
To retain the optimum number of trees on any development site.
(b) Tree Preservation Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms applicable hereto are defined in Article 13 Definitions of this Unified Development Code. For the purpose of this ordinance the Landscape Administrator shall have interpretive authority to use commonly accepted definitions and/or to utilize generally accepted professional standards when any such conflict cannot otherwise be resolved.
Sec. 14.902 Definitions for Tree Preservation
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms applicable hereto are hereinafter defined. Words and terms used in this ordinance, but not defined in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in the Lancaster Development Code, or other ordinances of the City. Words and terms defined in two ordinances shall be read in harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict in which case the definition contained in this ordinance shall control. For the purpose of this ordinance the Landscape Administrator shall have interpretive authority to use commonly accepted definitions and/or to utilize generally accepted professional standards when any such conflict cannot otherwise be resolved.
Agricultural Use. The use of land to produce plant or animal products, such as the growing of crops, raising and pasturing of livestock, timber production, Christmas tree, or farming.
14-128
Administrative Official. Provisions of this Section shall be administered by the Landscape Administrator, who shall be appointed by the City Manager.
ANSI. American National Standards Institute; standards used by the horticulture and landscape professionals to measure and evaluate trees.
Bark Protection. Where a protected tree remains in the immediate area of intended construction, the tree shall be protected by enclosing the entire circumference of the tree with approved padding material and 2” x 4” lumber encircled with wire or any other method approved by the Landscape Administrator or designee. The intent is to protect the bark of the tree against incidental contact or damage by large construction equipment.
Boring. Boring of utilities shall be required in those circumstances where it is not possible to trench around the critical root zone of the protected tree. When required, the length of the bore shall be the width of the critical root zone at a minimum depth approved on site by Landscape Administrator or designee.
Buildable Area. That portion of a building site exclusive of the required yard areas on which a structure or building improvements may be erected and including the actual structure, driveway, parking lot, pool and other construction as shown on a site plan.
Buffer Zone. Buffer zone is a method of screening or separating adjacent land use areas, which are improved with predominate non-residential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential district or use and not separated by a public street or roadway. These buffers, when required, should be densely maintained with trees and shrubs and be a minimum of twenty-five (25’) feet in depth.
Builder/Contractor (New Construction Only). A builder or contractor who has purchased land or lots for construction with intent to sell is subject to all requirements specified herein.
Building Envelope (BE). Defined as that area surrounding and adjacent to the building pad that may be cleared to allow for all necessary construction equipment and construction. Residential BE shall not exceed ten (10’) feet from the Building Pad. Commercial BE shall be determined by the Landscape administrator for the necessary tree protection. All existing natural vegetation beyond the building envelope shall be protected by protective fencing.
Building Pad. The actual foundation area of a building.
Caliper. The diameter of a tree measured is as follows: Height to measure depends on size: 0-4” (zero to four inches), measured at 6” (six inches) from natural ground level. Trees 4” (four inches) to transplantable size are measured at 12” (twelve inches) from natural ground level. All others at 4.5’ from the ground level in Diameter at Breast Height (*see ANSI standard).
Clear-Cutting. The removal of all of the trees or a significant majority of the trees within an area of land.
Conservation Design. A development design or pattern intended or having the effect of creating, retaining or preserving environmentally sensitive areas, natural habitats, wooded areas or areas of natural beauty in greater amount than would be otherwise be provided using Conventional Design or Traditional Neighborhood Design. Techniques used to achieve this result principally include the grouping together and/or concentration of buildings into clusters, reduction in lot size, reduction in paved areas and/or streets, and the use of shared common areas.
14-129
Conventional Design. A development design or pattern characterized by homes and non-residential buildings located on large individual lots, physical separation of buildings, segregation of land uses, and a predominance of individual yards within privately owned lots rather than the use of commonly-owned open areas. This pattern frequently features long block lengths, wide streets, cul-de-sacs, alleys and an emphasis on transportation service via the privately owned automobile.
Critically Alter, Critical Alteration. Uprooting or severing the main trunk of a tree, or any act which causes or may reasonably be expected to cause a tree to die. This includes, but is not limited to: damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree; a change in the natural grade above the root system of a tree, storage of materials, or the compaction of soil above the root system of a tree; an application of herbicidal chemical or the misapplication of beneficial chemicals; excessive pruning; placement of non-permeable pavement over the root system or a tree; or trenching within the primary root zone. Additionally, a tree may be considered critically altered if more than 25% of the primary root zone is altered or disturbed at natural grade, or more than 25% of the canopy is removed.
Critical Root Zone (CRZ). The area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree defined by a circle with a radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost portion of the drip line. If CRZ is compromised by site conditions, such as but not limited to, roads, sidewalks, existing buildings, utility easements, etc., the CRZ will be determined by the Landscape Administrator or designee.
Cut/Fill. Areas where the natural ground level has been excavated (cut) or raised (fill).
Drip Line. A circular line, which follows the outermost portion of the canopy of a tree and extending to the ground.
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH). The DBH is measured four and one-half (4.5’) feet from natural ground level.
FEMA 100-Year Flood Plain. The area designated as being within the one hundred year flood plain on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as of the effective date of this Ordinance. The boundary may be verified and established through field surveys based on elevation. Any changes made by FEMA to the 100-year flood plain boundary after the effective date of this Ordinance due to filling of the flood plain, channelization, or other drainage improvements shall not reduce the area in which tree preservation, replacement or protection requirements apply.
Grade Change. Any changes in ground level or soil compaction within the area just beyond the spread of the branches will damage the roots.
Ground Level Cuts. Where protected tree removal is allowed through exemption or by tree removal permit, and the root system is intertwined with protected trees which are intended to be saved, the tree shall be removed by flush cutting with the natural level of the surrounding ground. If stump removal is desired stump grinding shall be allowed upon approval of the Landscape Administrator.
Grubbing. Excavating or removing a significant part of the root system.
Tree Health. The condition of the tree, including structural integrity, pest and/or pathogen related problems.
14-130
Residential Homestead. Owners of property zoned as residential, who reside at the property as their primary residence. This term does not include properties zoned “MF” Multi-Family Residential district.
Limits of Construction. Delineation on the site plan defining the areas within which all construction activity may occur.
Municipal/Public Domain Property. Property in which title is held in the name of a governmental entity. Proper examples of this would include City Hall, public parks, Corps of Engineers’ property, State of Texas R.O.W., library, fire stations, water tower sites, public schools or similar properties.
Open Space. Open Space means a public or semi- public space, including common areas or parks that:
??
Is open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky. (Vegetation and complimentary amenity structures such as open pavilions shade structures, picnic tables, playground equipment, bicycle racks drinking fountains, trash receptacles, goal posts, lighting etc. shall not be considered obstructions.)
??
Is accessible to, designed for, and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the general public or the residents/occupants of a building, neighborhood or subdivision.
??
Is used for recreation, resource protection, amenity or buffer yard/greenbelt purposes.
??
Is not an existing or future right-of-way (R.O.W.).
??
Is not part of the roof of any building
Tree, Preserved. A protected tree shall be considered preserved only if a minimum of 75% of the critical root zone is maintained at undisturbed natural grade and not more than 25% of the canopy is removed due to building encroachment. The canopy shall retain its natural form and integrity.
Protective Fencing. Protective fencing shall be orange vinyl construction fencing or other material approved by Landscape Administrator or designee with a four-foot (4') approximate height adequately supported.
Pruning, Allowed. Approved pruning of protected tree(s) by Landscape Administrator in cases where tree(s) must be strategically pruned to allow construction or demolition of a structure. When allowed, all pruning shall be in accordance with approved arboricultural technique and/or guidelines established by the Landscape Administrator or designee.
Pruning Permit. Permit required for all utility, franchise and city projects. No fee is required.
Thinning, Selective. The removal of selected trees from within a forested area. The purpose of Selective Thinning is to improve the health and natural growth form of remaining trees or remove invasive and sometimes non-native species.
Top Soil. Top layer of soil native to the site.
Traditional Neighborhood Design. A development design or pattern that is characterized by a mixture of housing types and densities, a mixture of land uses including retail, office, and civic uses, reduced paving and street sizes, and that affords ease of pedestrian access. This design typically features a gridiron street pattern, short block lengths, narrow streets, reduced building 14-131
setbacks from the street and close proximity of residential and non-residential buildings and uses.
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, which will attain a trunk diameter of two inches (2") or more when measured at a point four and one-half feet (4.5’) above ground level and normally an overall height of at least fifteen feet (15') at maturity, singular or multi-trunk. The diameter of a multi-trunk tree shall be determined by adding the total diameter of ½ diameter of each additional trunk to the diameter of the largest trunk.
Tree Board. The Tree and Landscape Advisory Board members shall be appointed by the City Council. The Board will meet as needed, to review and monitor the Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinances, and to advise the Landscape Administrator, Park Board, City Council, Planning & Zoning Commission and citizens.
Tree Diversity. A condition wherein no single species of tree or plant material comprises more than 30% of the cumulative total of plantings on a site or of replacement trees required due to mitigation and remediation.
Tree, Heritage. Any tree planted and related to the heritage of the community, individual or homestead.
Tree, Historic. Any tree that has been identified as having historical value (species, history, uniqueness) by the Tree Advisory Board and/or Landscape Administrator. The nomination for certification shall have a public hearing and be forwarded to the Council for confirmation. A listing of all trees so designated shall be maintained and updated by the Landscape Administrator and made available upon request to the public. (Tree Champion List is listed with Texas Forestry Service.)
Tree, Park. Trees located in public parks and all areas owned by the City to which the public has free access to as a park.
Tree, Protected. A tree listed on the recommended tree list (Appendix A), which has a caliper of six (6”) inches or greater measured in accordance with standards established by this ordinance. The caliper of a multi-trunk tree shall be determined by adding the total diameter of the largest trunk to one-half (1/2) diameter of each additional trunk (refer to ANSI).
Tree, Specimen. Any tree, including under story trees, of a species not listed or not on the recommended tree list, but which the City determines significant positive characteristics, such as size, age and/or historical importance, and is worthy of preserving.
Tree, Street. Trees, shrubs, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines planted at recommended intervals with consideration of visibility triangle on either side of all streets, avenues, right-of-ways or entrances to the City. Tree species and planting techniques shall be selected to create a unified image for the street, provide an effective canopy, avoid sidewalk damage and minimize water consumption.
Tree, Understory. A tree which the City has determined has significant positive characteristics worthy of preservation and that does not typically attain height greater than thirty (30’) feet.
Tree Survey. The Tree Survey is the heart of the Tree Preservation Ordinance. Its purpose is not to penalize, but to aid in protecting our valuable natural resources during development and construction. The Tree Survey will also help determine the quantity of trees, if any, that may be
14-132
removed or cannot be safely and adequately protected during the street utility, engineering/drainage, and construction phases of development.
Tree Topping. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this ordinance at the determination of the Landscape Administrator or designee.
Tree, Canopy or Shade. Canopy or Shade Tree means a species of tree which normally bears crown foliage no lower than six feet above ground level upon maturity.
Sec. 14.903 Permit Required
A tree removal permit shall be obtained from the Landscape Administrator or designee before any person, directly or indirectly, shall clear cut/remove, destroy or do selective thinning on any protected tree(s) situated on property regulated by this ordinance, except as specified herein (definitions of clear cutting, selective thinning, and ground level cuts).
(a) New Development/Construction. In the event it becomes necessary to remove a tree for development or construction, a Tree Removal Permit shall be required. New construction shall include Residential, Non Residential, Special Developments, Planned Developments and individual contractor builders shall be required to meet the criteria herein specified and shall require a Tree Removal Permit for the removal of any Protected Tree. During platting, a permit shall be issued after preliminary plat approval by Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1)
Submission of a Tree Removal Permit Application to the City shall authorize the Landscape Administrator or designee to conduct field inspections of the site as necessary to meet the provisions of this Article and any published Guidelines. After thorough review of the Tree Removal Permit Application and accompanying documents, the Landscape Administrator or designee will approve as submitted, approve with conditions, or disapprove the applications.
(2)
All developers and/or builders, which have not submitted preliminary plats as of the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to the requirements for tree protection and replacement specified in this ordinance.
(3)
All areas within public R.O.W., utility easements or drainage easements, as shown on an approved Preliminary Plat and areas designated as cut/fill on the master drainage construction plan approved by the Landscape Administrator, shall be subject to the tree protection requirements specified herein except as provided for in Sub-section 5.8 Street Trees and Open Space.
(b) Municipal/Public Domain Property. All municipal or public domain property shall be subject to this Article regarding protection and replacement specified. A Tree Removal Permit shall be required with fee exemption for the removal of a Protected Tree. Any Protected Tree to be removed must be shown on construction plans approved by the Landscape Administrator or designee.
(c) City/Franchise for Existing R.O.W. and Public Easements. All construction and maintenance activity within public R.O.W. or easements shall be subject to the requirements for tree protection and replacement specified in this ordinance.
14-133
(1)
City Projects. The City shall be subject to the requirements for tree protection and replacement on all projects. A Tree Removal Permit shall be required with fee exemption for the removal of a Protected Tree.
(2)
Pruning. The owners of all trees adjacent to public R.O.W. shall be required to maintain a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14’) above the traveled pavement or curb of a public street. Said owners shall also remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which shall constitute a menace to public safety. (The City shall also have right to prune trees overhanging within the Public R.O.W. which interfere with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or a s necessary to preserve the public safety.)
(3)
Stump Removals. All stumps of street and park tree shall be removed below the surface of the ground so the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(4)
Franchise and Other Utility Companies. All utility company projects shall be subject to the requirements for tree protection and replacement specified in this Ordinance. Companies shall meet before hand on site with Landscape Administrator or designee, and obtain pruning permit before work is begun. Pruning activities by a utility company must comply with Definitions on Pruning, allowed, Pruning required, and Tree Topping. Prior to beginning any pruning not requested by the owner of the tree; the contractor shall submit a Tree Pruning Request for approval (see definitions). A Tree Removal Permit must be obtained prior to the removal of a protected tree. This permit must be accompanied by current pictures, site plan or construction plan meeting the site plan requirements specified in this Ordinance.
A.
Utility companies may prune trees as necessary to re-establish disrupted electric service without obtaining a permit.
B.
Compliance with this ordinance shall be amended to and included with all future revision of all franchise agreements.
C.
All trenching shall be designed to avoid trenching across the critical root zone of any protected tree. Although this is not intended to prohibit the placement of underground service such as electric, phone, gas, etc., the placement of these utilities is encouraged to be located outside of the critical root zone of protected tree(s).
D.
Pictures of work site shall be submitted with all permit applications and is a requirement for procurement prior to work beginning.
(c) Agricultural Owners. Agricultural owners shall be permitted to remove seven (7) protected trees per calendar year without the requirement to mitigate or replace said trees providing they meet provisions as stated in Sub-section 5.4 Agriculture. Protected trees removed in excess of seven will require mitigation and the approval of a permit.
(d) Builders/Contractors (New Construction Only.). A builder or contractor who purchased land or lots for residential construction and sale is subject to all requirements specified herein. All builders who have not submitted a request for a building permit as of the effective date of this ordinance are subject to the requirement herein this ordinance and shall be required to obtain a tree removal permit for removal of Protected Tree(s). No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant signs a permit request which states that all construction activities shall meet the requirements of the tree preservation ordinance.
14-134
(e) Permit Expiration. Permits for tree removal shall become void one hundred eighty (180) days after the issue date on the permit.
Sec. 14.904 Submittal Requirements
Prior to removing a protected tree(s) and receiving a tree removal permit, the applicant shall submit a Tree Removal Permit Application and pay the application fee to the City. The applicant shall also submit a written reason for the request to remove the Protected Tree(s), as well as the following information as applicable:
(a) Tree Survey
(1) Purpose. The Tree Survey is vital to the Tree Preservation Ordinance. Its purpose is to aid in protecting the City’s valuable natural resources during all phases of development and construction. Additionally, the Tree Survey will help identify Protected and/or historic trees; identify the trees to be mitigated on the site that may be damaged in the construction zone; determine the trees that must accommodated in the development of essential streets, utilities and building construction, and in the adjustment of these streets, utilities and building envelopes, to protect as much of the native vegetation as possible.
(2) Scope. A Tree Survey shall be conducted on all residential and non-residential tracts and be current to within the twenty-four (24) months immediately prior to submission of and included with the following:
A.
Preliminary Plat
B.
Re-plat
C.
Final Plat/Approval
D.
Site Plan Review
E.
Application for Building Permit
F.
Street, Utility, and drainage plans
G.
Concept Plan for a Planned Development
(3) Detail
A.
The Tree Survey shall be performed by a degreed urban forester, certified arborist, or qualified personnel as approved by the Landscape Administrator or designee.
B.
The Tree Survey shall be accurate and include: Location, size (DBH or Caliper), species, and trees with health problems (structural integrity, pest and/or pathogens) with a six-inch (6”) or greater caliper (see definition). The Tree Survey information shall be compiled in a tabular format with each Tree identified by a number corresponding to a numbered tree on the site Plan.
C.
The entire parcel being proposed for development should be included in the Tree Survey.
D.
Once the Tree Survey has been accomplished and submitted to the City, all Trees on the Tree Survey shall be classified as Protected Trees, with the exception of those classified as Unprotected Tree species under this Ordinance.
14-135
14-136
(b) Commercial Development. Additional requirements for the tree survey on commercial tracts of land shall require a complete tree survey, which shall include the following:
(1)
All areas within public R.O.W.,
(2)
Public utility or drainage easements shown on an approved Final Plat, and
(3)
Fire lanes, parking and drive areas, exclusive of the building pad, shall be subject to the tree protection and replacement requirements specified herein.
(c) Aerial Photos and Sampling. With the submittal of a concept plan or preliminary plat, which ever occurs first for property containing large, heavily wooded areas, the Landscape Administrator or designee may, in lieu of a tree survey, authorize the submittal of an aerial photograph accompanied by a transparent plan of the development at the same scale as the photograph, showing all non-disturbance areas and proposed exemption areas where no trees will be critically altered.
For heavily wooded areas where development activity and disturbance is intended or likely, the Landscape Administrator or designee is authorized, but not required, to accept sampling of the property in lieu of a tree survey for all or any part of a property, provided that a tree survey of all other areas is submitted to the Landscape Administrator prior to any grading or construction. Said Sample or sampling techniques should be representational of the site or wooded area and should comprise at least 5% of the total site or wooded area.
The Landscape Administrator or designee may approve the submission of photographs or samples in phases for a multiphase project.
(d) Affidavit of No Protected Trees. If a property contains no Protected Tree species, or if construction, grading, trenching or related activities are not to be performed in an area containing protected trees, the applicant may submit an Affidavit of No Protected Trees in lieu of a tree survey. This affidavit shall act in lieu of a tree survey upon a determination by the Landscape Administrator that no protected trees exist on the site. The Landscape Administrator shall review the Affidavit. The Affidavit shall be denied or approved when determined if the property contains protected tree(s) or non-protected tree(s) by the Landscape Administrator.
(e) A Tree Preservation Plan. A tree preservation plan shall be submitted showing major site construction features, existing trees to remain, existing trees that may be removed, and replacement trees showing species, location, number and size. The Tree Preservation Plan information may be included on the tree survey if all information can be clearly delineated.
Sec. 14.905 Exemptions
Any exemption shall be approved by the Landscape Administrator or designee prior to removal of any tree(s). A Tree Removal Permit and tree protection and replacement requirements shall not be required under any of the following circumstances.
(a) Public Safety. The tree endangers the public health, welfare of safety and immediate removal is required due to structural integrity concerns.
(b) Utility Service Interruption. The tree has disrupted a public utility service due to a tornado, storm, flood or other act of nature. Removal shall be limited to the portion of the tree reasonably necessary to reestablish and maintain reliable utility service.
(d) Landscape Nursery. All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements and from the tree-removal permit requirements only in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of said licensee, which are so planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of said licensee’s business.
(e). Agricultural. The owner of property zoned ‘AO’ agricultural and being actively used for agricultural purposes or being used for an individual residence or homestead shall be permitted to remove seven (7) Protected Trees per calendar year without obtaining a permit. Removal of protected trees in excess of seven will require permits. It is not the intent of this Ordinance to prohibit the clearing of land for legitimate agricultural use. An agriculturally zoned property owner shall request the Landscape Administrator to make an on-site inspection of the property to be cleared and provide to the Landscape Administrator the reason for the clearing said property. A fee shall be paid to the city for this inspection. If the Landscape Administrator determines the clearing of land to be for a legitimate, agricultural reason, he/she shall issue a tree removal permit and specify the designated area or property. Should the cleared land be developed within five (5) years of clearing date, the developer shall be required to mitigate trees removed as referenced in the Permit. To give the owner of agricultural property the same rights as the residentially zoned property owner, he/she can be exempt from this ordinance for a total of two (2) acres surrounding and adjacent to his/her existing homestead.
(f) Diseased Trees. Tree removal is permissible when a tree is infected with transmittable pathogens, damaged beyond the point of recovery, or in danger of falling as determined by the Landscape Administrator or designee prior to the removal of the tree.
(g) Residential Property. Owners of property zoned as residential, who reside at the property and use the residence as their primary residence. Citizens of Lancaster who have a homestead within the City of Lancaster and own residential rental properties shall have an exemption on a maximum of two (2) properties for removal of Protected Trees.
(h) Affidavit of No Protected Trees. See Section 14.904(d).
(i) Street Trees & Open Space. New developments incorporating Traditional Neighborhood Design with a minimum of 15% open space, Conventional Design with a minimum of 20% open space, or Conservation Design with a minimum of 25% open space and the provision of street trees shall be exempt from the mitigation applicable for protected tree loss within rights-of-way (ROW) areas. For purposes of this section the following apply:
(1)
Street trees shall be planted an average of thirty (30’) feet on center, in minimum five-foot (5’) wide planter strips located between the curb and minimum five-foot (5’) wide sidewalk. In secondary areas without planter strips, trees shall be kept as close to the sidewalk to 14-137
provide shade canopy, be aligned to visually frame the street, avoid sidewalk damage, and minimize water consumption. Street trees shall be of a limited selection of tree species, as listed in the City’s Approved Plant List, to give them a unified and distinct image.
(2)
Tree species and placement shall be designed to avoid the use of a single species, to visually frame streets and to create an identifiable and distinct image.
(3)
Adequate sight distances must be maintained, in order to ensure safety.
(4)
Infrastructure shall be engineered and constructed to assure placement of street trees will not be injurious to utilities, vision clearance, or other public improvements.
(5)
Maintenance of “street trees” including adequate irrigation shall be provided by homeowners individually or shall be incorporated into the homeowner association (H.O.A.) and business development agreements.
(j) Building Pad. The building foundation and an area extending ten (10’) feet from the building foundation as shown on an approved Site Plan shall be exempt from tree replacement and mitigation.
Sec. 14.905 Review and Approval Process
(a) Authority for Review. The Landscape Administrator or designee shall evaluate any plans required by this ordinance for determination that the applicant has made a good faith effort in saving as many protected trees as possible. An analysis prepared by the Landscape Administrator or designee shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for their consideration regarding denial or approval of the development. The Landscape Administrator or designee shall be responsible for the review and approval of all requests for tree removal permits submitted in accordance with the requirements specified herein.
(1) Deferrals. The Landscape Administrator may defer the approval of a tree removal permit to the Planning and Zoning Commission for any reason. All decisions made by the Commission shall be final.
(2) Appeals. Decisions made by the Landscape Administrator may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any such appeal shall first be considered by the Tree Advisory Board. The Tree Advisory Board shall be authorized, but not required, to forward a non-binding recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. All decisions made by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final.
(b) Fee Schedules. The Landscape Administrator shall establish administrative procedures necessary to facilitate the implementation and enforcement of this ordinance.
(1)
Fees. All tree removal permits shall be accompanied by a payment made to the City of Lancaster in the amount established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of review and passed by Resolution.
(2)
Alternative Fee Schedule. Until such time as a Landscape Administrator is hired, the Tree Preservation Ordinance requirements for new construction review shall be fulfilled by approved City Tree Consultants and applicable consultant fees shall be charged to the applicant in lieu of city fee schedule by resolution. There shall be an administrative fee of $25.00 paid additionally to the City.
(c) Permit Application Action. The Landscape Administrator or Planning and Zoning Commission shall grant a tree removal permit based on the following considerations:
14-138
(1)
Whether or not an alternative solution can be made to accomplish the desired activity without tree removal;
(2)
The cost of preserving the tree;
(3)
Whether the tree is worthy of preservation;
(4)
The effect of the removal on erosion, soil moisture, retention, flow of surface waters, and drainage systems;
(5)
The need for buffering of residential areas from the noise, glare, and visual effects of nonresidential uses;
(6)
Whether the proposed tree replacement pursuant to Section 7 Tree Replacement adequately mitigates the removal of the tree;
(7)
Whether the removal affects the public health, safety or welfare.
Sec. 14.906 Guidelines for Tree Protection
A major purpose of this Section is to protect all the Protected Trees retained on the site for approved development and construction to occur.
(a) During Construction. Minimum requirements for the protection of all Protected Trees on the development and construction site related, but not limited to, streets, parking lots, building sites, driveways and sidewalks shall be strictly adhered to. This shall include:
(1)
Establishing a Building Envelope enclosed with approved fencing; establishing designated areas for parking all vehicles, trailers, construction equipment, related items as well as storage of all supplies and materials;
(2)
Clearly identifying designated restricted areas on construction and site plans and the project location;
(3)
Proper protection of Drip line of a Protected Tree with appropriate fencing;
(4)
Approved bilingual (English and Spanish) signage visibly located at site;
(5)
Retention and protection of Under Story Vegetation and leaf litter during all phases of development;
(6)
Boring of any underground utilities, which passes within a Protected Tree or Critical Root Zone; and
(7)
Enactment of preventive measures to prevent grade changes of one-half inch (1/2”) or more, or fill, within a Tree Protection or Critical Root Zone.
14-139
14-140
Additional protective measures may be required by the Landscape Administrator or designee as a condition of permit approval. Such conditions may be established by the publication of Tree Preservation Guidelines and/or by attaching conditions of permit approval.
(b) Trenching. All trenching shall be designed to avoid trenching across the critical root zone of any protected tree. Although this is not intended to prohibit the placement of underground service such as electric, phone, gas, etc., the placement of these utilities is encouraged to be located outside of the critical root zone of protected tree(s). Irrigation system trenching shall be placed outside the critical root zone with only the minimum required single head supply allowed within that area placed radically to the tree trunk and shall be hand trenched with roots cleanly cut or use of air spade to reduce damage.
(c) Prohibited Activities. Prior to and during development and construction, the following activities shall be prohibited. The Landscape Administrator shall be authorized to provide more detailed explanations by publication of Tree Preservation Guidelines or by attachment of conditions to any permit issued pursuant to this ordinance. All such directions shall be strictly adhered to.
(1)
Clear cutting of trees on a property for any purpose at any time except for the exceptions provided for in Section 5 Exemptions.
(2)
Construction vehicles and equipment parking and storage around Protected Trees.
(3)
Storage, placing or disposing of construction and waste materials around Protected Trees.
(4)
Restrictions and prohibitions on unapproved grade changes that may damage or destroy Protected Trees.
(5)
Water accumulations due to construction-related activities.
(6)
Unapproved attachments to Protected Trees.
(7)
Removal of more than 25% of a Protected Tree’s foliage in a given year. No pruning or topping may significantly disfigure the tree, or be done in a manner, which would reasonably lead to the death of the tree.
(8)
Any person acting to circumvent the purpose of this ordinance.
(9)
Impervious materials used in or near Protected Trees.
(10)
Unapproved fencing and bark protection methods on any construction sites in and near the Protected Tree areas.
(11)
Construction methods such as boring, grade change, trenching, and root pruning that damage or destroy Protected Trees.
(12)
Placement of fill within the drip line of any protected tree on any undeveloped property.
Sec. 14.907 Tree Replacement
In the event that it is necessary to remove a Protected Tree(s) as allowed in Section 3 above, the applicant shall be required to replace the Protected Tree(s) being removed with quality trees from the Approved Plant List. A sufficient number of trees shall be planted to equal or exceed, in caliper, the diameter (at 4.5’ above ground level) of each tree removed. This mitigation measure is not meant to supplant good site planning. Tree replacement will be reconsidered only after all design alternatives, which could save more existing trees, have been evaluated and reasonably rejected. Said replacement trees shall be a minimum of two (2”) inches caliper (at 1’ above ground) and seven feet (7’) in height when planted. All replacement trees shall be from the Approved Tree List or an approved street tree when replacing street trees. Tree diversity will be encouraged. The Landscape Administrator or designee has the authority to reject any tree(s) replacement plan not meeting the standards in this Article and in Article VIII Landscape Standards.
(a) Responsibility and Site Requirements. The Landscape Administrator or designee shall determine the agent responsible for replacement, the time frame for replacement and the location of the new trees. The replacement trees shall be located on the subject site whenever possible. However if this is not feasible, the Landscape Administrator or designee has the authority to allow the planting to take place on another property, including public property. If the Landscape Administrator approves the planting of replacement trees more than 30 days after the removal of protected trees, the applicant shall provide the Landscape Administrator with an affidavit that all replacement trees will be planted within six (6) months and maintained by the applicant for a minimum of two (2) years in good condition. Developers shall plant all the replacement trees identified on the Mitigation Plan. The Landscape Administrator or designee shall document the date of replacement trees on the reforestation plan and record for review of the 2-year commitment.
In as much as it is reasonable and feasible, replanting on the development or construction site will be encouraged in order to restore the original natural landscape character of the site.
(1)
Protected Trees will be replanted at a replacement ration of one-inch (1”) caliper of replacement tree for each one (1”) inch Diameter Breast Height (DBH) of removed tree.
(2)
*Specimen and Historic, Champion, and Heritage Trees shall be replanted at a replacement ratio of ten (10”) inches caliper Replacement Tree for each one-inch (1”) DBH of removed tree. *(American National Standards Institute)
(3)
The Landscape Administrator has the authority to reject any trees not meeting these standards.
(4)
One (1) 6-month extension may be approved by the Landscape Administrator due only to seasonal limitations that would make planting of trees impractical, and shall require an escrow deposit in an amount equal to 110% of the mitigated value.
(5)
The applicant shall be required to maintain the replacement trees in good condition for a minimum of two years. If a replacement tree dies or is damaged within the initial two-year period, the applicant shall replace it with a tree approved by the Landscape Administrator or designee.
(b) Payment in Lieu of Replacement.
(1) To the extent that tree replacement is not feasible, the Landscape Administrator or designee shall determine in accordance with the provisions provided herein, the amount of indemnification to be paid by the developer or other responsible party. Upon 14-141
determination of indemnification, said payment shall be made to the City of Lancaster Reforestation and Natural Area Fund based on the following guidelines:
A. For Protected Trees, reparations will be made in the amount of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per one (1”) inch DBH. The Landscape Administrator shall be authorized to reduce this amount in accordance with the following:
1.
In cases when at least 25% of the required mitigation is provided by on-site or off-site tree planting, a reduction to not less than one hundred dollars ($100) per one (1”) inch DBH may be allowed.
2.
A two (2”) inch credit against mitigation and/or reparations may be authorized for each inch of large tree that is preserved and designated as Specimen, Historic, Champion, or Heritage tree. Designation of Specimen, Historic, Champion, or Heritage trees not located on the same property may also be used for this credit upon review and approval of same. The property owner or responsible party for said tree designated as a Specimen, Historic, Champion, or Heritage tree shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of said tree.
3.
A one (1”) inch for one (1”) inch credit against mitigation and/or reparations shall be authorized for the preservation of any tree provided that:
i.
Said tree to be preserved is a minimum of six (6”) caliper inches and is listed as a protected species in Appendix A of this ordinance.
ii.
Said tree to be preserved is located in an exempted area or is otherwise free from mitigation and/or reparations requirements.
iii.
Said tree is protected from future removal, destruction or critical alteration by:
??
The establishment of protective covenants, easements, or agreements, or
??
Said tree is transplanted to or designated within a common area, public park or open space.
4.
Subsequent removal damage, or critical alteration of any tree used for credit as identified in Sub-sections a, b or c above shall require mitigation replacement and/or reparations in accordance with this ordinance.
B. For Specimen and Historic, Champion, and Heritage Trees, reparations will be made for the Appraised Value of the removed tree as determined by CLTA (Council of Landscape Tree Appraisers) Guidelines. In lieu of total cash reparation, developers shall have the option of paying 75% of mitigated value to the City of Lancaster Reforestation and Natural Areas Fund (LRNA Fund) and 25% of the mitigated value shall be expended to plant approved trees at sites designated by the Landscape Administrator. Developers shall purchase, plant, and maintain for a period of two (2) years approved trees at designated sites. Verification of mitigation expenses shall be approved by Landscape Administrator or designee.
C. If any Protected and/or Replacement Tree(s) dies within two (2) years of initial planting or issuance of Certificate of Occupancy and is brought to the attention of the Landscape Administrator or designee, the original permit applicant shall be subject to the same replacement fee as for a Protected Tree.
14-142
D. Money paid in lieu of tree replacement made in compliance with this section shall be considered contributions to the LRNA Fund.
E. The LRNA Fund shall be used for purchasing and planting trees on public property, acquiring property that shall remain in a naturalistic state in perpetuity through outright purchase or Development Rights, and assisting in the cost of administering this ordinance.
F. The Landscape Administrator shall be authorized to temporarily defer the payment of any mitigation or reparation fees when such action is deemed to be warranted due to unique circumstances, such as when the amount of mitigation is subject to change, when a development agreement is pending, or other similar transitory circumstances. Any such deferred fee shall be rectified and paid in full prior to the filing of a plat in the County records.
14-143
Sec. 14.908 Tree Planting Restrictions
(a) Overhead Lines. Any required replacement trees shall not be planted within an area such that the mature canopy of the selected tree will interfere with overhead utility lines.
(b) Underground Utilities. Any required replacement trees or street trees shall not be planted within an area such that the mature root zone of the tree will interfere with underground public utility lines (including water lines, sewer lines, transmission lines or other utilities). Selection of tree species whose root systems are the least invasive to utilities may be considered.
(c) Fire Hydrants. No trees shall be planted within ten (10’) feet of a fire hydrant.
(d) Street Corners. No street trees shall be planted closer than thirty-five feet (35’) of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb-lines.
Sec. 14.909 Street Trees
(a) Acceptable Trees. The Landscape Administrator shall maintain a list of acceptable trees for planting along streets, buffer yards, medians, within parks, or within other public areas. Trees other than those listed as acceptable may only be planted within said public areas upon approval of the Landscape Administrator.
(b) Street Tree Spacing. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with recommendations of the Landscape Administrator. Closer spacing or group plantings may be approved by the Landscape Administrator in unique situations.
(c) Homeowner Associations (HOAs) or Property Owners. HOAs or property owners shall maintain a clearance above the street level of fourteen (14’) feet, seven to eight feet (7’ to 8’) above sidewalks, and branching of trees out of the Visibility Triangle. Landscape maintenance of street trees to accommodate buses and service vehicles shall be incorporated into homeowner association and business agreements. HOAs will be responsible for replacement of trees along public rights-of-way within their neighborhood.
(d) Public Tree Care. The City shall have the right to prune and maintain street trees, and park trees within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public health, safety and welfare. The City may, by determination of the Landscape Administrator, remove, cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition; or which by reason of its nature maybe injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, vision clearance or other public improvements.
Sec. 14.910 Ordinance Enforcement
(a) Developers Agreement. No developer’s agreement shall be approved which does not state that all construction activities shall meet the requirements of the tree preservation ordinance.
(b) Building Permit. No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant signs an application or permit request which states that all construction activities shall meet the requirements of the tree preservation ordinance and guidelines.
(c) Acceptance of Improvements. No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until all fines for violation of this ordinance have been paid to the City or other wise disposed of through the Municipal Court. No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until all replacement trees have been planted, or appropriate payments have been made to the Reforestation
14-144
Fund; however, the acceptance of public improvements may be authorized before all trees have been replaced provided a fiscal security deposit is posted in the amount equal to one and one-half times (1½ X) the prevailing rate for installed trees with a two (2) year guarantee, plus fifteen percent (15%) to cover administrative costs. Said deposit shall be forfeited if subject trees are not planted within 30 days of notification by the Landscape Administrator.
(d) Certificate of Occupancy. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all fines for violations of this ordinance have been paid to the City or otherwise disposed of through the Municipal Court. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all replacement trees have been planted or appropriate payments have been made to the Reforestation Fund; however, that a Certificate of Occupancy may be granted before all trees have been replaced provided a fiscal security deposited is posted in the amount equal to one and one half times (1½) the prevailing rate for installed trees with a two (2) year guarantee, plus fifteen percent (15%) to cover administrative costs. Said deposit shall be forfeited if subject tree(s) are not planted within 30 days of notification by the Landscape Administrator.
Sec. 14.911 Violations
In addition to any criminal penalty for violation of this Code, any person, firm, corporation, agent, city, state, or federal organization or employee thereof who violates the provisions of this ordinance where such violation results in the removal or damage to applicable trees shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be assessed a civil penalty of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per diameter inch of the tree(s) removed or damaged.
The unlawful injury, destruction or removal of each protected tree shall be considered a separate incident, and each incident subjects the violator to the penalty set forth herein per tree.
(a) Removal of Public Trees. It shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the City without first adhering to the requirements of this ordinance and procuring approval from the Landscape Administrator.
(b) Violations and Assessments. Violations of this ordinance and non-payment of fines levied will be attached to property involved through standard legal methods.
Any person, firm, corporation, agent, city, state, or federal organization or employee thereof who violates a procedural requirement or who fails to comply with conditions established with a permit issued by the Landscape Administrator or his or her designee pursuant to this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each procedural violation or failure to comply each day shall be considered a separate incident, and each incident subjects the violator to the penalty set forth herein.
14-145
ARTICLE 14.1000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Sec. 14.1001 Planned Development - General
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to provide for the creation of planned development zoning districts ("PD Districts"). PD Districts are intended to provide for the development of land as an integral unit for single or mixed use in accordance with a PD Concept Plan that may include uses, regulations and other requirements that vary from the City's Zoning Ordinance or from other ordinances, rules or regulations of the City. PD Districts are intended to implement the goals and objectives of the City’s Comprehensive Plan, but may be accompanied by specific amendments to provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Parks and Open Space Plan or the Thoroughfare Plan. PD Districts are also intended to encourage flexible and creative planning, to ensure the compatibility of land uses, and to allow for the adjustment of changing demands to meet the current needs of the community by meeting one or more of the following purposes:
•
to provide for a superior design of lots or buildings;
•
to achieve a mixture of uses and /or residential unit types;
•
to provide for increased recreation and/or open space opportunities for public use;
•
to provide amenities or features that would be of special benefit to the property users or community;
•
to protect or preserve natural amenities and environmental assets such as trees, creeks, ponds, floodplains, slopes or hills and view corridors;
•
to protect or preserve existing historical buildings, structures, features or places; or
•
to provide an appropriate balance between the intensity of development and the ability to provide adequate supporting public facilities and services.
(b) Nature of PD Districts and Minimum Standards. Each PD District is intended to be a free-standing zoning district in which land uses and intensities of land use may be tailored to fit the physical features of the site and to achieve compatibility with existing and planned adjacent uses. In order to ensure that a PD District implements the policies of the Comprehensive Plan, and to further ensure that the PD District is in accordance with a comprehensive plan of zoning regulation, it is necessary to establish minimum standards for residential and non-residential uses proposed for the PD District that must be incorporated within an ordinance adopted by the Council (the "PD Ordinance").
(1) Land Use
A.
Uses. Unless otherwise provided by the PD Ordinance, only those uses authorized by the City's Zoning Ordinance are permitted in PD Districts.
B.
Location. The location of all authorized uses shall be consistent with the PD Concept Plan and PD Site Plan.
14-146
(2) Open Space Standards
A.
Public and Private Open Space. Unless otherwise provided by the PD Ordinance, a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the gross land area within the entire PD District shall be devoted to open space, consistent with the open space requirements of the City’s Parks and Open Space Plan. At least 80% of all homes should be within 800 feet of a publicly accessible park of at least 15,000 s.f. Open space for PD Districts may be satisfied by either public or by a combination of public open space and open space held in common, unless otherwise provided by development regulations established by the City Council. Open space requirements specified in this subsection are in addition to requirements for site landscaping and buffering. Public open space shall be dedicated to the City or contain an easement on title as being open to public use.
B.
Preservation of Natural Features. Unless otherwise provided by the PD Ordinance or PD Concept Plan:
C.
Floodplain areas shall be preserved and maintained as open space; and
D.
Significant stands of native trees and shrubs shall be preserved and protected from destruction or alteration.
E.
Open Space Allocation. Open space requirements shall be satisfied for each phase of a multi-phased residential development. If open space is not to be provided proportionally among phases of development, the applicant must execute a reservation of open space in a form that will assure the City that such open space will be provided. The City may require that all open space within the district must be provided prior to completion of development within the district.
(3) Other Minimum Development Standards.
Dimensional and Area Standards. Unless otherwise provided by the PD Ordinance, dimensional and area standards for uses shall be the most restrictive standards authorized by the City's Zoning Ordinance for the same or similar uses.
(c) PD Plans Required. There are three types of plans that may be required as part of the development process within a PD District. Each successive plan may modify the previous plan provided that it does not substantially change the general intent of the original PD district. Each successive plan becomes part of the Zoning Ordinance governing the property and replaces the previously approved plan.
(1) PD Concept Plan. The PD Concept Plan is mandatory and is intended to be used as the first step in the PD development process. It establishes the most general guidelines for the PD District by identifying the land uses and intensities, thoroughfare locations, and open space boundaries (including public trail systems). It may include images of intended style and type of development. The Concept Plan illustrates the integration of these elements into a master plan for the whole PD District. The PD Concept Plan establishes the development standards for the PD district.
(2) PD Development Plan. A PD Development Plan is optional and is intended to be used where appropriate as the second step of the PD development process. It may be required by the PD ordinance, or it may be submitted voluntarily by the property owner. A PD Development Plan constitutes an amendment to the approved PD Concept Plan and PD Ordinance and may be used where the developer requests, or the Council requires, certain standards for the PD District to be specified after initial establishment of the PD District. A
14-147
PD Development Plan includes more detailed information as to the specific development standards and land uses, including their boundaries. The purposes of a PD Development Plan are to allow flexibility in the development process by deferring specification of all development standards at the time of PD District creation and to enable developers to satisfy conditions imposed on creation of the District prior to submittal of a PD Site Plan.
(3) PD Site Plan. A PD Site Plan is mandatory and is the final step of the PD development process. The purposes of a PD Site Plan are to assure that the development of individual building lots, parcels, or tracts within the PD District are consistent with the approved Concept Plan and Development Plan, if any, and to assure that the standards applicable within the PD District are met for each such lot, parcel or tract. A PD Site Plan shall continue to be valid for a period of two years after it is approved by the Commission; however, such period may be extended by the Council upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The period of time approved for any such extension shall be indicated in any approval, but in no case, shall the period for extension exceed two (2) years.
A.
The Site Plan shall be accompanied by building elevations and landscape and master sign plans.
B.
A PD Site Plan shall terminate at the end of a two-year period unless, within such period, any of the following occurs:
1.
A Preliminary Plat is approved;
2.
A Final Plat is approved;
3.
The filing of a Final Plat in the Court of Public Record;
4.
The issuance of a Building Permit; or
5.
The approval, by City Council of a Site Plan extension.
(d) PD Compliance with Approved Plans
(1) Plan Consistency. Except as otherwise provided by the subdivision provisions of the City's Zoning Ordinance, no development shall begin and no building permit shall be issued for any land within a PD District until a PD Site Plan that is consistent with the PD Concept Plan and applicable PD Development Plan has been approved. Each PD District shall be developed, used, and maintained in compliance with the approved PD Site Plans for the district. Compliance with the PD Ordinance shall be construed as a condition precedent to granting of Certificates of Occupancy.
(2) Historic Districts. Site Plans for PDs located in a Historic District shall be reviewed and a recommendation made by the Historic Landmark and Preservation Committee.
Sec. 14.1002 Planned Development Procedures
(a) Establishment of a PD District
(1) Zoning Amendment. An application for the establishment of a PD District shall be made to the Commission. The application shall:
A.
Be accompanied by a PD Concept Plan;
B.
Be accompanied by a list of proposed PD District development standards;
14-148
C.
Identify the City's then-current zoning district which shall apply to the extent not otherwise provided by the PD Concept Plan or by the proposed PD District development standards;
D.
Be accompanied by a Concept Plan informational statement, and traffic impact analysis in accordance with the City’s published standards or application forms.
Except to the extent provided by the PD Concept Plan and the PD Ordinance, development within the PD District shall be governed by all of the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City in effect at the time of such development (including the standards of the City's zoning district so identified in the application). In the event of any conflict between (i) the PD Concept Plan and the PD Ordinance and (ii) the then-current ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City, the terms, provisions, and intent of the PD Concept Plan and PD Ordinance shall control. In addition, prior to action by the Commission on the establishment of the PD District, the applicant shall submit a traffic impact analysis.
(2) PD Concept Plan. A PD Concept Plan (or, at the applicant's option, a PD Development Plan) shall be processed simultaneously with the zoning amendment application, and if the zoning amendment application is approved, the PD Concept Plan (or PD Development Plan) shall be incorporated as part of the PD Ordinance. The graphic depictions contained on a PD Concept Plan shall be considered as regulatory standards. Each PD Concept Plan shall be prepared as required by the City. Unless waived by the Council on recommendation of the Director, each PD Concept Plan shall graphically depict the following:
A.
A diagram or drawing of the boundaries of the proposed PD District;
B.
Proposed and existing land uses organized by category (including, if applicable, proposed and existing land uses by category for any sub-areas to be developed within the PD District);
C.
Proposed density by type of residential uses, including the maximum numbers of dwelling units for residential uses other than single-family detached, and lot sizes for single-family detached;
D.
Proposed estimated total floor area and floor area ratios by category of non-residential uses, if any;
E.
Proposed configuration of public and private open space serving the development, showing the relationship to the City’s Parks and Open Space Plan, including trail system and access points to the trail system, estimated dimensions and approximate area, and areas to be dedicated to the public or to a private maintenance organization, if known;
F.
Proposed and existing thoroughfares, boulevards and roadways;
G.
To the extent known for adjoining land, existing land uses (by zoning district), existing thoroughfares; and existing open space for such adjoining land;
H.
A general plan for circulation of traffic and pedestrians within and external to the development, including designated points of access; and
I.
Other information as may be required by the Director
(3) Concept Plan Informational Statement. A PD Concept Plan shall be accompanied by an informational statement containing the information set forth below. If the zoning 14-149
amendment application is approved, the informational statement shall not be binding on the applicant or the land owner and shall not be considered part of the PD Concept Plan or the PD Ordinance. Informational statements shall be updated concurrently with any amendment to the PD Concept Plan and with each PD Development Plan. Each statement shall include the following:
A.
A general statement setting forth how the proposed PD District will relate to the City's Comprehensive Plan;
B.
The total acreage within the proposed PD District;
C.
If the development is to occur in phases, a conceptual phasing plan that identifies the currently anticipated general sequence of development, including the currently anticipated general sequence for installation of major capital improvements to serve the development; and
D.
An aerial photograph with the boundaries of the PD Concept Plan clearly delineated.
(4) Proposed PD Development Standards. Proposed PD District development standards shall be processed simultaneously with the zoning amendment application, and if the zoning amendment application is approved, such standards shall be incorporated as part of the PD Ordinance. Such proposed development standards may include (but shall not be limited to) uses; density; lot size; lot dimensions; setbacks; coverage; height; landscaping; lighting, fencing, parking and loading; signage; open space; drainage; and utility and street standards. Any graphic depictions used to illustrate such standards, unless otherwise provided in the PD Ordinance, shall be considered as regulatory standards.
(5) Traffic Impact Analysis. Prior to or simultaneous with submission of an application for the establishment of a PD District, the applicant shall submit to the Director, a traffic impact analysis for the proposed PD District for any project which may generate 1,000 trips or less per day or 400 or less per hour based on ITE standards, unless waives by the Director or City Council.
The analysis must be approved by the Council prior to or concurrently with the approval by the Council of the PD District. The traffic analysis shall not be considered part of the PD Concept Plan or the PD Ordinance but may be used to condition the density or intensity of uses, the location and configuration of access, or the timing of development within the District based upon the existence of a supporting roadway network adequate to accommodate the traffic expected to be generated. In multi-phased developments, the traffic impact analysis shall be updated with each PD Site Plan.
(6) Complete Application. No application for the establishment of a PD District shall be deemed to be filed with the City until the Director or designee has determined that the PD Concept Plan is complete, that the proposed PD District development standards have been identified, a traffic impact analysis has been submitted, and that the informational statement is complete.
(7) Commission Recommendation. The Commission, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the City's Zoning Ordinance procedures and State law, shall formulate its recommendation with respect to establishment of a PD District. The recommendation of the Commission shall be forwarded to the Council for decision.
14-150
(8) Council Decision. Following receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the Council, after notice and public hearing in accordance with this Code, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for establishment of the PD District.
(9) Approval Criteria. Based upon the PD Concept Plan, the Commission, in making its recommendations to the Council, and the Council, in determining whether the PD District should be established, shall consider whether the following criteria have been met:
A.
The plan of development is generally consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan (as such plan may be amended prior to or concurrently with approval of the PD District);
B.
Proposed uses and the configuration of uses are compatible with existing and planned adjoining uses;
C.
The general arrangement of streets conforms to the City's Thoroughfare Plan (as such plan may be amended prior to or concurrently with approval of the PD District);
D.
Proposed uses, development densities and intensities, and development regulations are generally consistent with this Article;
E.
The configuration of the proposed open space serving the development is consistent with the City's Parks and Open Space Plan (as such plan may be amended prior to or concurrently with approval of the PD District)
F.
The provision of publicly accessible open space where there are residential units, the number of units which face on the open space, and the distance of residential units to the open space;
G.
The amenities proposed justify proposed densities or intensities;
H.
The proposed plan of development furthers the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; and
I.
The traffic impact analysis demonstrates that the capacity of the proposed roadways shown on the proposed PD Concept Plan, together with any roadways within related PD Districts and the supporting roadway network, are adequate to accommodate the traffic expected to be generated by the uses, densities and intensities of use shown on the PD Concept Plan in and authorized in the PD Ordinance in a timely and efficient manner with all appropriate standards which will ensure the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(10) Conditions. The Commission may recommend, and the Council may require, such conditions to the establishment of a PD District and to the approval of a PD Concept Plan as are reasonably necessary to assure that the purposes of the District and the approval criteria for the PD Concept Plan are met. Such conditions may include the requirement of a PD Development Plan.
(11) Adopting Ordinance. The PD Ordinance shall include the PD Concept Plan as an exhibit to the ordinance and shall include the following:
A.
A statement of the purpose and intent of the PD District;
B.
A metes and bounds description of the land within the PD District;
C.
A list of the specific land uses permitted within the PD District, together with a description of the sub-areas, if any, in which such uses are allowed;
14-151
D.
The maximum density or intensity of each permitted land use;
E.
A list of all the PD District development standards, together with necessary graphic illustrations;
F.
Identification of the City's then-current zoning district standards that shall apply to the extent not otherwise provided by the PD Concept Plan or PD Ordinance;
G.
Identification of the development standards, if any (whether in the PD Ordinance or in the then-existing ordinances, rules, or regulations of the City), that may be deferred for specification until approval of a PD Development Plan or that may be varied by the Council as part of the approval process for a PD Site Plan
H.
Unless otherwise identified on the PD Concept Plan, the general location and size of open space serving the development; including any proposed dedication of open space to the public or to a maintenance organization.
I.
Provisions governing amenities, if any, to justify densities or intensities.
J.
Such additional conditions as are established by the Council to assure that the PD District and PD Concept Plan are consistent with the purposes of the District and the approval criteria for the Concept Plan.
(b) PD Development Plans. If the Council requires as a condition of establishing the PD District and approving a PD Concept Plan that PD Development Plans be submitted prior to submittal of a PD Site Plan, a PD Development Plan may be prepared and submitted for the entire development at one time or for individual phases of development. Each required copy of the PD Development Plan shall be accompanied by (i) a development plan informational statement and (ii) a preliminary drainage study for the area covered by the proposed plan. If deemed necessary by the City's Transportation Engineer or Director, the applicant for a PD Development Plan shall also submit an updated traffic impact analysis prior to Commission action.
(1) Submittal Requirements for PD Development Plans.
A.
Approximations of the following: site boundaries and dimensions, lot lines, site acreage and square footage, and distances to the nearest cross streets;
B.
Location map, north arrow, title block and site data summary table;
C.
Existing land uses and zoning classifications on adjacent properties;
D.
Preliminary tree survey.
E.
Any features omitted from the PD Concept Plan upon Council authorization;
F.
Such additional features as are necessary to assure compliance with conditions established by the Council to be satisfied by the Development Plan; and
G.
Other information as may be required by the Director or Designee.
(2) PD Development Standards. Development standards that were not specified in the PD Ordinance, as authorized by the Council, shall be submitted and approved as an amendment to the PD Ordinance and incorporated therein, in conjunction with approval of the PD Development Plan.
(3) Development Plan Informational Statement. Each PD Development Plan shall be accompanied by an informational statement containing the information set forth below.
14-152
Informational statements shall be updated concurrently with any amendment to a PD Development Plan and with each PD Site Plan. Each informational statement shall include the following:
A.
Name and address of landowner and date of preparation of the PD Development Plan;
B.
Name and address of architect, landscape architect, planner, engineer, surveyor, or other persons involved in the preparation of the PD Development Plan;
C.
A table listing the specific permitted uses proposed for the property, and, if appropriate, the boundaries of the different land uses and the boundary dimensions;
D.
Development standards for each proposed land use, as follows:
1.
Minimum lot area;
2.
Minimum lot width and depth;
3.
Minimum front, side, and rear yard areas;
4.
Maximum height of building; and
5.
Maximum building coverage.
E.
A list of the development standards, if any (whether in the PD Ordinance or in the then-existing ordinances, rules, or regulations of the City that apply to development within the PD District), for which the applicant is seeking amendment by the Council as part of the PD Development Plan approval process.
F.
If Council approval of any height increase is being requested, a view analysis of the impact of such requested Exception on adjacent residential areas of the City.
G.
Preliminary and approximate building locations and building footprints;
H.
Preliminary elevations and perspectives to show the relationship of building heights to surrounding topography;
I.
Location of parking areas and structures for multi-family and non-residential uses, including areas for off-street parking;
J.
A detailed description of how open space serving the development will be satisfied for the phase of development represented by the PD Development Plan, including any proposed dedications of open space to the public or to a private maintenance organization;
K.
If the PD Development Plan is a phase of the project (as described in the applicant's original informational statement submitted with the PD Concept Plan), depiction of the area subject to the development in relation to the then-current phasing plan, together with any updates of the then-current phasing plan that was submitted as part of the applicant's original informational statement; and
L.
A list identifying each proposed addition or amendment to the PD ordinance.
(4) Preliminary Drainage Study. Each PD Development Plan shall be accompanied by a preliminary drainage study for the area covered by the district unless waived by the City Engineer or City Council. The study shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas and experienced in the study of drainage issues.
14-153
A.
Purpose. The purposes of the drainage design policies are to prevent flooding of adjacent properties, owned by third parties and to regulate water surface elevations and peak discharges. Development within the PD District shall not produce any increase in the water surface elevation (either upstream or downstream) due to a 5-year, 10-year, 50-year, or 100-year storm. If the discharge from the area proposed for development would increase the water surface elevation above predevelopment conditions on any property owned by third parties due to any of such storms, then such peak discharge must be regulated to the extent necessary to eliminate the increased water surface elevation. The regulation of discharges to eliminate such increases may be achieved using either on-site or off-site storm water management facilities (such as detention areas, retention areas, and infiltration and sedimentation ponds).
B.
Content. The preliminary drainage study shall
1.
Contain a topographical map of the area proposed for development to a scale not smaller than 1 inch = 200 feet;
2.
Generally describe how the proposed development will comply with the drainage design policies set forth below;
3.
Include all information deemed necessary by the preparing engineer to support his or her determination that the proposed development will comply with the drainage design policies; and
4.
Include all information reasonably requested by the City Engineer to support his or her review of the preliminary drainage study.
(5) Updated Traffic Impact Analysis. If deemed necessary by the Director or if required by the PD Ordinance, the applicant for a proposed PD Development Plan shall submit an updated traffic impact analysis prior to action by the Commission. The purpose of the updated analysis is to determine whether the traffic estimated to be generated by the development shown on the proposed PD Development Plan will necessitate specific on-site or adjacent traffic improvements (e.g., turn lanes, stacking lanes, signalization, etc.) and to determine whether conditions attached to the Concept Plan based on the original traffic impact analysis have been met.
(6) Commission Recommendation. The Commission, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the City's Zoning Ordinance procedures, shall recommend to the Council whether to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove each PD Development Plan, together with each proposed amendments to the PD Ordinance.
(7) Council Decision. Upon receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the Council, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the City's Zoning Ordinance procedures, shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove each PD Development Plan and each proposed addition or amendment to the PD Ordinance.
(8) Approval Criteria. The Commission, in making its recommendation to the Council, and the Council, in acting upon each PD Development Plan and proposed addition or amendment to the PD Ordinance, shall determine whether the proposed PD Development Plan and ordinance addition or amendment meets the following criteria:
A.
The plan generally is consistent with the approved PD Concept Plan (including open space, trails, and thoroughfares);
14-154
B.
The plan generally is consistent with the development standards set forth in the PD Ordinance;
C.
The plan satisfies any conditions established by the Council in the PD Ordinance relating to Development Plan approval;
D.
The plan is generally consistent with the standards and conditions of the Zoning Ordinance and of other ordinances, rules and regulations of the City (to the extent that such standards and conditions are applicable to development within the PD District);
E.
The traffic estimated to be generated by the plan is generally consistent with the original, Council approved traffic impact analysis and any conditions to be satisfied at the time of the Development Plan approval have been met;
F.
The plan includes the necessary on-site or adjacent traffic improvements to accommodate traffic generated by the plan (e.g., turn lanes, stacking lanes, signalization, etc.); and
G.
The preliminary drainage study for the plan indicates that the proposed development can be achieved without increasing the upstream or downstream water surface elevation on property owned by third parties and that detention and drainage areas can be improved in a natural manner.
(9)Conditions. The Commission may recommend, and the Council may require, such conditions to the approval of a PD Development Plan as are reasonably necessary to assure that the approval criteria are met.
(10) Approving Ordinance. The Development Plan shall be incorporated within an ordinance amending the PD Ordinance and the Concept Plan. The amending ordinance shall set forth all standards necessary for development of the land subject to the Development Plan that were not included in the PD Ordinance. The amending ordinance also shall repeal or amend any conditions that were attached to the PD Ordinance that have been satisfied as a result of approving the Development Plan and associated amendments.
(c) PD Site Plans
(1) Delegation to Commission. The Commission hereby is delegated the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny PD Site Plans submitted that complies with PD regulations adopted in the PD ordinance and all amendments thereto, subject to appeal to the Council. Any Site Plan subject to a request for Exceptions or other modifications that are reserved for the Council by these PD regulations shall be decided by the Council upon recommendation of the Commission.
(2) Submittal Requirements. The following requirements apply to each application for PD Site Plan approval unless otherwise required or approved by the Director:
A.
Size. PD Site Plans shall be prepared on sheets and at a scale as required by the Director. PD Site Plans shall be prepared by a registered engineer, architect, landscape architect, or a certified city planner.
B.
General Information.
1.
North Arrow;
2.
Total site acreage;
14-155
3.
Submission date;
4.
Scale (written and graphic);
5.
Vicinity map;
6.
Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of designer, engineer, developer, and owner;
7.
A boundary survey of the site with the location of proposed land uses;
8.
Adjacent subdivision names and property lines; and
9.
Adjacent land uses and structures.
C. Structures.
1.
Location, dimensions, and use of all existing facilities and proposed building sites;
2.
Setback and separation distances between building sites;
3.
Proposed construction type and facade materials for all multi-family and non-residential buildings (the Commission may require elevations and perspective drawings);
4.
Proposed density of each use;
5.
Proposed location of screening along public roadways shown on the PD Concept Plan;
6.
Location and types of signs, including lighting and heights;
7.
Elevation drawings citing proposed exterior finish materials; and
8.
Location of solid waste collection facilities.
D. Streets and Sidewalks.
1.
Location and width of all rights-of-way and easements;
2.
Location and dimensions of all pavement and curbing;
3.
Location and width of all sidewalks;
4.
Location and width of all ingress/egress points;
5.
Location and width of all medians and median breaks;
6.
Location of any special traffic regulation facilities;
7.
Location of Fire Lanes; and
8.
Street names on proposed streets.
E. Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas
1.
Number, location, and dimension of spaces;
2.
Type of surface material of parking facility;
3.
Dimension of aisles, driveways, maneuvering areas, and curb return radii;
4.
Distance between spaces and adjacent rights-of-way;
14-156
5.
Location of all existing and proposed fire lanes and hydrants; and
6.
Proposed lighting diagram.
F. Landscaping
1.
Location and size of major tree groupings and existing hardwood trees of 6" caliper or greater , noting whether they are to be removed or retained;
2.
Location and size of proposed plant materials, including paving, together with type and species of plants;
3.
Number and type of each landscape element;
4.
Height and type of all fencing or buffering;
5.
Height of all planters, sculptures, and decorative screens;
6.
Location and type of trash receptacle screening;
7.
Location and type of lighting for streets, signage, and parking areas; and
8.
Location of visibility triangles where required.
G. Drainage.
1.
Direction of water flow;
2.
Quantity of on and off-site water generation;
3.
Topographic contours at a minimum of 5 foot intervals;
4.
Points of concentrated water discharge;
5.
Areas where special design and construction may be necessary due to slope or soil conditions;
6.
Location and design of all water detention and drainage areas; and
7.
Drainage ways, creeks, and limits of the 100 year floodplain and floodway as shown on current FEMA mapping or the City's master drainage plan, including location and acreage, together with a general plan for accommodating flood waters and drainage.
H. Preliminary Service Plan.
1.
A preliminary drainage plan of the area showing the size and location of each existing and proposed drainage way and retention or detention area. If no Development Plan has been required and approved by the Council, the drainage plan shall incorporate the requirements of the preliminary drainage study;
2.
The proposed method of providing water and sewer service; and
3.
If no Development Plan has been required and approved by the Council, an updated traffic impact analysis.
I. Exceptions. A list of the development standards, if any (whether in the PD Ordinance or in the then-existing ordinances, rules, or regulations of the City that apply to development within the PD District), for which the applicant is seeking an Exception by the Commission as part of the PD Site Plan approval process.
14-157
J. Other information. Other information as may be required by the Director or designee.
(3) Commission Decision. The Commission, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the City's Zoning Ordinance procedures, shall approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny each PD Site Plan.
(4) Approval Criteria. The Commission, in approving, conditionally approving, or denying a PD Site Plan, shall consider the following criteria:
A.
The plan complies with the applicable PD Concept Plan or Development Plan, if any, and with the PD Ordinance, expressly including conditions attached to the Concept Plan, Development Plan or PD Ordinance.
B.
The plan complies with the standards and conditions of the Zoning Ordinance and of other ordinances, as well as other rules and regulations of the City (to the extent that such standards and conditions are applicable to development within the PD District);
C.
If no Development Plan was required and approved by the Council, the traffic estimated to be generated by the plan is generally consistent with the original Council-approved traffic impact analysis;
D.
If no Development Plan was required and approved by the Council, the plan includes the necessary on-site or adjacent traffic improvements to accommodate traffic generated by the plan (e.g., turn lanes, stacking lanes, signalization, etc.);
E.
If no Development Plan was required and approved by the Council, the preliminary drainage study for the plan indicates that the proposed development can be achieved without increasing the upstream or downstream water surface elevation on property owned by third parties and that detention and drainage areas can be improved in a manner approved by the Council; and
F.
Landscaping promotes continuity and unity consistent with the landscape plan for the development and encourages views to public open space and public landmarks.
(5) Conditions. The Commission, or the Council on appeal, may establish such conditions to the approval of a PD Site Plan as are reasonably necessary to assure that the approval criteria are met.
(6) Appeal from Commission Action. If the Commission approves a PD Site Plan with conditions or if it disapproves a PD Site Plan, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Council by filing a written request with the City Secretary within ten (10) days after the Commission's decision.
(7) Exceptions. The granting of Exceptions for Planned Development District regulations shall be the purview of Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
(d) Amendment of PD Plans.
(1) PD Concept Plans. PD Concept Plans (excluding informational statements) are considered part of the PD Ordinance. Any amendment to a PD Concept Plan shall be considered a zoning change, and the provisions of this Code and Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, relating to notices, public hearings, and written protests for changes in zoning districts or regulations shall apply. If a PD District is established subject to approval of PD Development Plans, the provisions of this Subsection shall apply to such PD Development Plan.
14-158
(2) PD Site Plans. PD Site Plans are not considered part of a PD Ordinance. Except as otherwise provided, any amendment to an approved PD Site Plan must be approved by the Commission. However, "minor modifications" to any PD Site Plan may be administratively approved by the Director. If the Director believes that a request for minor modification entails a significant change in the Site Plan, he may refer the request to the Commission for determination. A "minor modification" to a PD Site Plan is defined as any modification that does not:
A.
Alter the basic relationship of proposed development to adjacent property;
B.
Change the uses permitted;
C.
Increase the maximum density, floor area, or height;
D.
Decrease the amount of off-street parking, unless parking remains sufficient in number and conforms to ordinance requirements; or
E.
Reduce the minimum yards or setbacks.
(e) Periodic Review.
(1) Applicability. Each tract of land not yet fully developed, for which (PD) Planned Development District Zoning has been granted, shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to make inquiry and ascertain the following:
A.
Whether a Preliminary Plan and/or Development Plan can reasonably be expected to be filed;
B.
If a Preliminary Plan and/or Development Plan can be reasonably expected to be filed at any time within the two (2) year interval as set out herein;
C.
Whether the granted uses for the tract of land under consideration continues to have a desired relationship with the surrounding area; and
D.
If such density and other design standards originally granted are in accordance with the current community growth patterns and values.
(2) Determination. If, upon inquiry and review, the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that a particular tract of land zoned (PD) Planned Development is not reflective of current community growth patterns or community design policies, or is not in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, it may request the City Council to initiate hearings on the particular tract of land to consider 1) reform or modification of the PD District on the particular tract; or 2) change the zoning to a more suitable land use classification.
(3) Frequency. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review each tract of land for which Planned Development zoning has been granted beginning in January of each year, at least on two year intervals. The Planning and Zoning Commission may review certain tracts (for which Planned Development zoning has been granted) more frequently if it determines such review is necessary.
Sec. 14.1003 Effect on Existing PDs
(a) District Amendments. If an amendment is proposed after the effective date of this Article to any Concept Plan, Development Plan, Site Plan or planned development ordinance approved prior to the
14-159
effective date of this ordinance under prior development regulations, the provisions of this Article shall apply to those amendments.
(b) Site Plans. For any PD District established under prior planned development regulations for which at least one Site Plan has been approved pursuant to such prior regulations, the provisions of this Article shall not apply, except that procedures related to approval of PD Site Plans pursuant to this ordinance shall apply to any application for PD Site Plan approval submitted more than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Article.
Sec. 14.1004 Amendments to Approved PD Applications
(a) Processing Amendments.
(1) Amendments to all applications and approvals shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. However, the applicant shall submit a summary of all elements that are proposed to be changed along with the revised plans and application.
(2) Notwithstanding the above, the Director may approve minor modifications in an approved Site Plan or PD Site Plan administratively, provided that they do not:
A.
Alter the basic relationship of proposed development to adjacent property;
B.
Change the uses permitted;
C.
Increase the maximum density, floor area, or height;
D.
Decrease the amount of off-street parking, unless parking remains sufficient in number and conforms to ordinance requirements;
E.
Reduce the minimum yards or setbacks; or
F.
Detrimentally change or alter the characteristics of the elevation drawings or Site Plan as approved, but rather allow for some flexibility in minor modification to same.
14-160
ARTICLE 14.1100. ZONING-RELATED APPLICATIONS
Sec. 14.1101 Zoning Change
(a) Filing of an Application
(1) Pre-application Conference.
A.
An applicant for a change in zoning must hold a pre-application conference with the Director or designee Director prior to formal application.
B.
At the pre-application conference, the applicant should present a draft Concept Plan with as much detail as possible.
C.
Based on the information presented, the City representative will provide initial comments concerning the merits of the proposed development and inform the applicant of any additional requirements for preparation of the formal zoning application.
(2) Application Requirements. No application shall be reviewed which is not complete and accompanied by the payment of fees as established in this Code or other ordinances of the City of Lancaster. All applications shall be filed with the City on forms available in the City of Lancaster offices.
(3) Timing. Applications for Rezoning and Plan Approvals shall be submitted at least one month prior to the first scheduled hearing date.
(b) Submission of Plans.
(1) Preparation. All plans submitted pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance shall be prepared by a registered architect, engineer, landscape architect, or certified city planner.
(2) Quantity Required. Plans shall be submitted in the form and number as required by the Director.
(c) Considerations in Review and Approval of Rezoning.
(1) Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Potential impact on adjacent development.
(3) Availability of utilities and access.
(4) Site conditions such as vegetation, topography, drainage and flood plain.
(5) Timing of development as it relates to the City’s Capital Improvement Plan.
96) Other issues as may be deemed important.
14-161
Sec. 14.1102 Required Site Plan (Non-PD)
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Site Plan is to ensure that all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City are adhered to while providing for design flexibility; that sensitive environmental issues such as slopes and vegetation are accommodated; and that services and facilities necessary to support the proposed development will be available on an appropriate time schedule.
(b) General.
(1) Applicability. Site Plans are required for all new developments, except individual single family and duplex lots, and for expansion of existing development by 50% or more of the gross floor area.
(2) Application. Site Plans shall be accompanied by a completed application form and a proposed development schedule.
(3) No Permits without Site Plan. Site Plans may be submitted at the time of Building Permit application, but no permit shall be issued for site grading or construction until a Site Plan has been approved.
(4) Notification. No public notification is required for consideration of a Site Plan, or amendment, beyond posting as an agenda item for the Planning and Zoning Commission, if appealed or referred to it. This provision does not apply to PD Site Plans.
(c) Site Plan Submittal Requirements. The following requirements apply to each application for non-PD Site Plan approval unless otherwise required or approved by the Director:
(1) Size. PD Site Plans shall be prepared on sheets and at a scale as required by the Director. PD Site Plans shall be prepared by a registered engineer, architect, landscape architect, or a certified city planner.
(2) General Information.
A.
North Arrow;
B.
Total site acreage;
C.
Submission date;
D.
Scale (written and graphic);
E.
Vicinity map;
F.
Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of designer, engineer, developer, and owner;
G.
A boundary survey of the site with the location of proposed land uses;
H.
Adjacent subdivision names and property lines; and
I.
Adjacent land uses and structures.
(3) Structures.
A.
Location, dimensions, and use of all existing facilities and proposed buildings;
B.
Setback and separation distances between buildings;
14-162
C.
Proposed construction type and facade materials for all multi-family and non-residential buildings (the Commission may require elevations and perspective drawings);
D.
Proposed density of each use;
E.
Proposed location of screening along public roadways shown on the PD Concept Plan;
F.
Location and types of signs, including lighting and heights;
G.
Elevation drawings citing proposed exterior finish materials; and
H.
Location of solid waste collection facilities.
(4) Streets and Sidewalks.
A.
Location and width of all rights-of-way and easements;
B.
Location and dimensions of all pavement and curbing;
C.
Location and width of all sidewalks;
D.
Location and width of all ingress/egress points;
E.
Location and width of all medians and median breaks;
F.
Location of any special traffic regulation facilities;
G.
Location of Fire Lanes; and
H.
Street names on proposed streets’
(5) Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas.
A.
Number, location, and dimension of spaces;
B.
Type of surface material of parking facility;
C.
Dimension of aisles, driveways, maneuvering areas, and curb return radii;
D.
Distance between spaces and adjacent rights-of-way;
E.
Location of all existing and proposed fire lanes and hydrants; and
F.
Proposed lighting diagram.
(6) Landscaping.
A.
Tree survey of major tree groupings and existing trees of 6" caliper or greater , noting species and whether they are to be removed or retained;
B.
Location and size of proposed plant materials, including paving, together with type and species of plants;
C.
Number and type of each landscape element;
D.
Height and type of all fencing or buffering;
E.
Height of all planters, sculptures, and decorative screens;
F.
Location and type of trash receptacle screening;
G.
Location and type of lighting for streets, signage, and parking areas; and
H.
Location of visibility triangles where required.
14-163
(7) Drainage.
A.
Direction of water flow;
B.
Quantity of on and off-site water generation;
C.
Topographic contours at a minimum of 5 foot intervals;
D.
Points of concentrated water discharge;
E.
Areas where special design and construction may be necessary due to slope or soil conditions;
F.
Location and design of all water detention and drainage areas; and
G.
Drainage ways, creeks, and limits of the 100 year floodplain and floodway as shown on current FEMA mapping or the City's master drainage plan, including location and acreage, together with a general plan for accommodating flood waters and drainage.
(d) Site Plan Review.
(1) Procedure. Site Plans shall be reviewed, and a decision rendered, by the Director, or at his prerogative the Planning and Zoning Commission, taking into consideration comments from the Plan Review Committee. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Administrator to the Planning and Zoning Commission whose decision shall be final. Such appeal must be made in writing to the Administrator within 10 business days of the Director’s notification of decision to the applicant.
(2) Criteria for Site Plan Review. In approving or denying a Site Plan under this Article, the following criteria shall be considered:
A.
The extent to which the Site Plan fulfills the goals, objectives and standards in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, Parks and Open Space Plan and Thoroughfare Plan.
B.
Safety of the motoring and pedestrian public using the facility and area surrounding the site.
C.
Safety from fire hazards and measures of fire control.
D.
Protection from flooding and water damage.
E.
Noise and lighting glare effects on adjacent neighbors.
F.
Relations of signs to traffic control and their affect on adjacent properties.
G.
Adequacy of streets to accommodate the traffic generation of the proposed development.
H.
Adequacy of off-street parking and loading facilities for the uses specified.
I.
Landscaping and screening provisions appropriately placed per code requirements.
J.
Sitting structures and other improvements relative to required setbacks, height limitations, and other density and dimensional requirements.
K.
The impact of the proposed development on slopes, protected vegetation, the open space system, and adjacent properties.
L.
Such other measures as might secure and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
14-164
(e) Effect of Site Plan Approval.
(1) Site Plan Expiration. A PD Site Plan shall terminate at the end of a two-year period unless, within such period, any of the following occurs:
A.
A Preliminary Plat is approved;
B.
A Final Plat is approved;
C.
The filing of a Final Plat in the Court of Public Record;
D.
The issuance of a Building Permit; or
E.
The approval, by City Council of a Site Plan extension.
If development of a lot or tract with an approved Site Plan has not been initiated within 2 years, or more with an extension, of its final approval, the Site Plan shall be deemed to have expired and a new review and approval of a Site Plan for development of the property shall be undertaken, and this new approval shall be required before a building permit is issued for development. This review and approval shall be evaluated according to the standards of this ordinance, taking into account all changes to the ordinance which has occurred subsequent to the prior Site Plan approval.
(2) Phasing Plan Expiration. If the Site Plan is submitted in conjunction with an approved phasing plan for development of the lot or tract, the Site Plan shall be deemed to have expired if any phase is not completed within the time period approved for such phase. No Site Plan phase may be planned to exceed three years unless specifically authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council when demonstrated that due to the size or complexity of the site the three year time period would create a hardship. If any phase is not completed within the time period approved, the entire remaining uncompleted Site Plan shall be deemed to have expired and the provisions of Subsection A above shall be followed.
(3) Extension of Site Plan. Extension of an approved Site Plan may be granted by City Council, after a recommendation by the Commission, upon submission of a request for such extension by the property owner at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall take into consideration any changes that have occurred in this ordinance subsequent to original approval of the plan and the property owner may be required to bring such plan into compliance with the current requirements. The period of time approved for any such extension shall be indicated in any approval, but in no case, shall the period for extension exceed two (2) years.
(f) Amendment of Site Plans. "Minor modifications" to any Site Plan may be approved by the Director. However, if the Director believes that a request for minor modification entails a significant change in the Site Plan, he may refer the request to the Commission for determination. A "minor modification" to a PD Site Plan is defined as any modification that does not:
(1) Alter the basic relationship of proposed development to adjacent property;
(2) Change the character of the development;
(3) Change the uses permitted;
(4) Increase the maximum density, floor area, or height; 14-165
(5) Decrease the amount of off-street parking, unless parking remains sufficient in number and conforms to ordinance requirements; or
(6) Reduce the minimum yards or setbacks.
Sec. 14.1103 Certificates of Appropriateness (CA)
(a) General.
(1) Historic Landmarks. Except as otherwise provided for in Subsections C and D below, no alteration, construction, reconstruction restoration, rehabilitation, removal or demolition shall be allowed upon an historic landmark unless a Certificate of Appropriateness has been approved by the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee and the Planning and Zoning Commission. An applicant may appeal a final decision in accordance with Subsection (c)(5).
(2) Historic Districts. Except as otherwise provided for in Subsections (3) and (4) below no alteration, construction reconstruction, restoration, rehabilitation, removal or demolition which alters the exterior architectural appearance visible from a public right-of-way of a structure within a designated historic district shall be allowed unless a Certificate of Appropriateness has been recommended by the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee and approved by the Commission. An applicant may appeal a final decision in accordance with Subsection (c)(5).
(3) Minor Exterior Alterations. The Historic Preservation Officer shall be authorized to approve a Certificate of Appropriateness for Minor Exterior Alterations (See Definitions Article 13). If the Historic Preservation Officer (HPO) determines that the applicant is seeking a Certificate of Appropriateness to authorize only minor exterior alterations, as referred to in this section, the staff shall review the application to determine whether the proposed work complies with the regulations contained in this section and approve or deny the application within five (5) days of receipt. However, the Historic Preservation Officer shall at his or her discretion be authorized to forward such an approval for any reason to the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee for recommendation to the Commission. An applicant may appeal either decision pursuant to the appeal process in this Section.
(4) Emergency Repairs or Demolition. The Building Official shall be authorized to approve temporary/emergency repairs and/or demolition for any Historical structure without the need to first obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness when such actions are appropriate to ensure the safety and welfare of the public against an eminent threat or when failure to act in a timely manner is reasonably likely to result in significant degradation to a structure or regulated element. Such temporary/emergency repairs and/or demolitions should be limited to the extent minimally necessary to alleviate the immediate concern and done in such a manner as to be reversible to the extent practical. The Building Official shall notify the Historic Preservation Officer as soon as practical following any such action with details relating to the extent and nature of the repairs and/or demolition. This authority for temporary/emergency repairs and/or demolition shall also apply to buildings or areas nominated for landmark or historic district status (See Article 14.200).
(5). CA Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
A.
Alteration. Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a building, including but not limited to the erection, construction, reconstruction or removal of any structure.
14-166
B.
Certificate of Appropriateness. A certificate issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission indicating its recommendation of plans for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of an historic landmark or a structure within an historic district.
C.
Certificate of Economic Hardship. A certificate issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon recommendation by the HLPC approving the alteration, construction, removal or demolition of an historic landmark or a structure within an historic district, even though a Certificate of Appropriateness had previously been denied.
D.
Construction. The act of altering or by adding an addition to an existing building or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
E.
Demolition. The act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark or a structure within an historic district.
F.
Exterior Architectural Appearance. The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to the type, color and texture of the building material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant elements.
G.
Minor Exterior Alterations. The installation of or alteration to awnings, fences, gutters and downspouts, lighting fixtures, steps, paving or landscaping; alteration, construction, restoration or removal of any exterior architectural feature of a building or structure which does not involve any significant change in the architectural or historic value, style, general design or appearance of the building or structure; and additions or changes not visible from a public right-of-way to the rear of the main building or structure or to an accessory structure.
H.
Reconstruction. The act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form any detail of a vanished structure.
I.
Rehabilitation. The act or process which returns a structure to a useful state. Rehabilitation may include alterations or additions to the structure or the repair or replacement of architectural elements or features.
J.
Removal. The act of moving a structure from its current site to another site.
K.
Repair. Any change that is not construction, removal or alteration.
L.
Restoration. The act or process which returns a structure to an earlier appearance. Restoration may include the removal of later additions or changes, the repair of deteriorated elements or the replacement of missing features.
M.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including but limited to buildings; fences; gazebos; advertising signs and billboards.
(b) Application Required.
(1) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, excavation permit, development permit or prior to the commencement of any work requiring a Certificate of Appropriateness, the property owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall file an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness with the Historic Preservation Officer.
14-167
The application shall be completed in full, in a format and on forms as approved by ordinance, policy or procedure of the City. The Historic Preservation Officer shall be authorized at any time to reject an application or deny it for any of the following reasons:
A.
Missing, incorrect or inadequate information.
B.
Failure to pay applicable fee(s).
C.
Failure to provide adequate copies of the application information.
D.
Failure to provide corrected information or supplemental information as requested by the HPO, HLPC, P&Z, or City Council as applicable
(2) No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Economic Hardship (see Subsection 3.4 below) has been issued. This requirement shall be in addition to any building permit or other development permit that may be required by any other ordinance of the City.
(c) Certificate of Appropriateness Review and Appeals Procedures.
(1) First Review. The Historic Preservation Officer or the HLPC as appropriate, shall review an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness no later than forty-five (45) days following the receipt of an administratively complete application. The applicant or designated representative shall be afforded an opportunity to submit evidence and/or testimony related to the pending action for this review consistent with adopted rules policies or procedures. Evidence in addition to the application submittal including but not limited to expert opinion, historic documents, photographs, maps, reports, and testimonials reasonably relevant to the application may be considered by the authority considering an application.
(2) Planning and Zoning Commission Review of Historic Landmarks. For properties designated as Historic Landmarks, a review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission based on a recommendation by the HLPC shall be required for the issuance of the Certificate of Appropriateness. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the application within forty-five (45) days following action by the HLPC. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, approve subject to modification or deny the request. The action of the P&Z shall be a final decision subject to appeal as specified in Subsection 3.3 E (below).
(3) Failure to Act. In the event that a final decision is not acted on within 180 days, a building or development permit may be granted.
(4) Decisions in Writing. All final decisions shall be in writing noting if the application was approved, denied or approved subject to modifications. A copy of the written notification shall be sent by regular US mail to the applicant at the address indicated on the application within ten (10) business days following the date of the final decision. Either a certified copy of the official meeting minutes or a notification letter signed by the Historic Preservation Officer may be used to satisfy this requirement.
(5) Appeals. An applicant, property owner or authorized agent of a property owner may appeal any final approval, approval subject to modification or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness, or they may apply for a Certificate of Economic Hardship. (See Subsection 3.4 below) All requests for an appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Historic Preservation Officer within ten (10) days from the date of the final decision. A 14-168
request for appeal shall identify the name and address of the person making the appeal and shall include a statement indicating the basis for the appeal. An appeal is considered a separate request and an additional fee may be required. A previous final decision may be affirmed, affirmed in part, modified or reversed by the appealing authority.
A.
Timing. The appealing authority shall consider the appeal within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal with the Historic Preservation Officer. However, the City Council shall consider an appeal within forty-five (45) days of the date of the filing of the appeal.
B.
Failure to Act. In the event that the request is not formally considered in accordance with the time limits specified the request will be considered approved.
C.
Actions Final. The decision of the City Council on a request for an appeal shall be final.
(d) Certificate of Economic Hardship Application Procedures.
(1) Application. Upon receipt of written notification of the denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness, an applicant may apply to the HLPC for a Certificate of Economic Hardship. No building demolition or development permit (except as specified in Subsections 3.1 C or 3.1 D above) shall be issued unless the Commission upon recommendation by the HLPC makes a finding that a hardship exists. All requests for a Certificate of Economic Hardship shall be in writing and filed with the Historic Preservation Officer within ten (10) days from the date of the final decision. A request for a Certificate of Economic Hardship is considered a separate request and an additional fee may be required.
(2) Findings. To affirm a claim of economic hardship the owner or authorized agent shall demonstrate that all of the following are true.
A.
The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return with its current use or configuration, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible;
B.
The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; and
C.
Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.
(3) Timing of Consideration. The HLPC shall consider the request within forty-five (45) days of receipt of an administratively complete application. The HLPC may solicit expert testimony and/or require that the applicant for a Certificate of Economic Hardship submit any or all of the following information prior to making a determination on the application:
A.
An estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or removal; and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the conditions of the HLPC required for the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
B.
A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation.
C.
Estimated market value of the property in its current condition after completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or removal; after any changes recommended by the HLPC; and in the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property for continued use.
14-169
14-170
D.
In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse or the existing structure on the property.
E.
Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years.
F.
All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property.
G.
Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years.
H.
The assessed value of the property according to the two most recent certified tax rolls.
I.
Real estate taxes paid for the previous two years.
J.
Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.
(4) Failure to Act. In the event that the request is not formally considered in accordance with the time limits specified the request will be considered approved.
(5) Decisions in Writing. All decisions of the HLPC shall be in writing. Written notice of the determination shall be sent to the applicant within ten (10) days of the date of decision of the HLPC. Copies of the decision shall be filed in the building permit file.
(6) Appeal. The denial of an application for a Certificate of Economic Hardship may be appealed in the same manner as described for a denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
Sec. 14.1104 Development Code Text Amendments
(a) Purpose and Authority. The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, or by request of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Director or the City Engineer, amend, supplement, or change the regulations established in the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Procedures.
(1) Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall give appropriate notice and hold a public hearing. The commission shall approve, deny or modify the amendment and forward its report and recommendation to the City Council.
(2) Action by the City Council. The Council shall give appropriate notice and hold a public hearing and has final authority to adopt or deny any proposed amendment.
ARTICLE 14.1200 SIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 14.1201 General
(a) Purpose. The intent of this article is to promote the health, safety, welfare, convenience, and enjoyment of the public, and in part, to achieve the following:
(1) The safety of the citizens of the city by prohibiting signs which create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists, or by impairing the driver’s ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or to read traffic signs.
(2) Communications efficiency by promoting the efficient transfer of information in sign messages by providing that those signs which provide messages and information most needed and sought by the public are given priorities; so that businesses and services may identify themselves; so that customers may locate a business or service; so that no person or group is arbitrarily denied use of sight lines from right-of-way for communication purposes; and so that persons exposed to signs are not overwhelmed by the number of messages presented and are able to exercise freedom of choice to observe or ignore such messages.
(3) To preserve landscape quality in the protection of the public welfare and to enhance the appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing that a sign does not create a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and contiguous property by its brightness, height, size, or movement.
(b) Applicability and Effect. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained in the jurisdiction only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this ordinance. These regulations apply to both commercial and non-commercial messages.
The effect of this ordinance is:
(1) To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this ordinance; and
(2) To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this ordinance, except as approved through the appeals process established by this code.
(c) Jurisdiction. These regulations shall be applied to all areas within the corporate limits of the City of Lancaster and its Extra Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). However, in the ETJ, on-premise signs shall be exempt.
(d) Exempted Signs. The following signs shall be exempt from the requirements of this article with the exception of set back from property lines.
(1)
Flags or emblems of government or of a political, philanthropic, or educational organization displayed on private property; for the purpose of this Section, emblems shall mean signage of not more than nine (9) square feet in area.
(2)
Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory services, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings, and other institutional or regulatory signs having to do with health, hazards, parking, swimming, dumping and of a similar nature.
14-171
(3)
Scoreboards, municipal golf course tee signs, sports field fencing, and park signs.
(4)
Independent school district or private school athletic facilities, temporary banners and special event signs.
(5)
Merchandise and pictures or models of products or services incorporated on the inside of the building/lease space on the window.
(6)
Holiday decorations, clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, local, or religious holiday, provided that such signs not be displayed more than thirty (30) days prior to holiday; and removed within ten (10) days after holiday. Number, height, location, illumination, or animation, and may not refer to any business, product or service.
(7)
Permanent signs designating historic tours, permanent Town Square directional signage showing Town Square location, and permanent signs showing Country View Golf Course, Chamber of Commerce, municipal parks, and municipal office locations.
(8)
All City and State directional and traffic control signs.
(9)
One temporary sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which such sign is located.
(10)
The changing of messages or copy of signs designed and intended to be changed on a regular basis provided the sign is not altered. Examples of these type signs are theater marquees, menus, fuel prices, directories, and the like.
(11)
Signs which display date, time and temperature are permitted, providing they do not exceed six (6) square feet in addition to the allowed business signage.
(12)
Signs which display help wanted, and do not exceed six (6) square feet. Number of signs, square foot and location to meet the regulations set forth in this ordinance.
(13)
Signs of 2.5 square feet or less on private property which include warnings and notices such as “do not enter”, “beware of dog” and “alarm system”.
(14)
On-site directional signs necessary for the movement and circulation of traffic which are three (3) square feet or less in size.
Sec. 14.1202 General Sign Regulations
(a) Prohibited Signs.
(1)
Off-Premise Billboards. Off-premise pole signs and billboards are prohibited in the City of Lancaster and in its Extra Territorial Jurisdiction.
(2)
Trailer Mounted and Portable Read-a-Board Signs. Trailer mounted and portable read-a-board signs are strictly prohibited, and subject to the following:
A. Enforcement. The owner or occupant of any property upon which there is located a trailer mounted, or non-trailer mounted, portable read-a-board sign in violation of this Sub-section or the owner or lessee of any trailer mounted, or non-trailer mounted, portable sign which is in violation of this Sub-section as herein defined shall be given notice by the Building Official or his designee, stating the nature of the violation and ordering that the violation be corrected or removed from said property within seventy two (72) hours.
B. Notice. Notice shall be given by one of the following methods:
14-172
1.
A written notice may be attached to the sign in violation of this Sub-section, or
2.
Verbal notification may be made by telephone or in person.
C. No Response. If the owner, lessor, lessee, or the representative of the lessor of the trailer mounted or non trailer mounted portable sign fails to remove such sign within seventy two (72) hours of the notification, the owner, lessor or lessee shall be issued a citation.
D. Entrance onto Property. The Building Official or any duly authorized agent may enter upon private property which is accessible to the public for the purposes specified in this Sub-section to examine signs or their location, obtain information as to the ownership of such signs and to declare the sign to be a nuisance pursuant to this Sub-section.
(3) Obscene and Immoral Matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign any obscene, indecent or immoral behavior. As defined in the Black’s Law Dictionary Fifth Edition.
(4) Painting or marking or streets, sidewalks or utility poles. No person shall attach any sign, paper or other material, or paint, stencil or write any name, number (except address numbers) or otherwise mark on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, utility pole, public building, fence or structure except as otherwise allowed by ordinance.
(5) Hand Bills and Placards. No person, firm, corporation or association of persons, shall paste, stick, tack, nail or otherwise place any advertisement, handbill, placard or printed, pictured or written matter or thing for any purpose upon any fence, railing sidewalk or public telephone, electric or other utility pole, or any other public property, including trees thereon.
(6) Flashing Signs. Signs of any type with flashing, revolving or rotating lights shall not be permitted.
(7) Changeable Electronic Variable Message Sign (CEVMS). A sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including an illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color shall not be permitted. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard.
(b) Illuminated Sign Distance from Residential
(1)
Illuminated signs are permitted in nonresidential districts, provided that they shall not be erected within one hundred (100) feet of any residential district unless properly and adequately shielded so that light from such sign is not directed toward such residential district.
(2)
In no case can a sign be placed closer than fifteen (15) Feet from a residential property.
(3)
No high intensity lights shall be permitted as part of a sign display visible from an adjacent street.
(4)
No sign shall be illuminated to intensity greater than two hundred (200) foot-candles. The restrictions of luminance in this Sub-section shall be determined from any other premise or from any public right-of-way other than an alley.
(c) Pole Signs Adjacent to Residential. A Pole sign greater than 10 feet in height may not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a single-family lot. Illuminated sign shall be shielded so that light from such sign is not directed towards residential district.
14-173
(d) Construction/Development sign. A temporary on-site sign providing information about future development or current construction on a site and the parties involved in the project. Maximum size 64 square foot per side.
(e) Obstruction of Sight. No sign shall be located as to obstruct the vision or sight distance of vehicle operators or pedestrians at any intersection or street crossing. In order to maintain visual clearance and sight distance for vehicle operators and pedestrians:
(1)
A Visibility Triangle shall be provided
(2)
A sign in direct line of vision of any signal light, traffic control sign, or any other such device from any point in a moving traffic lane must be at least fifty (50) feet from such device, unless the City Engineer or his designee approves the placement of such sign.
(e) Adjacency to Utilities.
(1)
No sign shall be constructed nearer than three (3) feet from any public or private underground utilities. No pole sign shall be installed closer than ten (10) from any aerial power lines/cable or building service drops.
(2)
No ground sign or accessories to such sign shall be located within ten (10) feet vertically and six (6) feet horizontally of electrical wires or conductors in free air carrying more than forty eight (48) volts, whether or not such wires or conductors are insulated or otherwise protected.
(f) Signs Posted on Poles and Fences. No sign shall be posted upon any tree, utility pole, fence post, or any style or type of fence. No detached sign shall be suspended over any building or structure.
(g) Directional Signs. Directional signs shall be allowed in all districts subject to the following:
(1)
Directional signs shall be limited to six (6) square feet in area for institutional uses, with one (1) sign per street entrance allowed.
(2)
Identification of services is permitted on such a sign, such as “emergency services entrance.” Such signs are limited to two (2) square feet or less in area for non-institutional uses, with no limit on the number of signs permitted for such uses. For non-institutional uses, identification of services is not permitted on such sign.
(h) Political Signs. Political signs shall not be permitted to be placed on public property or in public rights-of-way and may not be placed on utility poles or trees. No political sign may be placed within the 25 foot Visibility Triangle of any intersection. No political sign may be placed on public property on Election Day. Any such signs may not have an effective area greater than 36 square feet and may not be more than eight (8) feet in height. Political signs may not be illuminated or have moving elements.
(i) Portable Signs. Portable signs shall not be permitted except as otherwise provided in this article.
(k) Cloth, Paper, Banner and Flag Signs.
(1)
No cloth, paper, banner, flag, device, or other similar advertising matter shall be permitted to be attached, suspended from or allowed to hang loose from any sign, building, or structure, except as allowed by other provisions of this Section. Such advertising matter shall be a violation of this Section and shall be removed immediately upon notice by the Building Official.
(2)
No person shall place on, or suspend from any building, pole, structure, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, or parking area, any goods, wares, merchandise, or other advertising object or structure for the purpose of advertising such items, except as otherwise permitted.
(l) Signs on Public Property.
14-174
(1)
No pole signs shall be placed in the City right of Way or public or private easements.
(2)
No portion of any sign shall be erected upon or over public property or public right-of-way, except as otherwise specifically permitted.
(m) Signs on Vehicles. No signs shall be attached to a motorized vehicle, where the primary use of such vehicle is for sign purposes. Signs attached to or upon any motorized vehicle shall be prohibited where any such vehicle is allowed to remain parked in the same location or in the same vicinity, at frequent or extended periods of time where the intent is apparent to be one of using the vehicle and signs for the purpose of advertising. Vehicles operating under a city franchise shall be excluded from this provision. This provision does not restrict the identification signing or vehicles used for delivery service, interstate commerce, or any bona fide transportation activity.
Sec. 14.1203 Specific Sign Regulations
(a) Attached Sign. A sign attached to, painted on, or erected against a wall of a building which extends no more than twelve (12) inches from the wall surface upon which it is attached and whose display surface is parallel to the face of the building to which the sign is attached and may not extend above the roof line or roof façade, and must be at least eight (8) feet from grade.
(b) Monument Signs.
(1)
Maximum height: Fifteen (15) feet in the Freeway Corridor including monument base, measured to ground level at base; and eight (8) feet elsewhere in the City.
(2)
Maximum area:
A.
Thirty-two (32) s.f. of sign area.
B.
Exceptions:
1.
Menu Board: Forty eight (48) square feet
2.
Apartment: Thirty two (32) square feet
(3)
Placement:
A.
Fifteen (15) feet from property lines from out board edge of sign face or sign edge abutting a street. Twenty five (25) feet on corners for Visibility Triangles.
B.
Exceptions: A Menu board may be placed Fifteen (15) feet behind the property line.
(4)
Maximum Number: One per 600 feet of each frontage, or fraction thereof, in the Freeway Corridor, and 500 feet in the remainder of the City.
(c) Wall Signs.
(1)
Construction: Attached signs that are illuminated internally shall be constructed only of materials that are noncombustible or slow burning in the case of plastic inserts and faces.
(2)
Maximum height: A wall sign shall not extend above the roofline or facade of a building.
(3)
Maximum area:
A.
Total square footage is equal to one times the length of the building frontage or lease space frontage.
B.
Exception: Apartment, multi-purpose, real estate development – sixty-four (64) square feet.
14-175
(4)
Placement:
A.
Painted or attached directly on the wall surface on a building intended to be viewed from the ground.
B.
Signs above roofline, fascia, or top of roofs are strictly prohibited
(d) Pole Signs for On-Site Businesses.
(1)
Materials:
A.
Pole signs which are illuminated internally must be constructed of materials that are noncombustible or slow-burning in the case of plastic inserts and faces.
B.
Pole Signs must be supported by noncombustible material only. Wood or non-painted steel supports, except Corten pipe or similar steel, are specifically prohibited.
C.
Pole signs shall not have any attached guys or braces.
(2)
Maximum height: Thirty (30) feet from ground level for a Freeway Sign in the Freeway Corridor; and six (6) feet elsewhere in the City is the maximum allowed height.
(3)
Maximum area: Two hundred twenty-five square feet in the Freeway Corridor; 20 s.f., elsewhere in the City.
(4)
Placement:
A.
Five (5) feet from property lines abutting a street, and twenty five (25) feet from property lines abutting two streets at an intersection or at alley.
B.
Freeway Pole Signs must be located within 100 feet of the freeway right-of-way.
C.
Pole signs must be located at a minimum of
1. Thirty feet from an adjoining private property line,
2. One hundred (100) feet from a freeway sign or any other pole sign, and
3. One hundred (100) feet from any single family residential zoned property.
D. All pole signs must be located on-premise, unless allowed off-premise by a Specific Use Permit.
(5)
Maximum number: One (1) per 600 feet of each frontage, or fraction thereof, in the Freeway Corridor, and 250 feet in the remainder of the City.
Sec. 14.1204 Portable Signs, Temporary Banners, Flags, Or Inflatable Signs
(a) Portable Signs. Portable signs are subject to the following regulations:
(1) Permit Required. Prior to the use or placement of any portable sign, a permit must be obtained.
A.
No permit fee is required for temporary signs for schools, and other public or quasi-public institutions. Exemption from the permit fee does not exempt a person from all other requirements of this article. A permit shall be required, however, the fee may be exempt.
B.
Temporary sign permits shall be issued for a maximum continuous period of fourteen (14) days, and for a maximum number of four (4) times per calendar year. A minimum time of sixty (60) days must be elapsed between expiration and issuance of temporary sign permits.
1.
Size. The maximum size of each portable sign is 12 square feet.
14-176
2.
Sign Location. No portable sign shall be located in city rights-of-way, in any Visibility Triangle, or in any other location so as to impair traffic or pedestrian vision or safety. All portable signs must be set back a minimum distance of five (5) feet from the property line.
3.
Lighting. Such temporary signs may be internally lighted; however, such lighting shall not be flashing or intermittent. Temporary electrical requirements shall be subject to the adopted electrical code. No sign located in a residential district shall be lighted.
(b) Trailer-Mounted and Read-a-Board Signs. Trailer mounted and read-a-board style portable signs and signs with changeable letters/numbers are strictly prohibited.
(c) Temporary Banners. Temporary banners, including flags, pennants or other wind devices, shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1)
Permit required. A permit shall be required for all banners or other wind devices.
(2)
Zoning District Allowed. A banner shall be allowed in all non-residential zoning districts and in multi-family residential districts.
(3)
Time Limitations. A banner or other wind device shall not be displayed for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. Consecutive permitting shall be prohibited. There shall be a sixty (60) day time period between permitting. The maximum total use of a banner during the calendar year shall be one hundred twenty (120) days.
(4)
Location. Banners and other wind devices shall be securely attached to a wall surface or building element and shall not project above the apparent roof or building eave line. A fence or railing shall not be considered to be a building element.
(5)
Permanent Display Prohibited. A banner shall not be used in lieu of a permanent wall or pole sign, except in the case of new businesses where it may be used for a period exceeding thirty (30) days.
(6)
Maintenance. Banners shall be secured at all points of attachment. Torn or severely weathered banners shall not be permitted.
(7)
Number of Banners. The number of banners displayed on any premises shall not exceed two (2).
(8)
Size. No individual banner shall contain more than forty (40) square feet of area.
(9)
Non-Conformance. Banners found in violation of this Section must be removed or made to conform within 24 hours of notification.
(d) Inflatable Signs. Air filled or gas filled device that are anchored to a building, structure, device, object or the ground and used for advertising purposes on a temporary basis may be allowed for a 30-day period. A minimum time of sixty (60) days must be elapsed between expiration and issuance of a new permit.
(e) Sidewalk / Sandwich Board Signs. Sidewalk/Sandwich signs are distinct from Portable Signs as established in Sub-section 6.1 subject to the following regulations.
(1)
A sign permit is required, and expires on December 31 of each calendar year.
(2)
Sidewalk/Sandwich Board signs are allowed in non-residential districts including the Historic Retail District.
14-177
14-178
(3)
Sandwich Board Signs shall be a maximum of 6 square feet in size.
(4)
Maximum height of 3 feet and maximum width of 2 feet.
(5)
Sidewalk Signs shall not impede the required 6-foot walkway clearance.
(6)
One sign per business location.
(7)
Sign can only be placed outside during the hours the business is in operation.
SEC. 14.1205 Development / Real Estate Directional Signs
(a) Development / Real Estate Directional Signs
(1) For the purposes of this Code, Development / Real Estate Directional Signs are those which promote residential development.
(2) Business Directional Signs which promote business and mercantile are strictly prohibited within the City of Lancaster.
(3) Temporary signage promoting residential development and housing shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way except as otherwise allowed in this section.
(b) Kiosk Signs
A.
Purpose. Kiosk signs will provide a uniform, coordinated method of providing homebuilders and developers a means of utilizing directional signs, while minimizing the negative impacts to the City of Lancaster and its residents. The following definitions apply:
1.
Kiosk Sign: A sign that contains individual panels and that is generally used to provide direction to residential subdivisions from major thoroughfares or to provide direction to schools, amenities, information centers, community facilities and neighborhoods within a residential subdivision.
2.
Sign Panel: An individual sign placard displaying directional information on a kiosk sign.
B.
Approval. All kiosk signs and individual panels must have approval by the City of Lancaster. Fees for kiosk signs shall be set forth in the license agreement.
C.
Placement. Kiosk signs shall not distract traffic or create a traffic hazard. The Engineering Division must approve the placement of all kiosk signs prior to installation.
D.
Size. Kiosk sign structures shall not exceed 12 feet in height and 4 feet in width.
E.
Design. Kiosk sign structures shall be ladder type with individual sign panels of uniform design. The color of all kiosk sign structures and panel background color will be approved by the city.
14-179
F.
Services Contract. The City Council may, by a duly executed services contract, grant to a qualified person or company the right to design, erect and maintain directional kiosk signs within the city. All kiosk signs are to comply with the standards set forth in this section and City Code. The Contractor shall provide, at no cost to the city, municipal directional kiosk sign panels, which will comprise up to twenty percent (20%) of all sign panels permitted, for uses of public purpose directional signage to municipal sites, as designated by the city.
G.
Unauthorized Signs. Illegally placed and non-permitted signs placed in city right-of-way may be removed by the city upon discovery. Non-permitted or illegally placed signs may be destroyed immediately.”
Sec. 14.1206 Off-Site Church Identification/Welcome Signs
Religious, civic, and philanthropic institutions and organizations located within the city limits of Lancaster are permitted to place identification signs, welcome signs and promotional signs, subject to the following regulations:
A.
Permit Required. A sign permit shall be required. If the institution and property owner is different, then a signed agreement between property owner and institution shall be furnished to Building Official.
B.
Size. The maximum area of any such sign representing a single institution is thirty-two (32) square feet. The maximum height of any such sign is nine (9) feet.
C.
Number of Signs. The maximum number of signs promoting any one single institution shall not exceed four (4).
D.
Location.
1.
Signs must be located totally on private property, not on city right-of-way.
2.
No such sign shall be located within twenty five (25) feet of a residential lot.
3.
No such sign shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of a similar such sign.
4.
No signs shall be placed within fifty (50) feet of street or alley intersections.
14-180
Sec. 14.1207 Special and Unique Signs
(a) Multi-Use Businesses. Certain business establishments are recognized to have certain unique requirements that necessitate additional building signage. Businesses are described as follows:
(1)
Business that incorporates on one (1) tract of land or under one roof, several distinct type businesses that are somehow interrelated shall be allowed to have one (1) such sign for each business entity. An example of such business is, but not necessarily limited to, a new car dealership (used cars, paint and body shop, service department, etc., are distinct but interrelated businesses). Size and number of signs to be approved by the Building Official.
(2)
Retail establishments that sell and dispense gasoline shall be allowed a gasoline price sign in addition to any general business signs.
(3)
Banks, retail stores that provide ATM machines.
(4)
The city manager or his designated representative shall have the final determination on approving sign permits for applications applying under the terms of this article.
(b) Historic District.
(1)
Historic Landmark District A. Signs located within the Historic Landmark District A as defined in Chapter 10, Article 10.800, Section 10.803 of the Lancaster Code of Ordinances, shall be subject to the following special regulations in addition to the review as required in this Article:
A.
Attached signage on buildings that front or face the Historic Town Square, shall not be internally illuminated.
B.
Attached signage on buildings shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in gross surface area. Such signs shall be mounted parallel and flush to the surface of the building.
C.
Signs shall be of earth tones. (Shown in Sherwin William’s Historic Color Chart.)
(2)
Town Square Regulations. Any person, firm, corporation, or association erecting a sign on Town Square public or private canopy shall comply with the following regulations pertaining to sign style, size, materials, media and placement:
A.
Sign Size. The maximum height of the sign shall be fourteen (14) inches; the thickness of the sign shall not exceed two (2) inches; the width of the sign shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the width of span between support columns, less nine and one-half (9-1/2) inches. Where no support columns exist, the maximum width of a single sign shall not exceed seven (7) feet, nor shall the maximum width of two signs placed together on a canopy exceed the width of the canopy, less twelve (12) inches.
B.
Sign Materials. The prescribed material to be used in construction of canopy signage may be cedar, redwood, cypress or other wood materials that are naturally resistant to decay.
C.
Sign Media. The application of a message on a sign may be achieved by sand blasting, by application of dimension (raised or recessed) characters, or by hand lettering (vinyl cutout letters are strictly prohibited). Color selections for sign letters, border, and background shall be made by owners/tenants. Day-Glow, neon and similar colors are strictly prohibited. Illuminated signs are not compatible with the Town Square restoration theme and are therefore not approved sign media.
D.
Sign Placement, Public Canopy:
14-181
1.
The top edge of the sign shall be six (6) inches below the top edge and flush with the front edge of the canopy front horizontal beam.
2.
The side edge of the sign shall be eight (8) inches from the leading edge of the support column. The sign shall be located between the support columns to the side nearest building and business entrance.
3.
The sign shall be affixed to the canopy mounting hardware in accordance with the detail set forth in the “Canopy Signs/Attachment Specification”, adopted herein by reference.
4.
In no event shall the affixing of a sign to the public canopy provide a vertical clearance between grade level and the bottom of the sign of less than seven (7) feet five (5) inches.
E.
Sign Placement, Private Canopy:
1.
The top edge of the sign shall be six (6) inches below the top and flush with the front edge of the canopy.
2.
No more than two (2) signs may be placed on any single canopy. Each sign must be suspended directly from the canopy.
3.
In no event shall the affixing of a sign to the canopy provide a vertical clearance between grade level and the bottom of the sign of less that seven (7) feet, five (5) inches.
Sec. 14.1208 Maintenance of Signs
All signs and sign support structures, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be maintained in a proper state of preservation. No sign will be allowed to be kept in a dilapidated or deteriorated condition. Signs with broken or missing faces shall be repaired or replaced within fifteen (15) days of notice by the Building Official.
Freestanding sign panels advertising a business that has vacated the premises must must be replaced with the new business or a blank panel within 30 days of vacancy.
Sec. 14.1209 Removal of Obsolete Signs
Any sign which the Building Official determines no longer serves a bona fide use conforming to this code, shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the land, buildings or structure upon which such signs is located within fifteen (15) days after written notification to do so from the Building Official. Upon failure to comply with such notice, the Building Official is hereby authorized to cause the removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the land, building or structure to which such sign is attached or upon where it is erected.
Sec. 14.1210 Removal or Repair of Unsafe Signs
If the Building Official shall determine that any sign is unsafe or unsecure, or is a menace to the public, he shall give written notice to the person or persons responsible for such sign. If the permittee, owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises fails to remove or repair the sign within fifteen (15) days after such notice, such sign may be removed by the Building Official at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The Building Official may cause any sign that is an immediate hazard to persons to be removed summarily and without notice.
14-182
Sec. 14.1211 Illegal and Nonconforming Signs
(a) Illegal Signs. An illegal sign is any sign that meets any of the following criteria:
(1)
A sign erected without first obtaining a permit and complying with all regulations in effect at the time of it construction or use;
(2)
A sign that was legally erected but whose use has ceased because the business it identifies is no longer conducted on the premises;
(3)
A nonconforming sign for which the amortization period has expired;
(4)
A sign that was legally erected but which later became nonconforming and then was damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more of its current replacement value;
(5)
A sign that is a danger to the public or is unsafe; or
(6)
A sign that pertains to a specific event that has not been removed within five days after the occurrence of the event.
(b) Retention of Non-conforming Signs. Non-conforming signs, except as otherwise provided by this ordinance, may be continued subject to the following limitations:
(1)
The owner of a non-conforming sign, upon receipt of a notice of non-conformity, may register the sign with the City as an existing, non-conforming sign.
(2)
Registered, non-conforming signs may be maintained and repaired with like materials and the sign message may be changed, provided that there is no extension, enlargement, change in location, or structural modification to any non-conforming aspects of the sign.
(3)
When a non-conforming sign is demolished or damaged to the extent that the cost of repairing the sign is more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, such sign shall be eliminated or made to conform to the current sign regulations.
(c) Removal of Non-conforming Signs. The following non-conforming signs shall be eliminated or made to conform to the current sign regulations within 30 days of the receipt of a notice of non-conformity. Signs subject to this Section are those whose characteristics constitute a public safety hazard.
(1) Signs that violate the sight triangle provision.
(2) Signs using the words "stop", "slow", "caution", "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as is reasonably likely to be confused with traffic, directional and regulatory signs.
(3) Signs erected so that by their location, color, nature or message are likely to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signals or signs, or is likely to be confused with the warning lights or an emergency or public safety vehicle.
(4) Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those exempt under Section 14.1201(d) Exempted Signs.
(5) Signs affixed to trees or utility poles.
(6) Temporary and portable signs, except those provisionally exempt signs listed in Section 14.1201(d) Exempted Signs, which violate building code provisions for wind loading, structural stability, electrical wiring or other code provisions.
(d) Removal of Illegal and Dangerous Signs. Except as otherwise provide by this ordinance or by law, the Building Official shall cause the removal of:
14-183
(1)
Any sign constructed, erected or placed in violation of the provisions of this or prior ordinances;
(2)
Any sign expressly prohibited by Section 14.1201(a) Prohibited Signs;
(3)
Any sign that represents a clear and present danger to the health or safety of the public due to its structural condition.
(e) Other Signs Forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this Section, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.
Sec. 14.1212 Administration and Permits
(a) Principles of Sign Computations. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height.
(1)
Computation of Area of Individual Signs
A.
The area of a sign shall be computed as the entire advertising area of the sign, including any framing or trim, contained within the respective sign cabinet. For the purposes of this computation the sign cabinet shall be defined as the structure or border used to differentiate a sign face from the structure against which a sign face is placed.
B.
Where a sign consists of individual letters, words or symbols attached to a surface, building, canopy, awning or wall and all such elements are located in the same plane, the sign area shall be the area of the smallest rectangle which completely encompasses all such letters, words or symbols and any accompanying background of a color different than the natural color of the wall.
C.
The permitted area for all monument signs shall not include the sign base or sign structure. In no case shall the overall sign structure, including the base, exceed the maximum allowed height nor the maximum allowed sign area. In no case shall the sign face of a monument sign exceed 50% of the overall sign structure.
(2)
Computation of Area of Multi-faced Signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are substantially similar, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
(3)
Computation of Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the mean distance from the base(s) of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. 14-184
Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
(4)
Computation of Sign Setback. The spacing between a sign and a lot line or two signs. The distance is measured horizontally from a vertical plane at the outer extremity of each sign.
(5)
Computation of Maximum Number of Signs. Pursuant to this Article, each lot is allocated the maximum number of signs allowed per District. Where indicated, additional signs beyond the identified allowance shall be determined by the lineal frontage of the lot.
(b) Sign Permits, Applications and Inspections.
(1)
Creation of Any Sign. It shall be unlawful for any person to paint on any wall or surface, construct, erect, alter, enlarge or repair any sign within the city limits of the City of Lancaster without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official and paying the fee as listed elsewhere in the City Code.
(2)
Illuminated Signs. Signs to be illuminated are subject to the electrical code, permit and fee requirements.
(3)
Applications.
A.
Application. Application for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the Building Official, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:
1.
Name, address and telephone number of the applicant
2.
Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected.
3.
Two (2) sets of plans to scale shall be submitted showing the sign location in relation to nearby buildings or structures, signs, property lines, driveways, public streets, fences, and sidewalks, and two (2) sets of plans and specifications showing method of construction and attachment to the building or ground, size, type, height, construction materials, and such other information as the Building Official may require. The plans shall be 1/8" to I' (foot). Signs over ten feet (10) in height shall be engineered design.
4.
Name and address of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting structure.
5.
Electrical permit shall be required for illuminated sign.
6.
Zoning classification carried by the property.
7.
Such other information as the Building Official may require in order to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the city and state.
8.
The Building Official may require plans to be prepared by a registered professional engineer. Original signature of engineer required. Engineer shall be certified by the State of Texas.
B.
Review and Inspection.
1.
Review. It shall be the duty of the Building Official upon the filing of an application for a sign permit to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign, and if it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this Section, the building code, and all other laws and ordinances of the City of Lancaster, he shall then issue the sign permit. In addition, applications for sign permits within the Historic Landmark 14-185
Preservation District shall be reviewed by the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee and a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to issuance of permits. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within ninety (90) days after issuance, the said permit shall become null and void.
2.
Inspection. The Building Official shall be notified by the permittee when erection of the sign is complete and he shall make an inspection to determine if the sign conforms to city ordinances and codes. The Building Official shall inspect annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each sign regulated by this Section for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure, whether it still serves a useful purpose and whether it is in need of repair or removal.
(4)
Sign Control Board Approval. Signs or signs with moving parts shall be approved by the Sign Control Board.
(c) Building and Fire Codes.
(1)
Codes. Signs shall meet all adopted building codes and fire codes.
(2)
Structural Design. Signs in excess of fifty (50) square feet in area and taller than ten (10) feet in height shall be designed by a structural engineer registered in the State of Texas and constructed to withstand a wind load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot and shall be constructed to receive a dead load as required by the adopted building code.
(d) Sign Contractors Registration Required. A sign contractor’s registration must be obtained prior to engaging in such business within the City of Lancaster.
(1)
Requirement for Registration. No person, firm or corporation shall install, erect or maintain any sign, or contract for such service, until such person, firm or corporation has applied to the Building Inspection Department for a registration to install, erect and maintain signs, and until such registration has been approved and issued.
(2)
Registration Fees. The fee for such registration shall be established by City Council.
(3)
Registration Board. No registration for the installation, erection and maintenance of signs shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation until such person, firm or corporation has filed with the Building Inspection Department a liability insurance certificate in an amount established by the Building Official. Such certificate shall meet the requirements of the City of Lancaster and the laws of the State of Texas, and shall provide for the indemnification of the City of Lancaster, for any and all damages or liability which may accrue against it by reason of faulty installation, erection, demolition, repair, removal or defects in, or collapse of, any sign for a period of one (1) year. Such liability insurance shall further provide for the indemnification of any persons, firm or corporation who shall, while upon public property or in any public place, incur damage for which principal named in the insurance policy is legally liable.
(4)
Cancellation of Registration. The registration of any sign contractor may be canceled by the City manager upon the recommendation of the Building Official, when such contractor persistently violates the requirements of this code. Conviction in Municipal Court, whether appealed or not, on three (3) violations over a period of two (2) calendar years shall constitute evidence of persistent violation. Any registration thus canceled shall not be renewed for such contractor or anyone operating his shop until such violations have been corrected. Upon correction of the violations, the contractor’s registration may be renewed.
14-186
ARTICLE 14.1300. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 14.1301 Usage
(a) For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this Ordinance.
(b) Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense and words used in the plural include the singular.
(c) The word “shall” wherever used in this Article will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; the word “may” shall be deemed as permissive.
(d) The word “building” includes the word “structure”, the word “lot” also means “plot” or “tract”.
(e) The term "used for" includes the meaning "designed for" or "intended for".
Sec. 14.1302 Definitions
(a) General Definitions:
Accessory Building or Use. A subordinate building having a use customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main building; or a use customarily incident to the main use of the property. A building housing an accessory use is considered an integral part of the main building when it has any part of a wall in common with the main building, or is under an extension of the main roof and designed as an integral part of the main building.
Adopted Policies. A written administrative directive discussed at a public meeting and officially adopted by a majority vote of the City Council.
Agriculture. The planting, cultivating, harvesting and storage of grains, hay or plants, or vineyards, commonly grown in Dallas County; The raising and feeding of livestock and poultry shall be considered an agricultural venture if the area in which the livestock or poultry is kept is three (3) acres or more in area, and if such raising of livestock and poultry is incidental or supplemental to the raising of crops and is not primarily for the raising or fattening of livestock. A feed lot exclusively for the fattening of livestock is not considered an agricultural use.
Agricultural Building: A structure designed and constructed to store farm implements or hay, grain poultry, livestock, fruit, and other agricultural products. These buildings are not to contain any residential use or be open to the public.
Alley. A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street; it is also public space or way, 20 feet or less in width, which has been dedicated or deeded for public use.
Alteration to a Sign. Any change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction, or supporting structure of any sign.
Alteration. Any addition, removal, extension, or change in the location of any exterior wall of a main building or accessory building, or change or modification in construction or occupancy. 14-187
Antenna. Definitions. For the purpose of this division an antenna mast is defined as an antenna, mast or tower, or all or any two (2) of these combined to constitute a structure designed for radio and television reception or transmission.
“Antenna” means a device or apparatus consisting of one or more wires, rods, dish or panels arranged to send and receive radio, television, electromagnetic or microwave signals. For purposes of this section, several antenna components may be assembled to perform a single function for a single operator and may be considered one (1) antenna.
Antenna--Accessory means an antenna for the purpose of transmitting, retransmitting and/or receiving radio, television, electromagnetic or microwave signals as part of and directly related to a principal activity within an office, retail or industrial building and which itself is not a principal use or unrelated to any principal use on the property.
Antenna--Commercial means an antenna for the purpose of transmitting, retransmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, electromagnetic or microwave signals, and any other similar technology, primarily for the purpose of operating a business and/or for financial gain. A commercial antenna may be either mounted or freestanding as described below.
Antenna, Commercial--Free-Standing means a commercial antenna supported by or affixed to a free-standing pole, tower, tripod, frame or other similar structure.
Antenna, Commercial--Mounted means a commercial antenna permanently affixed to the roof or other portion of a building.
Antique Shop. A retail or wholesale establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, architectural antiques, furniture and/or other artifacts of an earlier period (i.e., over 50 years old) and that are in clean, operable and saleable condition (i.e., not junk), with all sales and storage occurring inside a building. An antique shop is differentiated from a “used merchandise store”, a “resale shop” or a “consignment shop” in that it does not market common, contemporary used household goods, clothing or furnishings – rather, it deals primarily in vintage and nostalgia items (generally over 50 years old) and in antiquities (generally over 100 years old) from past eras.
Apartment Hotel. An apartment house which furnishes for the use of its tenants services ordinarily furnished by hotels, but the privileges of which are not primarily available to the public.
Apartment House or Building. A building arranged, intended or designed for more than two families. (See Dwelling Unit, Multiple)
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms within an apartment house arranged, intended or designed for a place of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit and who do their cooking therein. (See Dwelling Unit)
Associated Recreation. Recreational uses which are an integral part of a common ownership or associated with high density residential development (example: Homeowners Association with a private club, swimming pool, and tennis courts).
Authorized Agent. An architect, builder, developer, or other person empowered to act on behalf of other persons.
Automobile Repair, Major. Major repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, transmissions, or other major components for motor vehicles; collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; customizing; overall painting or paint shop; automotive glass and upholstery; those uses listed under “Automobile Repair, Minor”, and other similar uses. All repair work shall be performed inside an enclosed building. Vehicles shall not be stored on site no longer than 90 days.
Automobile Repair, Minor. Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes, and batteries; diagnostic services; minor motor services such as grease, oil spark plugs, and filter changing; tire
14-188
alignment; tune-ups, emergency road service; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses, brake parts, mufflers; performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; servicing of air-conditioning systems, and similar minor services for motor vehicles except heavy load vehicles, but not including any operation named under “Automobile Repair, Major” or any other similar use. All work must be performed inside an enclosed building. Vehicles shall not be stored on site for longer than 14 days.
Bank, Savings and Loan, Credit Union or Similar Financial Institution. An establishment, open to the public, for the deposit, custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds, excluding pawnshops, check cashing businesses, payday advance/loan businesses and car title loan businesses.”
Bar, Cocktail Lounge, Tavern, Saloon, Cantina. An establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-premises consumption, other than a restaurant as defined in this Section.
Basement or Cellar. A story having more than one-half (½) of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement.
Bed and Breakfast. A single family owner-occupied house offering rooms with breakfast on a nightly basis for a fee.
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the Building Official shall determine the outline of the block.
Board. The Board of Adjustment of the City.
Boarding House or Lodging House. A building other than a hotel, occupied as a single housekeeping unit, where lodging or meals are provided for five or more persons for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements, but not for the public or transients.
Buffer. A visual screen constructed of wood, concrete block, masonry, or landscape material including earthen berms in such a manner that adjacent property will be screened from the use contemplated, so noise, solid waste, or other objectionable influences will be avoided. Such buffer shall be horizontal to the ground, opaque, and a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
Building. An enclosed structure, anchored to permanent foundation, and having exterior or party walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of persons, animals, or property. When divided by other than common or contiguous walls, each portion or Section of such building shall be regarded as a separate building, except that two buildings connected by a breeze way shall be deemed as one building. Parking structures shall not be considered as buildings when calculating building coverage.
Buildable Area. The "buildable area" of the lot is the maximum amount of allowable space upon which a structure or building may be erected, after meeting the coverage, yard and other requirements of this Ordinance.
Building Area. The building area of the lot is the gross area covered by the structures when placed on the lot.
Building Coverage. Percentage of the lot that is occupied by the building area. Parking structures shall not be included in the calculations for coverage requirements.
Building Height. The height of the building shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the roof or parapet of the building if it is a flat, mansard or shed roof; or to the midpoint of the roof if it is gable, hip or gambrel roof.
Building Official. The duly authorized employee or representative of the City charged with implementation, inspection and enforcement of the building codes.
14-189
Building, Principal. A principal building is one in which a main use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
Building Setback Line. A line defining an area on the building lot between the street right-of-way line and all other property lines and the building line within which no building or structure shall be constructed (also referred to as a “yard”), encroach or project except as specifically authorized in an adopted ordinance of the City of Lancaster. In the GR, C, CBD, HC, RT, LI, HI districts, underground parking garages shall not be required to meet side or rear setback requirements, but may be constructed from lot line to lot line.
a. Front Building Setback Line (defining a Front Yard): A line parallel to the street right-of-way line which the building faces, and takes its primary access from.
b. Side Building Setback Line (defining a Side Yard): A line parallel to an adjacent lot or street right-of-way on a corner lot, which the building sides up to.
c. Rear Building Setback Line (defining a Rear Yard): A line parallel to an adjacent lot, alley, or street in the case of double frontage lots, which the building backs up to and has its rear or secondary access from.
Caliper. Caliper means the diameter of the trunk measured six inches above ground level up to and including four inch caliper size, and measured 12 inches above ground level if the measurement taken at six inches above ground level exceeds four inches. If a tree is of a multi-trunk variety, the caliper of the tree is the total caliper of all of its trunks at the elevation being measured.
Carport. A structure which is open on at least 2 sides., covered with a roof and constructed specifically for the storage of one or more automobiles; utility room may be included.
Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate issued by the Zoning Administrator or his authorized representative stating that the proposed use of the land and/or building conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance.
Check Cashing Business/Credit Agency or Similar Financial Institution. A check cashing business, credit agency or similar financial institution, e.g., payday advance/loan businesses or car title loan businesses, defined as:
14-190
An establishment that provides to the customer an amount of money that is equal to the face of a check or the amount specified in the written authorization for an electronic transfer of money, less any fee charged for the transaction, and where there is an agreement not to cash the check or execute an electronic transfer of money for a specified period of time, the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose for compensation by any person or entity other than a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables, to retail buyers, that cashes checks or money orders, or issues money orders or money transfers for a minimum flat fee as a service that is incidental to its main purpose or business, provided such retailer does not cash more than 100 checks in any calendar month, and/or an establishment that makes small consumer loans, usually backed by a postdated check or authorization to make an electronic debit against an existing financial account, where the check or debit is held for an agreed-upon term, or until an applicant’s next payday, and then cashed unless the customer repays the loan to reclaim such person’s check, and/or an establishment that makes small consumer loans that leverage the equity of a car or other vehicle as collateral where the title to such vehicle is owned free and clear by the loan applicant and any existing liens on the car or vehicle cancel the application. The loan terms are often for 30 days and failure to repay the loan or make interest payments to extend the loan allows the lender to take possession of the car or vehicle. This definition excludes a state or federally chartered bank, savings and loan association or credit union, pawnshop or grocery store.
NOTE: These uses will only be allowed with a Specific Use Permit (SUP) in the MI (Medium-Industrial) and the CS (Commercial Services) zoning districts in a free-standing building developed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and shall not be co-located in the same structure as other uses. No lot/parcel containing this use will be allowed within 2,000 lineal feet from any other lot/parcel containing this similar use (as measured in a straight line between the nearest points of one property line to another property line).
No lot/parcel containing this use will be allowed within 500 lineal feet of any residentially zoned property or property used for residential use, or within 1,000 lineal feet of East Interstate 35, Interstate 20 including the service roads and any major or minor arterial as designated by the adopted City of Lancaster Thoroughfare Map (as amended).
City. The City of Lancaster, Texas.
CLTA. Council of Landscape Tree Appraisers
Clinic. An institution, public or private, or a station for the examination and treatment of outpatients by a group of doctors, dentists, opticians, ophthalmologists, orthopedists, or other similar professional physicians.
Cluster Development. A method of development of land that permits variation in lot sizes without an increase in overall density of population or development, and results in a commonly held and accessible amenity. This remaining space must be preserved for public or neighborhood accessible open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features as a community resource. (See Conservation Development.)
Cold Storage Plant. A commercial establishment where foods are stored either in lockers, rented or leased, or in vaults in bulk for distribution to the home or other commercial businesses. There is no slaughtering of animals on the premises.
Commercial Amusement. Any enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with amusing or entertaining activities, where tickets may be sold or fees may be collected at the gates of the various rides, contests, games, exhibits, or other similar activities. Commercial amusements include zoos, exhibitions, expositions, athletic contests, rodeos, tent shows, Ferris wheels, children's rides, roller coasters, skating rinks, ice rinks, traveling shows, bowling alleys, pool parlors, video arcades and similar enterprises but does not include theaters and auditoriums.
14-191
Establishments that contain more than four (4) coin operated machines as defined by City Ordinances and/or more than one (1) pool table are hereby defined to be commercial amusements and shall meet the requirements for such uses as set forth in this ordinance.
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Lancaster and includes any unit or a part of such unit separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
Condominium. A multifamily dwelling unit, within which designated dwelling units are conveyed fee simple title, with an undivided interest in the building's common elements, to include, but not be limited to, halls, stairs, elevators, roof, parking space, and the land when the building is not constructed on leased land.
Conservation Development. A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features. (See Cluster Development.)
Convent or Monastery-a building or group of buildings designed to provide group housing for persons under religious vows or orders.
Court. An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the building.
Curb Level. The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front, or in the case of a corner lot, along the abutting street where the mean curb level is the highest. Where no curb has been established, the City Engineer shall establish such curb or its equivalent for the purpose of this Ordinance.
Day Care Center or Day Nursery. A place for the care of children. Services usually include a staff nurse and a hot meal is normally served.
Density. The ratio of dwelling units per gross acre of platted area being developed.
Director. The Director of Community Development for the City of Lancaster.
District. A zone or geographic area within the municipality within which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
Drive-In Eating Establishments. Any structure and premises specifically designed for the preparation and dispensing of food and meals for consumption either indoors or in a vehicle parked on the premises or taken away for consumption in the home or other places.
Dwelling Unit. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used primarily for residential occupancy, but not including hotels, boarding houses or mobile homes, trailers, motor coaches or other recreational vehicles.
a. Single-Family: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one (1) family as a separate dwelling unit.
b. Duplex: A building designed and/or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other.
c. Triplex: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by three (3) families living independently of each other.
d. Fourplex: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by four (4) families living independently of each other.
14-192
e. Multiple: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by five (5) or more families living independently of each other.
f. The determination of whether one family is living independently of another is based on one or more of the following criteria:
1) Separate sanitary facilities.
2) Separate kitchen facilities.
3) Separate entrances.
4) Separate utilities.
Empty Nester Unit. A residential unit type that is targeted to singles, empty nesters and retirees, which generally requires a minimum of maintenance and is smaller than typical single family homes. (See Article V.3.1.a.1)
Exception. Relief from or variation of the provisions of these regulations, other than Use Regulations, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from a Variance or rezoning, which may be granted by the Director, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council as specified in this Unified Development Code. (See “Variance” and “Temporary Waiver”.)
Family One (1) or more persons who are related by blood, adoption or marriage, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities, or a group of not more than five (5) (excluding servants) living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities, on a nonprofit, cost-sharing basis.
Fence. An enclosure or barrier for the purpose of enclosing space or separating lots, composed of masonry or concrete walls, excluding retaining walls; or wood, metal, or concrete posts connected by boards, rails, panels, wire, or mesh.
Filling, Retail Service Station. An establishment where gasoline, oil and grease, or automobile accessories are sold, supplied or dispensed to the vehicle trade or where motor vehicles received limited repair, are equipped for service, or where electric storage batteries are recharged and cared for, or a place where any two or more such activities are carried on or conducted as the principal use of the establishment. (The storage, sale, lease, or rental of more than one [1] boat or mobile home, or more than five [5] hauling trailers is prohibited.)
Flea Market/Second Hand Dealer/Swap Meet. The sale or trade of used merchandise customarily involving tables or space leased or rented to vendors either in the open air or in a building. This does not include a used merchandise establishment or an antique store.
Floor Area Ratio. The relationship of the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot to the total lot area. Parking structures shall be excluded in the calculation of the floor area ratio.
Frontage. All the property abutting on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets, measured along the street line.
Garage Apartment. A dwelling unit attached to a private garage.
Garage, Community. A building or portion thereof, other than a public, private or storage garage as defined below, providing storage for motor vehicles with facilities for washing, but no other services, such garage to be in lieu of private garages within a block or portion of a block.
Garage, Commercial. A commercial garage is any premises and structures used for housing more than three (3) motor driven vehicles or where any vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire, or sale and where a retail service station may be maintained as a secondary use.
14-193
Garage, Detached or Private. An accessory building for storage only of motor vehicles and home laundry.
Garage, Public. A building or portion thereof, designed or used for the storage, sale, hiring, care or repair of motor vehicles, which is operated for commercial purposes.
Garage, Storage. A building or portion thereof, except those defined as private, a public, or a community garage providing storage for more than four (4) motor vehicles, with facilities for washing but no other services.
Garage, Pull Through. A “pull through” garage shall mean a garage that is sited at the rear of a lot and behind the principal structure that requires a driveway adjacent to the principal structure to connect the garage with the street fronting the principal structure.
Garage, J-Swing. A “J-swing” garage is accessed by the front street, but the garage entry faces parallel to the street.
Group Housing Project. A dwelling project consisting of three (3) or more buildings, to be constructed on a plot of ground which is not subdivided into customary streets or lots, or where the existing or contemplated street or streets or lot layouts make it impractical to apply the requirements of this Ordinance to the individual building units in such housing project.
Guest House. An accessory building designed for the temporary occupancy of guests of the primary dwelling for which there is no remuneration and is not rented or otherwise used as a separate domicile.
Height of Yard or Court. The vertical distance from the lowest level of such yard or court to the highest point of any boundary wall.
Home Occupations. A "home occupation" is a commercial use customarily carried on in the home by members of the occupant family without structural alterations in the principal building or any of its rooms, without offering any commodity or service for sale on premises, without the installations of machinery or additional equipment other than that customary to normal household operations, without the employment of additional persons, without the use of a sign to advertise the occupations, and which does not cause the generation of other than normal noise, and pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Hospital, Sanitarium, Nursing or Convalescent Homes. A building or any portion thereof, used or designed for the housing or treatment of the sick, mentally ill, injured, convalescent or infirm persons; provided that this definition shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel, apartment hotel not ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons.
Hotel. A building occupied or used as a more or less temporary abiding place of individuals or groups of individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which there are more than twelve sleeping rooms, and no provisions for cooking in individual rooms.
Impervious Cover. Roads, parking areas, buildings and other impermeable construction covering the natural land surface that prevent absorption of the water. Water quality basins, swells and other conveyances for overland drainage shall not be calculated as impervious cover.
Institutional Use. A nonprofit organization or building, public or private, for the benefit of the public including YMCA, YWCA, Boys Clubs, Scouts; educational facilities and schools, including day care centers and kindergartens; churches, temples, cemeteries, mausoleums or crematories for the deposit of the human dead; hospitals, civic clubs, private parks, private libraries, museums, etc.
Kennel. Any premises in which more than 3 dogs or 3 cats or 3 other domesticated animals over the age of three months, not including livestock or poultry, are housed, boarded, raised, or trained as a commercial enterprise. This definition does not include pet shops. 14-194
Kindergarten. A school for more than five (5) children of preschool age, in which constructive endeavors, object lessons or educational games are prominent features of the curriculum.
Kiosk Program. A program established by the City of Lancaster to provide signage to community facilities, parks and new home developments. (See also “Signs, Kiosk)
Landscaping. Trees, shrubs, ground cover, earthen berms, vines, grass, water, decorative features such as fountains, or other material approved by the City Council.
Legislative or Governing Body: The City Council of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Loading Space. A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks and having a minimum dimension of twelve (12) by thirty-five (35) feet and a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
Loft. Flexible floor space above the ground level of a building (generally a commercial building) which is used for living or live-work uses.
Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street, or upon an approved open space, having direct street access, and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer, or improvement, which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record.
Lot Area, Minimum. Includes internal sidewalks, recreation areas, floor space, parking area, open space and utility easements, but does not include any public right-of-way street easements, or alley easements.
Lot, Corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the Building Official, or as specified on an approved plat.
Lot Depth. The length of a line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines.
Lot Double Frontage or Through Lot. A lot abutting on two (2) nonintersecting public streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
Lot, Frontage. The length of street frontage between property lines.
Lot, Interior. A lot whose side lot lines do not abut upon any street.
Lot, Irregular. Any lot not having equal front and rear lot lines, or equal side lot lines; a lot, the opposite lot lines of which vary in dimension and the corners of which have an angle of either more or less than ninety (90) degrees. A lot fronting on a sharp curve or cul-de-sac.
Lot Lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Front Lot Line. The property line between the front yard and the contiguous street right-of-way boundary.
a. Rear Lot Line: The boundary line which is opposite and most distinct from the front street line; except that in the case of uncertainty the Building Inspector shall determine the rear line.
b. Side Lot Line: The property line between two adjacent lots or between the side yard and the contiguous street right-of-way boundary on corner lots.
Lot, Reverse Corner. A corner lot whose front line faces at right angles to the front lot lines of the interior lots or whose rear lot line abuts the side lot lines of interior lots.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between side property lines, measured at the front setback line.
14-195
Lot of Record. A parcel of land which is part of a subdivision, the map or plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Dallas County; or a parcel of land not a part of an urban or town lot subdivision, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Dallas County prior to the adoption date of this Ordinance, which has not been divided since recording.
Lots in Separate Ownership at the Time of the Passage of this Ordinance. A lot whose boundary lines, along their entire length touched lands under other ownership as shown by plat or deed recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Dallas County on or before the date of the adoption of this ordinance.
Maneuvering Space. The space entirely on private property required for maneuvering vehicles in such a manner as to preclude the backing of any vehicle into any street right-of-way.
Masonry. Masonry construction shall be defined as construction composed of materials in the categories listed below and shall not include hollow clay tile or exposed lightweight block such as cinder block.
Mini-Warehouse. A mini-warehouse (or self-storage facility) is an enclosed storage facility containing independent, fully enclosed bays that are generally leased to individuals for long-term storage of their household goods or personal property.
Modular:
- Brick
- Natural or quarried stone
- Cast or cultured stone
- Glass block or glass
- Tile
- Custom concrete masonry units (normal or heavy weight blocks with an integral color that is sandblasted, burnished or has a split face)
Mini-warehouses. Small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted to the storage of items that are not for sale on the premises.
Mobile Home. A movable or portable dwelling which is constructed on a chassis, and which is designed to be towed over Texas roads and highways under special permit, designed for year-round occupancy, designed primarily to be used without a permanent foundation, but which may sit on a permanent foundation, and designed to be connected to utilities. It may consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when transported and expanded later for additional capacity, or of two or more units, separately transportable, but designed to be joined together into one integral unit. The following shall not be included in this definition:
a. Travel trailers, pickup coaches, motor homes, camping trailers, or other recreational vehicles.
b. Manufactured modular housing which is designed to be set on a permanent foundation, and which uses standard sheathing, roofing, siding, and electrical plumbing, and heating systems which comply with Lancaster Ordinances and Codes.
Modular Homes. Any permanent, single family dwelling unit which has been prefabricated or factory constructed as a single unit or in Sections or modules, and assembled at the factory or construction site and moved to a permanent location as a unit or in Sections or modules, as a permanent single family dwelling unit placed on a permanent foundation at such site and connected with all required utility services.
Motel. A building or group of two or more detached, semi-detached, or attached buildings containing guest rooms or apartments with automobile storage space provided in connection therewith, which building or group is designed, intended or used primarily for the accommodation of automobile travelers; including group designated as auto cabins, motor courts, motels and similar designations.
14-196
Municipal Uses. Facilities owned or controlled by the City of Lancaster including but not limited to: office buildings, maintenance shops, treatment plants, community centers.
Nightclub, Discotheque, Disco or Dance hall. An establishment whose primary activity is the provision of facilities for dancing, including a dance floor and live entertainment or amplified music. Such establishment may or may not provide on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. Schools of dance are exempted from this definition.
Nonconforming Use, Building or Yard. A use, building or yard, which does not, by reason of design, use or dimensions, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. It is a legal nonconforming use if established prior to the passage of this Ordinance.
Office Showroom. An establishment with no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas.
Offices, Professional and General Business. A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management and/or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, and medical offices.
Owners of record. Persons, partnerships or corporations listed as the property owner as of the date of the notification letter.
Parking Area. Space used exclusively for the parking of vehicles and where no other business is conducted paved to City specifications.
Parking Space. Area, not closer than six (6) feet from the back edge of the curb, the width and length of which shall exceed by a minimum of two (2) feet the dimensions of the type of vehicle normally to be parked in the space, and connected to a street or alley by a driveway affording satisfactory ingress and egress. The minimum dimension of a parking space shall be in accordance with the adopted ordinances of the City of Lancaster regarding off-street parking.
Patio Home. A single family, residential dwelling unit that is most often a one story L-shaped or U-shaped home utilizing the entire lot with an enclosed garden court for open space area. Fire retardant walls are utilized and additional open space is often provided by clustering the units.
Paving. Material which provides an all weather surface for the parking of vehicles. All required paving shall meet the standards specified by applicable City specifications.
Permitted Use. A use specifically allowed in one or more of the various districts without the necessity of obtaining a use permit.
Person. Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency or political subdivision.
Personal Service Shop: An establishment for the purpose of supplying limited personal services such as, but not limited to, barber, shoe, boot, saddle, shine shop.
Place. An open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently established or dedicated as the principal means of access to property abutting thereon.
Planning Consultant. A private practitioner in planning, who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP).
Planned Shopping Center. A group of architecturally unified commercial establishments built on a site which is planned, developed, owned and managed as one operating unit related in its location, size, 14-197
and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves. The unit provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and total size of the stores.
Planned Development (PD). Includes a combination of different dwelling types and/or a variety of land uses which creatively complement each other and harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity, and comply with provisions of the ordinances governing planned developments.
Plant List, City Approved. A list of plant materials which are acceptable for meeting the City’s landscape requirements. It also includes a list of plant materials which are prohibited. The Plant list is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and maintained by the Director.
Plat. A map of a subdivision or site plan that represents a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets.
Portable Building: A temporary building that may or may not have a foundation and is transportable. The structure may or may not require a permanent foundation based on the adopted building codes as amended.
Private Club. An establishment providing social and dining facilities as well as alcoholic beverage service to an association of persons and otherwise falling within the definition of and permitted under the provisions of that portion of Title 3, Chapter 32, VTCA, Alcoholic Beverage Code, as it be hereafter amended and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs.
Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not exceeding eight(8) feet and a body length not exceeding State maximums.
Rescue Mission or Homeless Shelter. A facility providing temporary housing to indigent, needy, homeless, or transient persons; may also provide ancillary services such as counseling, vocational training, etc.
Restaurant or Café: A building or portion of a building, where the primary business is the on-premises sale of prepared food, with adequate facilities for the preparation of the food to be sold, the adequacy of said kitchen facilities to be based upon the seating capacity of the restaurant and the type of menu offered.
Restaurant (Limited Service): A building or portion of a building, where the primary business is the on-premises sale of prepared food where patrons generally order or select items and pay before eating. Food and drink may be consumed on premises, taken out, or delivered to customers’ location. Drive-through “pickup/order” window permitted provided that there is no public address system or speakers.
Retail. The sale of goods directly to a consumer. Engaged in, pertaining to, or relating to the sale of merchandise at retail. To sell by individual items or by the piece, directly to a consumer.
Retail Food Store. A retail establishment selling meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery products, light hardware, and other similar items which are purchased for use and consumption off the premises (may be drive-in or supermarket type).
Right-of-Way Line. A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and the public right-of-way.
R.O.W. Right-of-Way.
Self-Storage facility. Small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the storage of items. The conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units, other than storage, shall be prohibited. One caretaker/security residence shall be permitted in association with a self-storage facility.
14-198
Semi-Public Uses. Public facilities including sanitary landfills, water treatment and supply facilities, and wastewater treatment facilities, but not including facilities owned or controlled by the City.
Servant's Quarters. An accessory building or portion of a main building located on the same lot as the main building and used as living quarters for servants employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate domicile.
Setback: See Building Setback Line.
SIGNS:
Abandoned Sign. A sign that no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, service, owner, product, or activity and/or for which no legal owner can be found.
Apartment Identification Sign. An accessory on-site sign for the identification of an apartment building or complex.
Attached Sign. A sign attached to, painted on, or erected against a wall of a building which extends no more than twelve (12) inches from the wall surface upon which it is attached and whose display surface is parallel to the face of the building to which the sign is attached and may not extend above the roof line or roof façade, and must be at least eight (8) feet from grade.
Awning Sign. A sign incorporated into or attached to an awning. Any non-illuminated sign painted on or applied to a structure made of cloth, canvas, metal or similar material that is affixed to a building and projects therefrom. Such signs may or may not be fixed or equipped with a mechanism for raising and holding an awning in a retracted position against the building.
Balloon Sign. One or more balloons used as a permanent or temporary sign or as a means of directing attention to any business or profession, or to a commodity or service sold, offered, or manufactured, or to any entertainment.
Banner Sign. A sign that is painted or displayed upon cloth, flexible fabric or other similar material. For the purpose of this ordinance, a flexible sign face of approved materials, installed according to the manufacturer’s requirements, and placed inside the sign cabinet of a general business or multi-tenant sign shall not be deemed to be a banner.
Billboard Sign. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
Building Frontage. The horizontal linear dimension designated as the primary façade of that portion of a building occupied by a single use or occupancy. A corner tenant will be permitted to use the secondary façade to determine the “building frontage”.
Building Official. Shall mean the officer or other person within the City of Lancaster charged with the administration and enforcement of the sign regulations.
Bulletin Board Sign. A sign that indicates the name of an institution or organization on whose premises it is located and which contains the name of the institution or organization, the name or names of persons connected with it, and announcements of persons, events, or activities occurring at the institution. Such sign may also present a greeting or similar message.
Business Identification Sign. A sign displaying information pertaining to goods, services, or entertainment offered or produced by the business located on the same property as the business sign, but not including advertising devices or advertising displays.
Canopy sign. Permanent sign attached to the vertical face of a canopy or attached to the structural supports of canopy. Canopy signs shall not extend above the roof line or extend beyond the face of the canopy more than twelve (12) inches.
14-199
Construction/Development sign. A temporary on-site sign providing information about future development or current construction on a site and the parties involved in the project. Maximum size 64 square foot per side.
Directional sign. An accessory sign that indicates the direction of facilities by means of arrows, words, or other symbols. Such sign may not contain any advertising.
Double-Faced Sign. A sign with two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display area is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other side from another direction.
Erect a Sign. Shall mean to build, construct, alter, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and shall also include the painting of signs on the exterior surfaces of a building or structure.
Flashing Sign. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign either stationary or animated, which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color by any means whatsoever.
Freeway Corridor. Shall mean the area of land formed by a line parallel to I-35E and I-20 rights-of-way with a width of the two hundred (200) feet from the right-of-way of I-35E and I-20. Land area outside of the two hundred (200) wide area would not be considered as being within the Freeway Corridor.
Freeway Sign. Any detached pole sign along I-35 and I-20.
Gasoline Pricing Sign. Any sign used in conjunction with any retail outlet for displaying changing fuel prices. Gasoline pricing sign regulations are the same as general business detached signs.
General Business Sign. An accessory sign which advertises only commodities or services offered on the premises where such sign is located and where such sign is not the billboard type, but is specifically for the location.
Ground Sign. A sign supported by structures or supports or upon the ground and not attached or dependent for support from any building. This includes both pole and monument signs.
Highway Control Zone. Shall mean all zoned and un-zoned commercial and industrial areas within six hundred sixty (660) feet from the nearest edge of the right-of-way of all portions of the interstate or primary highway systems within the State of Texas as further defined in the Highway Beautification Act.
Identification Sign. A sign identifying the use of, name, location of buildings, or groups of buildings or businesses.
Illuminated Sign. A sign designed to give forth artificial light directly or through transparent or translucent material from a source of light within this sign, including, but not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs, or a sign illuminated by external light directed primarily toward this sign and so shielded that no direct rays from the light are visible elsewhere than on the lot where the illumination occurs. An illuminated sign that indicates only the time, temperature, or date shall not be considered a flashing sign.
Inflatable Sign. Air-filled or gas filled device anchored to a building, or the ground and used for advertising purposes on a temporary basis.
Information Sign. A sign that contains useful public information such as the time and temperature.
Institutional Sign. A permanent accessory sign for the identity of a school, church, hospital or similar public or quasi-public institution.
Kiosk Sign. A kiosk sign is a sign that contains individual panels and that is generally used to provide direction to residential
14-200
subdivisions from major thoroughfares or to provide direction to schools, amenities, information centers, community facilities and neighborhoods within a residential subdivision.
Marquee Sign. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. (See for comparison "canopy sign".)
Marquee Sign. Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.
Menu Board.
Monument Sign. Shall mean a sign having a low profile and made of stone, concrete, metal, routed wood planks or beams, brick or similar material. A monument sign shall be solid from the ground up; any poles or supports shall be concealed.
Moving Sign. Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position by any movement or rotation.
Nameplate Sign. An accessory sign showing only the name and address of the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is located and date installed on all detached signs ten (10) feet or over.
Noncombustible Material. Shall mean any material that will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred (1,200) degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
Nonconforming Sign. An advertising structure or sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this ordinance, and which has subsequently come under the requirements of this ordinance, but does not now completely comply therewith.
Off-Site Advertising/Billboard Sign. A sign constituting the primary use of land and which directs attention to a business, product, activity, or service, which is not conducted, sold, offered, or located on the premises where the sign is located.
Off-Site Development Sign. A temporary off-site accessory sign relating to the promotion of new residential development where the nearest boundary of such development is located more than 1000 feet from the nearest arterial roadway. An off-site development sign may be permitted by the Building Official for a maximum of six months and may be renewed as long as development is active. Development is active if a building permit is active anywhere within the subdivision within the preceding six (6) months. Signs must be removed after expiration of the permit.
Person. Shall mean and include any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company, or organization of any kind.
Pole Sign. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade. A freestanding sign that is affixed, attached, or erected on a pole that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or structure.
Political Sign. A temporary sign identifying a political candidate, or party.
Portable Sign. Any sign which is not securely connected to the ground and which can be easily moved from one location to another.
Real Estate Directional Sign. A temporary sign related to the location of a new residential development or dwelling units, sales and rental.
Real Estate Sign. A temporary on-site accessory sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental property for the use for which it is legally zoned.
Roof Sign. A sign erected on a roof or signs that project above the highest point of the roofline, parapet, or fascia of the building.
14-201
Searchlight Sign. Searchlights shall be considered signs that are used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise businesses.
Shopping or Business Center Sign. An accessory sign, which identifies only the name of a shopping, office, or business center of six (6) or more acres.
Sidewalk/Sandwich Sign. A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located.
Sign Alteration. Any change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction, or supporting structure of any sign.
Sign Face or Surface. Shall mean the surface of the sign, upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
Sign Setback. Shall mean a minimum distance as measured from the property line to a vertical plane extended to the ground from the nearest extension of a sign structure, i.e. face of pole or outboard edge of sign structural trim.
Sign Structure trim. Shall mean the molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms, which are attached to the sign structure.
Sign. Shall mean and include every sign, name, number, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, device, display, flag, banner, pennant, illustration, beacon, light or insignia and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building or outdoor structure, or erected or maintained upon a piece of land, which directs attention to an object, product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. This includes any building or surface which is colored or patterned specifically to attract attention. The term “sign” shall not include any flag, badge, or insignia or any governmental unit, nor shall it include any item of merchandise normally displayed within a show window of a business.
Subdivision entrance sign. A permanent accessory sign, which identifies a single-family, duplex, or townhouse subdivision and is located on private property at street entrances into the platted subdivision area.
Temporary Sign. Any sign, banner, pennant, or advertising display intended to be displayed for a limited time period. Easily removed signs attached to windows are considered temporary signs.
Vehicle Sign. A sign that is attached to or painted on a vehicle that is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property.
Wall Sign. A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than 12 inches from, or painted on the wall of, a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall. This does not include window signs.
Window Sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. An interior sign that faces a window exposed to public view and located within three feet of the window is considered a window sign for the purpose of calculating the total area of all window signs.
Site. A combination of continuous lots that may or may not be owned separately, that will be developed under one unified plan, as if it were a single parcel of land.
Site Plan. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot including: topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plain, marshes and waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, and screening devices; any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
14-202
Social Service Provider. A facility that provides assistance to persons with limited ability for self-care but for whom medical care is not a major element.
Space. A plot of ground within a mobile home or recreational vehicle park designated for the accommodation of one mobile home or one recreational vehicle, together with such open space as required by this chapter.
Specimen and Historic, Champion, and Heritage Trees. As defined by the American National Standards Institute.
Storage. The accumulation, stocking, or depositing of materials or items. These may include materials for the eventual use or sale in a commercial enterprise; but does not include the storing of a personal car or truck on an individual residential lot.
Storage Building. Any building either portable or constructed on site, utilized for storage purposes, and not requiring plumbing and electrical wiring, and not used for residential purposes.
Story. That part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or, if there be no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of a floor and the ceiling next above. A top story attic is a half-story, when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first story is a full story when over fifty percent of its exterior walls are exposed to outside light and air entirely above grade and which exterior walls contain windows or doors permitting entrance of daylight and outside air.
Street. A public or approved private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, excluding alleys, and as defined in the City’s Thoroughfare Plan.
Street Line. The dividing line between the street right-of-way and the abutting property.
Street Yard. The area between the building and a street.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground; including, but not limited to, signs, and excluding utility poles, fences and retaining walls.
Structural Alterations. Any alteration involving a change in or addition to the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
Subdivision. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development or lease.
SUP. A Specific Use Permit.
Temporary Waiver. An Exception which is granted for a limited period of time.
Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series, or a group of units having common walls, each on a separate lot.
Travel Trailers. Any vehicular, portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, and includes folding, hardtop campers transported behind a motor vehicle, truck mounted campers attached to and transported behind a motor vehicle or pickup, camper, converted bus, tent trailer, tent or similar device used for temporary, portable housing, or a similar type of temporary dwelling intended for short term occupancy, travel, and/or recreation.
Trucking Company/Motor Freight Company. A company using trucks or other heavy load vehicles to transport goods, equipment and similar products. Includes companies that move residential or commercial belongings.
Used Merchandise Store (also “Resale Shop” or “Thrift Store” or “Consignment Shop”) An establishment that generally markets common, contemporary used household goods, clothing or 14-203
furnishings on a straight “for sale” basis or on a consignment basis. This term includes a used merchandise store that is operated by a non-profit, charitable or religious organization.
Variance. Relief from or variation of the provisions of these regulations, other than Use Regulations, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from an Exception or rezoning, as set out in powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment. (See “Temporary Waiver” and “Exception”)
Veterinary Clinic. An establishment where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment and boarding of animals is limited to short term care incidental and subordinate to the clinic use.
Visibility Triangle. An area where structures and landscaping is limited in order to preserve easy visibility between on-coming vehicles at an intersection. Visibility Triangles are defined in Article 14.800, Public Right-of –Way Visibility.
Wall, Exterior. Any wall or element of a wall, or any member or group of members, which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building and which has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the horizontal plane.
Wholesale. The sale of commodities for the purpose of resale, as to retailers or jobbers rather than to consumers directly; opposed to retail. Of, pertaining to, or engaged in sale at wholesale.
Xeriscape. Landscaping characterized by the use of vegetation that is drought-tolerant or of low water use in character.
Zero Lot Line House. A single family detached residential dwelling unit with one side wall coincident with the side lot line and a 5 foot maintenance easement coincident with the opposite side lot line.
ARTICLE 14.1400 PARK LAND DEDICATIONS
Sec. 14.1401 Purpose.
(a)
This ordinance is adopted to provide parks, open spaces and recreational areas in accordance with the City of Lancaster Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan and the Hike and Bike Trails Master Plan in the form of parks, open spaces, and trails as a function of subdivision development in the City of Lancaster. This ordinance is enacted in accordance with the Home Rule powers of the City of Lancaster, granted under the Texas Constitution, and the statues of the State of Texas, including, but not limited by way of limitation, Chapters 211 and 212 of the TEXAS GOVERNMENT CODE. It is hereby declared by the City Council that recreational areas in the form of parks, open spaces and trails are necessary and in the public welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to provide for same is by integrating such a requirement into the procedure for planning and developing subdivided property in the City, whether such development consists of new construction on vacant land, redeveloping, rebuilding or remodeling of structures on existing residential property.
(b)
Parks include public areas providing for a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities within convenient distances from residences to be served thereby, the standards for which are set forth in the Lancaster Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan. Open Spaces include preservation and conservation of land for wildlife habitat or areas of natural significance. Trails include a public citywide system of off-road hike and bike trails and equestrian trails. Proposed parks, open spaces and trail systems established by the City Council and shown in the official Lancaster Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan and the Hike and Bike Trails Master Plan shall be prima facie proof that any parks and/or trails located therein is within such a
14-204
convenient distance from any residence located therein. Therefore, the following requirements are adopted to affect the purposes stated herein.
Sec. 14.1402 Definitions.
When used in the context of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Applicant shall mean the property owner or duly designated agent of the property owner of land for which approval of a final plat has been requested for development.
Board shall mean the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board of the City of Lancaster.
City shall mean the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Commission shall mean the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Lancaster.
Community Park shall mean a park of approximately 10 – 50 acres, serving an area 2 – 3 miles in diameter, serving a population of approximately 20,000 persons and encompassing the service areas of 4 or more neighborhood parks. Community parks may typically contain lighted athletic facilities for more active play purposes, such as ball fields for football, soccer, baseball and softball, and a creation center or swimming pool, sufficient off street parking, restrooms, picnic areas and pavilions, shaded playgrounds, natural trails, ponds. These parks may be located adjacent to existing or proposed greenbelt areas and proposed educational facilities.
Council shall mean the governing body of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Development shall mean any residential activity that requires the approving of a final plat for residential uses as defined in the City of Lancaster Subdivision Ordinance, as amended.
Dwelling Unit shall mean space dedicated for human occupancy, any building, structure, or manufactured/mobile home, or part thereof, which is designed, used, or intended to be used, for human occupancy as living quarters or one housekeeping unit or family, as provided in the City of Lancaster Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.
Linear Park shall mean a park that follows some natural or man made feature that is linear in nature such as creeks, abandoned railroad right of ways, or power line or utility corridor easements. No specific standards apply to linear parks other than to be large enough to adequately accommodate the resources they follow. They can also serve as linear green belts, which preserve open space.
Neighborhood Park shall mean a park of approximately 5 – 10 acres accessible to residents who live within a ½ mile radius of the park, serving no more than 3,000 to 4,000. Neighborhood parks should be designed to service a specific neighborhood area and may include the following: Shaded playground apparatus, unlighted practice/multi-purpose fields, active areas for unorganized play, courts, picnic areas with benches, tables and grills, shaded pavilions and gazebos, trails, security lighting, typically restrooms are not provided in neighborhood parks.
Open Space shall mean areas remaining free of buildings, structures or other improvements. Open space in Conventional Suburban Development is defined as a ratio of some function, such as population or land area.
Park, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan shall mean the official adopted Park, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan and amendments thereto, including policies or development strategies in the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
14-205
Planned Development shall mean a development of mixed uses inclusive of residential, business, and retail or combination thereof. Planned developments shall have a defined development through design guidelines of landscape, building types, street types, parking for businesses and residential and open space.
Regional Parks shall mean a park dedicated due to its regional importance and relevance. The size of a regional park can vary from small to large, depending upon the purpose and character of the site. An example in Lancaster would be Ten Mile Creek Preserve.
Residential or Residential Development shall mean the actual or proposed use of land for one or more dwelling units, buildings, structures or manufactured/mobile housing which are designed or intended to be used, in whole or in part, as dwelling units.
Subdivider or Developer shall mean an individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, or other organization dividing or proposing to divide land, developing or making improvements to such land, so as to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself, or for itself, or for another.
Subdivision shall mean the division of any lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or sites for the purpose of sale or of building development, whether immediate or future. The term includes resubdivision or replatting of an existing subdivision, building upon, or other development of land, but does not include the division of land for agriculture purposes.
Special Purpose Parks shall mean parks designed to accommodate specialized recreational activities. Because the facility needs for each activity need are different, each special purpose park usually provides for one or a few activities. Examples are golf course, athletic fields, nature centers or preserves, swimming pool centers, tennis complexes, etc.
Sec. 14.1403 General Requirement
(a)
Whenever a final plat is filed of record with the County Clerk of Dallas county, Texas, for residential development (including single-family, dual-family and multi-family residential areas) in accordance with the subdivision and zoning ordinances of the City, such plat shall contain a statement providing for the assessment of a park land dedication fee in the amount of $1,400 per dwelling unit in accordance with this ordinance. Any field plat submitted to the City for approval shall show the area proposed to be dedicated under this ordinance. The required dedication of this section may be met by a payment of fees provided herein or dedication of land when permitted or required by the other provision in accordance with this ordinance. Such fee or land may be used only for park and recreational capital improvements in a neighborhood, special purpose, regional, linear and community parks or to construct hike and bike trails located within the city, unless such requirement is waived by the developer.
(b)
The developer of all residential development, single family or multi-family, shall be required to pay the applicable fee as provided in Sec. 14.1403(a) or provide an adequate open space within the development. No plat shall dedicate less than five (5) acres shall be approved, unless the dedication will add to an existing park area.
(c) When two or more developments will be necessary to create a neighborhood park of sufficient size in the same area, the Parks and Recreation Department, at the time of preliminary plat approval, will work with the developers to define the optimum location of 14-206
dedication dedicated land in lieu of fees within such development. Once a park site has been determined, adjacent property owners who develop around the park site subject to this ordinance will dedicate land to the existing site unless otherwise determined by the City Council.
(d) The fees or dedication required by this Ordinance shall be made by payment, filing of the final plat or contemporaneously by separate instrument unless additional dedication is required subsequent to the filing of the final plat. If the actual number of completed dwelling units exceed the figure upon which the original dedication was based, such additional fee or dedication shall be required.
Sec. 14.1404 Dedication of Land in Lieu of Fee
(a)
The City may, from time to time, decide at its sole discretion to accept land for parks in or near the area of actual or potential development in lieu of the fees provided in this ordinance. These requirements shall apply to all single-family, duplex, triplex, fourplex, and multi-family residential developments in the City of Lancaster.
1. Whenever a final plat is filed on record with the County Clerk of Dallas County for development of a residential area in accordance with the subdivision ordinance of the City, such plat shall contain a clear fee simple dedication of an area of land to the City for park, open space and/or trail purposes in accordance with the Parks and Open Space Master Plan and the Trail System Master Plan. The area shall equal one (1) acre per fifty (50) proposed dwelling units. Any proposed plat submitted to the City for approval shall identify the proposed park land to be dedicated and designate the area with a lot and block number. Trails shall be designated as either hike and bike or equestrian trail right-of-way. A trail easement will be accepted if said land is adjacent to a drainage easement and bisecting a piece of property. The dedication herein may be met by a payment of money in lieu of land or capital improvements in lieu of land when permitted or required by other provisions of this Ordinance.
2. The obligation of the developer to dedicate park land or make payments or improvements in lieu thereof shall be in addition to and independent of the requirements of the developer to provide open space with a Planned Development (PD) district. However, if the open space in the Planned Development (PD) exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the project area and is dedicated and accepted by the City as public park land, the required dedication or payment in lieu of may be reduced by the amount of excess acreage.
3. The City Council has determined that development of an area smaller than five (5) acres for a public park is impractical. Therefore, if fewer than two hundred fifty (250) units are proposed by a plat filed for approval, the developer shall be required to pay the applicable cash in lieu of land provided by this Ordinance. An exception will be made if the dedication will increase the size of an existing park adjacent to the proposed plat or provide a trail location and/or connection.
4. In instances where land is required to be dedicated, the City shall have the right to accept the dedication for approval on the plat request or to refuse same, after consideration of the recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Director. If the City refuses the land dedication, the developer is required to make a payment of cash in lieu of
14-207
land in the amount provided in Section 14.403 if the City determines that sufficient park and/or trail area is already in the public domain in the area of the proposed development, or if the recreation potential for said park zone would be better served by expanding or improving existing parks.
5. In instances where land dedication for trail development is required, the City Council shall have the right to require construction of the trail in accordance with the City Wide Trail System Master Plan standards for trail construction. In instances where sidewalk and hike/bike trails are in the same location, the hike and bike trail shall replace the sidewalk. Park Development Fees will be only credited for the difference of the required width. The applicant/developer shall receive a credit of Park Development Fees equal to the cost of construction up to the amount of Park Development Fees required. Reimbursement will not be made to applicant/developer for any amount of construction above the Park Development Fees credited. Construction of the trail must be completed in conjunction with all other public improvement/infrastructure and approved by the City for release of the Building Permit. All improvements or construction on or within the dedicated land to be installed by the applicant/developer shall be completed in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. Finished project shall be maintainable and acceptable as determined by the City.
6. The dedication required herein shall be made by filing of the final plat with the Dallas County Land Records Office or contemporaneously by separate instrument unless additional dedication is required subsequent to the filing of the final plat. If the actual number of completed dwelling units exceed the figure upon which the original dedication was based, such additional dedication shall be required, and shall be made by payment of the cash in lieu of land amount provided by Section 14.403 or by the dedication of additional park land to the City.
(b) Combined Land Dedication and Payment of Cash For Equal To or Greater Than a Five Acre Dedication: In instances where an area equal to or greater than five (5) acres is required to be dedicated, the City shall have the right to accept not less than five (5) acres in partial fulfillment of the dedication requirement with the remaining obligation may be fulfilled by payment of fee.
(c) There may be certain situations and circumstances which are unforeseen which arise with respect to certain tracts of land to be developed, including those parcels which were in final plat stage at the time of the passage of the original park land dedication ordinance, which require special attention and consideration by the City Council; and the City Council, upon showing of unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of the provisions of this ordinance due to the topography or other conditions, and not merely a convenience to the applicant, may permit an exception in the strict application of this Ordinance, provided such exception will not seriously affect adjoining property or the general welfare of the community. Any variance granted shall not establish a precedent for other tracts, and each parcel or development shall comply with the terms of this Ordinance unless the criteria for an exception set forth above are met.
(d) Timing of payment. Such payment shall be made at the time of acceptance by the City. Final plat shall not be filed until all have been paid to the City.
(e) Notation of agreement. Subject to approval of the City Council, a developer responsible for dedication under Section 14.403 may elect to meet the requirements of this section in whole or part by a cash payment in lieu of land, in the amount set forth in Section 14.1403. Such payment in lieu of land shall be made prior to plat recording with Dallas County, 14-208
prior to issuance of a Building Permit, or as specified in a Development Agreement. Such agreement to make a payment of cash in lieu of dedication or reservation shall be clearly noted on the face of the final recorded plat at the time of submission to the City for action by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
Sec. 14.1405 These Requirements Shall Apply To All Non-Residential Developments in
The City of Lancaster
(a) In instances where land is required for trail construction in accordance with the City-Wide Trail System Master Plan, the City shall have the right to require the land dedication for approval on the final plat, or to refuse same.
(b)
The City Council shall have the right to require construction of the trail in accordance with the City Wide Trail System Master Plan standards for trail construction. In instances where sidewalk and hike/bike trails are in the same location, the hike/bike trail shall replace the sidewalk. Construction of the trail must be completed in conjunction with all other public improvements/infrastructure and approved by the City for release of the Building Permit. All improvements or construction on or within the dedicated land to be installed by the developer shall be completed in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. Finished project shall be maintainable and acceptable as determined by the City.
SEC. 14.1406 Capital Improvements in Lieu of Land
Subject to approval of the City Council, an applicant/developer responsible for dedication under Section 14.1403 may elect to meet the requirements of Section 14.1404 in whole or part by constructing or completing capital improvements in existing City parks or dedicated park land in lieu of land. These improvements should be made in accordance with the Parks and Open Space Master Plan. Should any of this option be exercised, the City and the developer shall enter into a developer’s agreement for credit of expenses equal to the cost of construction, prior to initiation of work on such improvements. Reimbursement will not be made if the developer chooses to improve park lands at a greater amount than required. Such developer’s agreements for improvements shall be made prior to plat recording with the County or as specified in the Development Agreement.
Sec. 14.1407 Character and Minimum Area
(a)
In determining the appropriateness of land to be dedicated under 14.1404 the following shall be considered: Size, dimensions, topography, and general character as is reasonable required to meet the demand and need of future residents, e.g., multi-purpose trail, open space buffer, active recreation for team or individual sports, playground, tot lot, picnic area, and such other recreational uses.
(b) In determining the appropriateness of the dedication in lieu of fee, the City may also consider the use of such property for its Trail Network Plan as provided in the Comprehensive Master Plan or the Comprehensive Park Master Plan.
14-209
(c) Consideration shall also be given to unique natural areas or flood plains that provide linkages between parkland set aside or reserved for open space or other appropriate dedication.
(d) The minimum amount of open space and park and recreational area that shall be dedicated or otherwise reserved pursuant to this section shall be two (2) acres per one hundred (100) dwelling units. Land within flood plains and floodway designated areas shall not be counted toward meeting this requirement unless more than 50% of the site is located above the 100-year flood plain.
(e) No land dedicated or otherwise reserved in compliance with this section shall have dimensions smaller than one hundred feet (100’) in width and one hundred fifty feet (150’) in depth. In any development that includes wooded areas, flood plains, or other natural features that are desirable to maintain, the City Council may grant an exception from the strict application of these minimum dimensions, whenever it determines that by doing so the protection and preservation of such areas will be promoted.
(f) Extensions of the City’s trail network and trail linkages, other than extensions of the primary trail network as depicted in the Comprehensive Master Plan, shall be included in the calculation of the amount of open space and recreational area dedicated or otherwise reserved pursuant to this section.
(g)
The following characteristics of a proposed area are generally unsuitable (unless recommended in the Park and Open Space Master Plan or Citywide Trail System Master Plan and/or City Council makes an exception):
1.
Any area primarily located in the 100-year floodplain.
2.
Any areas of unusual topography or slope that renders same unusable for recreational activities.
3.
The above characteristics stated in Section(s) 14.1407 (g).1 and 14.1407 (g).2 of proposed park land, open space, or trail dedication may be grounds for refusal or any preliminary or final plat.
(h)
Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a park and/or trail if the channel is constructed in accordance with City engineering standards, and if so significant area of the park is cut off from access by such channel. If land dedicated is in the floodplain or floodway and is required to be dedicated for drainage easements, then it may not be credited for the required park dedication.
(i)
Each park shall have ready access to a public street. All streets fronting a park shall be single loaded streets unless City Council makes an exception.
(j)
For more than five (5) acres of land, an environmental study, audit or assessment may be required demonstrating that the property is in a condition that would allow the City to utilize the property for park purposes without expenditures to
14-210
remove environmental waste or hazardous materials, that the property is suitable and safe for use as a park and is free from environmental-related problems.
(k)
All rubbish, trash, junk and other offensive materials shall be removed from all dedicated lands and the property returned to its natural condition except as to approved construction and improvements thereon.
Sec. 14.1408 Prior Dedication
(a) If a dedication fee or cash payment, or a combination thereof, arose prior to the passage of this Ordinance, that dedication or cash payment in lieu of dedication requirement shall be governed by the provisions of the ordinance in effect at the time such obligation arose, except that additional dedication shall be required if the actual density of structures constructed upon the property is greater than the former assumed density. Additional dedication shall be required only for the increase in density and shall be based upon the ratio set forth in section B of this Ordinance.
(b) For any tract of land zoned “Planned Development” prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and for which tract a dedication of land or a cash payment in lieu of land was accepted by the City, no additional dedication of land or cash payment in lieu of land shall be required for such tract unless the density of the zoned tract is changed by plat, zoning or development to a degree which would require additional dedication or cash in accordance with State or local law and pursuant to the Lancaster Development Code.
Sec. 14.1409 Private Park Option-Open Space
Public Improvement District Park Land Development. The City Council may authorize Park Land Development in lieu of fee or dedication and upon application by a developer or other person or firm with a legal interest in the land to be developed, allow the open space and park and recreational areas required by this ordinance or a portion thereof, to be restricted to the use and enjoyment of the residents of the particular development or subdivision. The City Council may grant such request whenever it finds that:
(1) The public open space and park and recreational areas required by this ordinance cannot be effectively integrated into the public park system of the City;
(2) The open space and park and recreational needs of the residents of the development or subdivision can be supplied by the reservation of private open space and recreational areas at least as adequately as by the dedication of public park land; Such areas shall be maintained by and deeded to a mandatory homeowners’ association, pursuant to the provisions of section (9) (M) (iii) in the Subdivisions Ordinance.
(3) Such open space and park and recreational areas shall be clearly noted on the face of the plat as “Private Open Space or Private Recreational Land” at the time 14-211
of submission to the City for action by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
(4) Such instrument shall be approved by the city attorney as to legal form and effect, and by the Planning and Zoning Commission as to the suitability of the proposed use of the proposed open space and recreational areas.
Sec. 14.1410 Consideration of Park, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan/Comprehensive Plan
(a) Land depicted on the Comprehensive Plan, as being suitable for development in the City for a major recreational center, school site, park, or other public use, shall be reserved, for a period of one (1) year after the preliminary plat is approved by the City if within two (2) months after such approval, the City Council advises the developer of its desire to acquire the land or the interest of another government unit to acquire the land for purchase by the interested governmental authority at land appraisal value at the time of purchase. A failure by the City Council to so notify the developer shall constitute a waiver of the right to reserve the land. Any waiver of the right to reserve the land shall no longer be effective if the preliminary plat shall expire without adoption of a final plat.
Sec. 14.1411 Special Fund Refund
(a) All funds collected by this dedication process will be deposited in the City’s Park Land Dedication Fund and used solely for the purchase, leasing, construction, remodeling, maintaining, and improvement of park land and development of parks, including but not limited to, facilities and services provided in each park. Money in the Park Land Dedication Fund may be used to pay interest and principal on any land, certificate of obligation or other debt instrument the City has issued for park purposes. All expenditures from this fund will be reviewed by the Parks and Recreation Department and approved by the City Council.
(b) The City shall account for all sums paid in lieu of land dedication under this section with reference to the individual plats involved. Any funds paid for such purposes must be expended by the City within ten (10) years from the date received by the City for acquisition or development of a neighborhood park as defined herein. Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first in, first out basis in a particular park zone. If not so expended, the owners of the property on the last day of such period shall be entitled to refund of any funds which were not spent by the City. The owners of such property must request such refund within one (1) year of entitlement, in writing, or such right shall be barred.
Sec. 14.1412 Criteria for Acceptance of Park Land
(a) The following are required at the time of platting and shall be met before land required to be dedicated pursuant to this ordinance shall be accepted by the City. The developer shall submit a plat request in compliance with the following requirements:
(1) The owner and/or developer shall agree that no construction materials be disposed of or deposited within the park by its contractor, subcontractors, employees or agents at any time while the subdivision is being built. If materials are being deposited or disposed of within the park, the owner
14-212
and/or developer will be required to remove these materials within seventy-two (72) hours of written notice by the City.
(2) Each corner of the parkland to be donated shall be surveyed with dedicated area marked with a permanent monument consisting of three-fourths inch (3/4”) iron pins set in concrete. These shall be located and identified on a recordable land survey completed by a land surveyor registered in the state of Texas and provided to the City by owner and/or developer.
(3) The developer shall provide for adequate drainage through the proposed park to eliminate standing water and health hazards.
(4) A water main, sewer and electrical utilities deemed appropriate by the City shall be stubbed to the park area of a size and location specified by the Director of Parks and Recreation to provide for future utility needs of the park.
(5) Proper vehicle access shall be provided to enable trucks, tractors, mowers, etc. to enter the park.
(6) Sidewalks shall be constructed adjacent to park lands that provide contiguous walkways on all sides of the adjoining development, unless this requirement is waived by the City.
(7) Signage designating the area as parkland shall be supplied by developer and/or owner and shall be designed and installed to the following specifications:
(A) Sign boards installation must comply with city sign regulations concerning vision clearances.
(B) Sign boards shall be of two inch (2”) thick redwood, and shall be one foot (1’) high by eight feet (8’) wide.
(C) Sign boards shall be supported by two (2) redwood sign posts, eight feet (8’) tall and four-inch (4”) by four-inch (4”) dimension.
(D) The top sign board shall have the name of the park routed in eight-inch (8”) high lettering in Helvetica style type.
(E) The bottom sign board shall have LANCASTER PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT routed in six-inch (6”) high lettering in Helvetica style type.
(F) Letter routing shall be at least three-eighths inches (3/8”) in depth, and routed surface shall be painted white prior to installation with an oil-based enamel paint.
(G) The top sign board shall be four inches (4”) from the top of the post, and the bottom sign board shall be ten inches (10”) from the top sign board.
Sec. 14.1413 Additional Requirements
(a) Any land dedicated to the City under the Lancaster Development Code must be suitable for park and recreation uses. The following characteristics of a proposed area are generally unsuitable:
(1) Any area with more than 50% of the site located in the 100-year flood plain.
14-213
(2) Any areas of unusual topography or slope which renders same unusable for organized recreational activities.
(3) Any area encumbered by overhead utility lines or easements of any type which would limit the opportunity for recreational and park development.
(4) It does not or would not front an improved public street or would not be readily accessible, in whole or in part, to the public.
The above characteristics of a park land dedication area may be grounds for refusal of any preliminary plat.
(b) Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a park if the channel is constructed in accordance with City engineering standards, if no significant area of the park is cut off from access by such channel, if not less than five (5) acres of the site is above the 100-year flood plain, or if the dedication is in excess of ten (10) acres, not less than fifty percent (50%) of the site should be included in the 100-year flood plain. If a significant area of the park land is cut off from access by such channel, a wooden bridge construction may be permitted to provide access to the park areas. All bridge construction must comply with City engineering standards.
(c) Each park must have ready access to a public street.
(d) Unless provided otherwise herein, an action by the City shall be by the City Council, after consideration of the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(e) Any preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be exempt from these requirements set forth herein, when such preliminary approval expires, any re-submission of such plat shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance.”
ARTICLE 14.1500 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES
Sec. 14.1501 Enforcement
a)
This LDC shall be enforced by the Director of Community Development. No oversight or dereliction on the part of the Director of Community Development or on the part of any official or employee of the City shall legalize, authorize, or excuse the violation of any of the provisions of this LDC.
b)
The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to immediately issue a stop work order if it is found that the applicant intentionally provided incorrect or inaccurate information in order to obtain a development review approval or factual circumstances demonstrate that development is occurring without the appropriate development review approval.
Sec. 14.1502 Violations
a)
Complaints
Whenever a violation of this LDC occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint. A complaint may be filed in writing or orally, and may be submitted anonymously. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis of the complaint, shall be filed with the Director of Community Development. The Director of community Development shall record
14-214
properly such complaint, investigate within a reasonable time, take action as provided by this LDC and maintain as a public record the disposition made is the complaint.
b)
Constitution of Violation
Any of the following shall be a violation of this LDC and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this Article and by state law.
I.
Development Without Permit
To engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling or other activity of any nature upon land or improvements subject to the jurisdiction of this LDC without all required permits, certificates, or other forms if authorization as set forth in these regulations.
II.
Development Inconsistent with Permit
To engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling or other activity of any nature in any way inconsistent with any approved plan, permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted for such activity.
III.
Violation by Act or Omission
To violate, by act or omission, any term, variance modification, condition, stipulation or qualification placed by the City Council or its agent boards upon any required permit, certificate or other form of authorization for the use, development or other activity upon land or improvements.
IV.
Use or Build in Violation
To erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, convert, maintain or use any building or structure or to use any land in violation or contravention of this LDC.
V.
Parties in Violation
The owner of any structure or land where anything in violation of this LDC is placed or used, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person employed in connection with the owner, who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall each be deemed guilty of a violation of this LDC.
c)
Utility Connection
The City shall not connect City utilities to any property in violation of this LDC until there is compliance with the provisions of this LDC.
d)
Notice of Intent to Stop Work
I.
Before issuance of a stop work order for a violating use or structure, the Director of Community Development may give notice of intent. The notice may specify a reasonable time for compliance with this LDC.
II.
If notice of intent is given, the stop work order shall not be issued before the time for compliance has expired.
III.
The Director of Community Development shall not be required to provide notice of intent to suspend or revoke for violations of this LDC that cause imminent destruction of property or personal injury.
IV.
The Building Official may also act upon violations he or she otherwise becomes aware of during the normal performance of his or her duties.
Sec. 14.1503 Penalties
14-215
14-216
a)
Any person who violates any provision of this LDC within the City limits shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fines not more than 2,000 for a violation of any provision governing the public health, safety or general welfare and shall be fines not more than $500 for any other violation.
b)
Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Assessment of the fine shall temporarily cease when the applicant submits a complete development review application to rectify the violation. No fine shall be assessed for the time period that the development review application is being reviewed.
c)
Any person who violates any provision of the LDC within the ETJ of the City shall not be guilty of a misdemeanor. However, the City may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of this LDC.
d)
The penalty for violation shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by State law and the power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this LDC whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed.
e)
The City shall withhold development review processing for any applicant with an outstanding violation of this LDC unless the application is submitted in an effort to correct a violation.
f)
Any person owning property that may be affected by a violation of this LDC may bring suit against the violating property owner in a court of competent jurisdiction.

CHAPTER 14
DEVELOPMENT CODE
ARTICLE 14.1600 SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS................................................................1
Sec. 14.1601 General Provisions.....................................................................................................................................1
Sec. 14.1602 Preliminary Plat Review............................................................................................................................2
Sec. 14.1603 Construction Plan Review and/or Civil Plan Review..............................................................................6
Sec. 14.1604 Final Plat Review........................................................................................................................................7
Sec. 14.1605 Minor, Amending or Vacating Plat Review...........................................................................................11
Sec. 14.1606 Replat Without Vacation Review............................................................................................................13
Sec. 14.1607 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)................................................................................................................14
Sec. 14.1608 General Design Standards.......................................................................................................................19
Sec. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys.....................................................................................................................................21
Sec. 14.1610 Standards Included by Reference...........................................................................................................33
Sec. 14.1611 Access Management and Driveway Standards......................................................................................34
Sec. 14.1612 Utilities......................................................................................................................................................38
Sec. 14.1613 Stormwater Management........................................................................................................................43
Sec. 14.1614 Improvement Guarantees........................................................................................................................44
APPENDIX I FORM...........................................................................................................................................45
APPENDIX II. AMMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC..................................................................51
14-
TM 18015.7.000
i
Art. 14.1601 General Provisions
SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 14.1601 General Provisions
(a)
Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the City by requiring the proper design and arrangement of public improvements and site elements.
(b)
Authority
The provisions of this Article are adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212 and are applicable in the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
(c)
Applicability
(i)
Prior to the subdivision, re-subdivision or development of any land within the City or the ETJ, all plats and plans shall first be approved in accordance with this Article.
(ii)
Unless otherwise provided in this Article, anyone who divides a tract of land located within the City limits or the ETJ in two or more parts to lay out a subdivision, to lay out public improvements, to create a use upon the land, or to make additions to land or structure shall have a plat prepared.
(iii)
A division of a tract under this Section includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract for sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method.
(iv)
No building permit may be issued for any parcel or tract of land until:
A.
Such property has received final, minor or amending plat approval or replat approval;
B.
The plat has been recorded with the Dallas County Clerk;
C.
All required plans have received approval; and
D.
Public improvements have been accepted, as applicable.
(v)
The division of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of development is prohibited.
(vi)
No plat shall be approved that attempts to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions of the preceding plat until such preceding plat, or portion of such preceding plat has been vacated or amended.
(vii)
For applicability of minor, amending or vacating plats see Article 14.1600Sec. 14.1601(a). For applicability of replats without vacation see Article 14.1600Sec. 14.1601(a).
(d)
Exemptions
The provisions of this Article shall not to apply to the following:
(i)
Any division of a tract of land in the City into parcels greater than five acres, where each part has public street access and no public improvement is being dedicated;
(ii)
In the portions of Dallas County in which the City has subdivision plat review authority, a division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres;
14-
TM 18015.7.000
1
Art. 14.1601 General Provisions
(iii)
Any division of land to heirs through an estate proceeding;
(iv)
Any division of land by virtue of the foreclosure of a deed of trust; and
(v)
Cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations.
(e)
No City Maintenance or Services
(i)
The City shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any public improvements required in this Article in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record in accordance with requirements herein, nor shall the City repair or maintain any public improvements for which the standards contained in this Article or referred to in this Article have not been complied with in full.
(ii)
The City shall withhold all services, including the provisions of sewage facilities and water service, from additions and subdivisions that have not been approved by the appropriate development review body.
(iii)
Private improvements shall not be repaired, maintained, installed or provided by the City.
(f)
Requirements for Improvements
Where applicable, all public improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. Design and installation shall meet the minimum requirements established by this Code and City standards.
(g)
Type of Improvements Required
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the applicant shall provide the following improvements in conformance with the standards, specifications and requirements of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan and any state or federal requirements:
(i)
Streets including but not limited to curb and gutter, driveways, pavement, sidewalks, bicycle facilities, alleys, bridges, street lighting, street name signs, traffic control signage or devices, medians and landscaping;
(ii)
Permanent survey monuments, range points and lot pins;
(iii)
Public open space;
(iv)
Water system including but not limited to water lines, fire hydrants, valves and water towers;
(v)
Sanitary sewer system including but not limited to sanitary sewer water lines, force mains, manholes, cleanouts and lift stations;
(vi)
Storm water system including but not limited to drainage easements, channels, culverts, storm water lines and inlets and any associated stabilization as required to provide storm water facilities in accordance with the ordinances and standards of the City; and
(vii)
Utilities including but not limited to electric, cable, natural gas and telephone service shall be installed in conformance with the terms and regulations of the provider of the utility.
(h)
Continuity of Improvements
All required public improvements shall be designed and installed to provide for continuity of improvements between adjacent properties. Pedestrian, vehicle, water, sanitary sewer and storm water improvements shall be extended along the property line to the furthest property line within a subdivision or a single lot (“to and through”).
14-
TM 18015.7.000
2
Art. 14.1601 General Provisions
(i)
Acceptance of Improvements
(i)
During the course of installation and construction of required improvements, the City shall make periodic inspections of the work to insure that all improvements comply with City requirements. Upon satisfactory inspection and completion of installation and construction of all required public improvements and submission of required quality assurance documentation, the applicant may seek acceptance of such public improvements. Finished as-built plans including adequate dimensions, reference points and notes describing unique construction details of all public improvements as installed shall be required before the City will accept the improvements. In addition, a maintenance bond acceptable to the City, in an amount as specified by the City Engineer at the time of final plat submittal, shall be required for acceptance of public improvements.
(ii)
Building permits shall not be issued until the City has accepted all improvements and released all guarantees required by the final plat, engineering drawings and other agreements. The City Manager may waive this requirement and authorize the issuance of such permits provided that security is provided by the developer.
(j)
Maintenance and Supervision
Where a subdivision contains storm water, water and sanitary sewer facilities, open space or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area, or that are of common use or benefit which are not or cannot be satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provision shall be made for the establishment of a homeowners association or other arrangement for continued maintenance that is acceptable to the City for the proper and continuous operation, maintenance and supervision of such facilities. A copy of the agreements providing for the proper and continuous operation, maintenance and supervision of such facilities shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and shall be filed with the plat.
(k)
Public Improvement District (PID)
(i)
Adequate provision shall be made for the operation and maintenance of all private improvements. This shall include the creation of a PID to ensure a reliable source of maintenance funding, and may also include a homeowners association or other legal entity with direct responsibility to, and control by, the property owners of the subdivision.
(ii)
The applicant shall submit a legal instrument:
A.
Establishing a plan for the use and permanent maintenance of the private improvements;
B.
Requesting the establishment of a Public Improvement District to adequately fund maintenance of public improvements such as neighborhood parks, landscaping in public right-of-way which is generally inaccessible to adjacent property owners, entry features, private streets (where approved) and other improvements for the general benefit of the neighborhood;
C.
Providing the City and other governmental authorities with written permission for access at any time without liability when on official business; and
D.
Permitting the City to remove obstructions if necessary for emergency vehicle access and to assess the cost of removal to the owner of the obstruction.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
3
Art. 14.1601 General Provisions
(iii)
The instrument shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney prior to any plat recordation and shall be recorded at the same time as the plat.
(iv)
Homeowners associations shall be established in such a manner that:
A.
Provision for the establishment of the association is made before any lot in the development is sold or any building occupied;
B.
Owners of property in the subdivision shall automatically be members and shall be subject to assessments levied to maintain the private improvements for the purposes intended;
C.
The association or similar legal entity has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over such private improvements; and
D.
The association or similar legal entity has the power to compel contributions from residents of the development to cover their proportionate shares of the costs associated with the maintenance and upkeep of such common areas and facilities.
(l)
Application Check-In
Whenever possible where an application is submitted in person by a representative of the project, not including a courier or other delivery service, the application shall be evaluated to ensure the completeness of submission materials that includes the necessary copies, fees and other required documents. The content of the submitted materials shall not be considered at that time. Where an application lacks any required materials, the application shall not be accepted.
(m)
Application Review
(i)
A determination as to whether any zoning, platting or development application or plan is complete shall be made by the Director within ten days after submittal of the application or the post mark on mailed materials.
(ii)
An application that contains all the information necessary to ensure compliance with all of the requirements of this Code shall be deemed complete.
(iii)
If the application is determined not to be complete, the Director shall notify the applicant within the above ten (10) day period. The notification may list missing or incomplete items or issues. The applicant shall have forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of the application to make all required changes to plans or the application and resubmit the material. The applicant may request an additional meeting for explanation of the missing or incomplete items. If the application is not resubmitted within the period specified by the Director, the application shall be deemed rejected, null and void and shall not be accepted for filing. After an application has been rejected or has become null and void, a new application and fee shall be required and all previous application materials shall be destroyed at the discretion of the Director. The Director may consider additional time based on the nature and complexity of a project.
(iv)
Any time an incomplete application is deemed complete and later determined to be incomplete, the application shall be rejected and paragraph (iii) shall apply.
(n)
Site Considerations
(i)
All land proposed for platting and/or development shall be suitable for development as determined by the City. All development shall be carried out in conformity with the plans as finally approved by the City.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
4
Art. 14.1601 General Provisions
14-
TM 18015.7.000
5
(ii)
Unless otherwise required or approved, drainage areas should be left in a natural state and no encroachments shall be made on the natural channel area. Any land subject to flooding will be regulated as stipulated by the Drainage and Flood Control Ordinance as found in Chapter 3, Articles 3.1300 and 3.1400 of the City Code.
(iii)
Where a subdivision borders a railroad right-of-way, a freeway or an arterial street, design of the subdivision shall include adequate provisions for reduction of noise. Parallel streets, a landscaped buffer area, lots with increased setbacks, among others, are recommended solutions.
Art. 14.1602 Preliminary Plat Review
Sec.14.6102 Preliminary Plan Review
(a)
Preliminary Plat Required
(i)
Unless otherwise allowed by the Director, preliminary plat approval shall be required before any division of land or platting activity that does not meet the definition of a minor, amending or vacating plat as described herein.
(ii)
Where required, preliminary plats shall be prepared by a Texas licensed professional engineer or by a state registered professional land surveyor.
(iii)
A preliminary plat shall be considered accepted and deemed filed when all requirements herein and as required to make up an application is/are complete in all detail(s).
(b)
Application Requirements
A minimum of 20 copies of the preliminary plat and required supplemental material shall be presented to the Director in accordance with the submittal calendar established by the Director. The drawing shall be made at a scale of one (1") inch equals 200 feet or larger. The size of the sheets shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. If it is necessary to place the plat on more than one sheet, an index map shall be included on the first sheet. A vicinity map showing the location of the area being platted as it relates to major streets in the area shall be included. A preliminary plat application shall contain the following information:
(i)
Property boundary indicated by a heavy solid line, intermittent with 2 dash lines; dimensioned with bearing and distance;
(ii)
Front and exterior side or corner setback lines shown as a light dashed line and labeled;
(iii)
Location map clearly showing the location of the proposed preliminary plat with cross streets with an indication if the location map is to scale or not to scale;
(iv)
Written and bar graph scale and north arrow with the north oriented to the top or left side of the sheet;
(v)
Abstract lines, survey lines, county lines, and corporate boundaries as applicable;
(vi)
A title block provided in the lower right corner that includes large, boldly printed:
(SUBDIVISION NAME)
PRELIMINARY PLAT
LOT(S) _____, BLOCK(S) _______
(or survey, abstract and tract number)
(If a replat, include:)
REPLAT OF LOT(S) _______, BLOCK(S) _______
(vii)
The applicant, owner and engineer names, addresses and phone numbers, gross area, submission date, and a log of submittal/revision dates since submitted to the City;
(viii)
If the proposal is a replat, the existing lot numbers and block numbers or letters are shown as light dotted lines;
(ix)
Location of property lines, owner or subdivision name(s) and recording information of abutting properties;
(x)
Abutting properties indicated by a light solid line;
14-
TM 18015.7.000
2
Art. 14.1602 Preliminary Plat Review
(xi)
Existing boundary or adjacent streets, alleys and rights-of-way and boundaries of right-of-way dedication indicated by a medium weight solid line, intermittent with two dashed lines;
(xii)
Existing boundary or adjacent street names and widths;
(xiii)
Medians, median openings; turn lanes, deceleration and acceleration lanes and stacking distance indicated within 200 feet of the property;
(xiv)
Existing and proposed internal alleys and streets indicated by a medium weight solid line, intermittent with two dashed lines and dimensioned;
(xv)
Existing internal street names and widths;
(xvi)
Internal lot lines clearly indicated and shown to scale;
(xvii)
Dimensions and the square footage of each lot;
(xviii)
Each lot numbered and block groups assigned a letter;
(xix)
Location of existing underground and above ground utilities, flood plain boundaries and state or federally protected areas, such as wetlands;
(xx)
Location of existing structures or other features proposed to remain indicated by a light, solid line, and those proposed for removal indicated by a light, dashed line;
(xxi)
Existing easements indicated by a light, dashed line and labeled indicating dimension, purpose and recording information;
(xxii)
Location, dimension and purpose of proposed easements indicated by a light, dashed line.
(xxiii)
Required and proposed ingress and egress easements indicated by shading;
(xxiv)
Existing zoning of subject and adjacent property;
(xxv)
Location and area of parks, drainageways, creeks and open space;
(xxvi)
Legal description;
(xxvii)
Any notes required by the various affected agencies or utilities;
(xxviii)
Sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other public uses;
(xxix)
Preliminary utility plans with contours indicated in intervals of two feet;
(xxx)
A note that states whether or not the property is in the 100-year flood plain, with the FIRM Community Panel reference number and map date;
(xxxi)
Minimum dwelling size indicated on the lot;
(xxxii)
Lot size indicated on the lot;
(xxxiii)
A Tree Survey/Preservation Plan in the same number and format as required for this plat;
(xxxiv)
Location of proposed detention facilities and if such facilities will be below ground detention or above ground pond; and
14-
TM 18015.7.000
2
Art. 14.1602 Preliminary Plat Review
(xxxv)
A note stating:
“Preliminary Plat - For Inspection Purposes Only”
“Approved for Preparation of Final Plat”
_____________________ ___________________
Chairman, City of Lancaster, Date
Planning and Zoning Commission
_____________________ ___________________
Director of Community Development Date
(c)
Review Process
(i)
Pre-application Conference
A.
It is recommended that an applicant for preliminary plat review request a one-time courtesy pre-application conference with the Director and other affected City departments prior to formal application.
B.
At the pre-application conference, the applicant should present a draft Plan of the subdivision with as much detail as possible.
C.
Based on the information presented, the City representative will provide initial comments concerning the merits of the proposed development and inform the applicant of any additional requirements for preparation of the preliminary plat application.
(ii)
City Review
The Director and affected City departments shall review the application and, considering the review criteria below, make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(iii)
Planning and Zoning Commission Final Action
A.
At a public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the preliminary plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings regarding the review criteria below.
B.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall take final action on the preliminary plat within 30 days of determination of completeness. In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission fails to act within 30 days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed approved.
(iv)
Appeal
The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the City Council, whose determination shall be final.
(d)
Review Criteria
In making a recommendation or taking action on a preliminary plat, the applicable development review bodies shall consider the following criteria.
(i)
The preliminary plat is consistent with all district development regulations for the property, and any approved development or annexation agreements. 14-
TM 18015.7.000
3
Art. 14.1602 Preliminary Plat Review
(ii)
The proposed design and arrangement of required public improvements conforms to the Comprehensive Plan, this Code and other adopted plans.
(iii)
The tract of land subject to the application is adequately served by public improvements, or will be adequately served upon completion by the applicant of required improvements that meet the standards of Sec. 14.1601.
(iv)
The dedications of land, construction of public improvements or fees to be contributed by the applicant are adequate to offset the impacts created by the development on existing public facilities.
(v)
The plat meets any county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the City and Dallas County under Texas Local Government Code Chapter 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the ETJ of the City.
(e)
Exceptions
An Exception to the standards in Sec. 14.1601 may be requested in writing during preliminary plat review. Justification for such Exception shall be submitted with the plat application and the need for the Exception demonstrated to the Planning and Zoning Commission’s satisfaction. The Exception may be approved, approved with conditions or disapproved after consideration of the following factors:
(i)
The Exception is not detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or be injurious to other property in the area, conforms to the goals of the City, and is consistent with the intent of this Code;
(ii)
The conditions that create the need for the Exception do not generally apply to other property in the vicinity;
(iii)
The granting of the Exception would not substantially conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this LDC.
Denial of an Exception or condition for an Exception may be appealed to City Council.
(f)
Expiration
(i)
Preliminary plats for developments that are not phased or not to be developed sequentially shall expire and be deemed null and void 24 months after approval unless a final plat is filed and approved for all of the preliminary plat within that time or unless the Planning and Zoning Commission, in its discretion, extends such period of validity.
(ii)
For preliminary plats for developments that are phased or that will be developed sequentially, the approval of a final plat for a phase of the project shall extend the expiration date for the remaining portion of the original preliminary plat for a period of 12 months after the date of approval of the final plat. Approval of each subsequent final plat within 24 months of the date of approval of the preceding final plat shall extend the expiration date for the portion of the original preliminary plat for which no final plats have been approved for an additional 24 months from the date of approval of such final plat.
A.
Each 12-month extension period for the expiration of the original preliminary plat runs from the date of the latest final plat approval. Extension periods shall not be cumulative.
B.
If a final plat is not filed and approved during the 12-month extension period, the original preliminary plat, together with any unapproved final plat applications or expired final plats shall expire and be deemed null and void.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
4
Art. 14.1602 Preliminary Plat Review
14-
TM 18015.7.000
5
C.
For the purpose of this provision, a preliminary plat shall indicate on its face that this will be a phased development and that approximate phase lines are clearly indicated.
(iii)
All requests by an applicant for extensions of the expiration date of the preliminary plat shall be filed with the Director 60 days prior to the expiration of the 12-month period. A second consecutive extension shall not be granted. Thereafter, the applicant shall submit a new preliminary plat application.
(iv)
The Planning and Zoning Commission may specify a shorter time for expiration of the extended plat than is applicable to the original approval, but shall not extend the period that a preliminary plat is valid for more than one year, and to no more than two years total from the date of original approval.
(v)
At any time following the expiration of a preliminary plat, an applicant may request a reinstatement from the Planning and Zoning Commission of such preliminary plat for the purpose of considering and approving a final plat for all or a portion of the area covered by the preliminary plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall reinstate a preliminary plat only when it determines that it would be in the public interest to do so to avoid unnecessary review of a new preliminary plat, and when the pattern of development proposed by the plat would not be to the detriment of any nearby area or the general development of the City. The Commission may establish such conditions on reinstatement as are necessary to ensure that the reinstated plat conforms to the City's Comprehensive Plan, including a requirement that the plat conform to this Article.
Art. 14.1603 Construction Plan Review and/or Civil Plan Review
Sec.14.1603 Construction Plan Review and/or Civil Plan Review
(a)
Application Requirements
Construction plans shall include the following information.
(i)
Plan and profile sheets for the following:
A.
Water lines 12” and greater in diameter;
B.
Streets;
C.
Storm sewers;
D.
Sanitary sewer lines; and
E.
Drainage systems.
(ii)
Overall utility plan;
(iii)
Standard City details;
(iv)
Construction notes;
(v)
Grading plan;
(vi)
Drainage plan and drainage study; and
(vii)
Any additional plans or details needed to detail construction the project, including but not limited to a site plan, landscaping plan, irrigation plans and plat.
(b)
Review Process
(i)
After preliminary plat approval, the applicant may submit to the City Engineer construction plans for all improvements pertinent to the subdivision or as required by the City.
(ii)
The City Engineer shall approve the construction plans if they conform to the requirements of this Article, established engineering principles and Standard Specifications and Design Criteria for the City, or disapprove the plans giving reasons for denial in writing to the applicant at the request of the applicant.
(iii)
An engineer’s seal on the submitted construction plans shall indicate to the City that the plans comply with the standards of this Code and City standards.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
6
Art. 14.1604 Final Plat Review
Sec. 14.1604 Final Plat Review
(a)
Final Plat Required
(i)
A final plat is a technically complete version of an already approved preliminary plat that incorporates all required changes from the approved preliminary plat. No final plat shall be considered for review unless a preliminary plat, if one was required, for the same property boundaries has been approved and the final plat is consistent with the previously approved preliminary plat. If a final plat is not consistent with the approved preliminary plat, where one was required, the applicant may be required to submit a revised preliminary plat.
(ii)
Submittal of a final plat shall include signed and sealed final engineering drawings and descriptions and any “as-built” infrastructure on the site.
(iii)
A final plat submitted under these circumstances shall contain all information required of a preliminary plat.
(b)
Application Requirements
(i)
A complete submittal shall include the following:
•
An original Mylar and 20 folded paper copies of the plat; a photographic copy on matte film equal in quality to ink lines on mylar will be considered as an original. Maps of two or more sheets shall be referenced to an index map placed on the first sheet.
•
A legible reproducible reduction at 11 x 17 inches of the plat.
•
The plat drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger with the use of permanent lines or ink, and the outer dimensions of the map shall be 24 inches by 36 inches;
•
A completed application;
•
A Title Certificate no more than 14 days old indicating any mortgage or other property interest. The City may require a title policy if ownership is suspect. If there are multiple property owners, such as an escrow, consortium, joint venture, or other such arrangement, acknowledgement of such will be provided and a letter stating authority to act in behalf of the platting shall be required.
•
An electronic copy of the plat on a CD in either dwg. or jpeg format; and
•
A required fee.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
7
Art. 14.1604 Final Plat Review
(ii)
The plat shall contain the following information:
A.
Property boundary indicated by a heavy solid line, intermittent with 2 dash lines; dimensioned with bearing and distance;
B.
Front and exterior side or corner setback lines shown as a light dashed line and labeled;
C.
Location map clearly showing the location of the proposed preliminary plat with cross streets with an indication if the location map is to scale or not to scale;
D.
Written and bar graph scale and north arrow with the north oriented to the top or left side of the sheet;
E.
Abstract lines, survey lines, county lines, and corporate boundaries;
F.
A title block provided in the lower right corner that includes large, boldly printed:
(SUBDIVISION NAME)
FINAL PLAT (or MINOR, AMENDING or VACATING PLAT or REPLAT WITHOUT VACATION as applicable)
LOT(S) _____, BLOCK(S) _______
(or survey, abstract and tract number)
If a replat, include:
REPLAT OF LOT(S) _______, BLOCK(S) _______
G.
The applicant, owner and engineer names, addresses and phone numbers, gross area, submission date, and a log of submittal/revision dates since submitted to the City;
H.
Location of property lines, owner or subdivision name(s) and recording information of abutting properties;
I.
Abutting properties indicated by a light solid line;
J.
Existing boundary or adjacent streets, alleys and rights-of-way and boundaries of right-of-way dedication indicated by a medium weight line solid line, intermittent with two dashed lines;
K.
Existing boundary or adjacent street names and widths;
L.
Existing and proposed internal alleys and streets indicated by a medium weight solid line, intermittent with two dashed lines and dimensioned;
M.
Existing internal street names and widths;
N.
Streets, alleys, and rights-of-way named and widths indicated within 200 feet of the property;
O.
The length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, arc lengths, tangent length and central angles of all curves indicated along the lines of each lot.
P.
The curve data pertaining to block or lot boundary in a curve table at the base of the plat and prepared in a tabular form with the following information:
1.
Curve number;
14-
TM 18015.7.000
8
Art. 14.1604 Final Plat Review
2.
Delta;
3.
Radius;
4.
Tangent length;
5.
Tangent offset;
6.
Arc length;
7.
Chord; and
8.
Chord direction.
Q.
The description and location of all survey monuments placed in the subdivision or immediately adjacent to it;
R.
Internal lot lines clearly indicated and shown to scale;
S.
Dimensions and the square footage of each lot;
T.
Each lot numbered and block groups assigned a letter;
U.
Location of existing underground and above ground utilities, flood plain boundaries and state or federally protected areas, such as wetlands;
V.
Existing easements indicated by a light, dashed line and labeled indicating dimension, purpose and recording information;
W.
Location, dimension and purpose of proposed easements are indicated by a light, dashed line. Required and proposed ingress/egress easements are shaded.
X.
Dimensions and location of required and proposed ingress, egress and fire lane easements indicated by shading;
Y.
Existing zoning of the subject property and adjacent property;
Z.
Location and area of parks, drainageways, creeks and open space;
AA.
Legal description;
BB.
Any notes required by the various affected agencies/utilities.
CC.
Sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other public uses;
DD.
A note that states whether or not the property is in the 100-year flood plain, with the Community Panel reference number and map date;
EE.
Minimum dwelling size indicated on the lot;
FF.
Lot size indicated on the lot; and
GG.
Additional applicable notes as required by the City.
(c)
Review Process
(i)
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve or deny the final plat within 30 days of determination of completeness.
(ii)
Reasons for denial shall be furnished to the applicant at the request of the applicant.
(iii)
There shall be no endorsement of a final plat and the final plat shall not be recorded until either the improvements are complete or an appropriate improvement guarantee has been 14-
TM 18015.7.000
9
Art. 14.1604 Final Plat Review
14-
TM 18015.7.000
10
accepted by the City. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Engineer, a final plat shall be deemed to have expired 180 days from the date of the approval of the plat by the Commission if it has not been filed at the County, which shall not occur until such time that all infrastructure construction has been approved or surety provided to the City as required herein.
(iv)
The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the City Council, whose determination shall be final.
(d)
Review Criteria
A final plat shall be approved if it meets all of the criteria below.
(i)
The final plat is reasonably consistent with an approved preliminary plat, if one was required.
(ii)
The final plat is consistent with any City-approved construction plans for any required or agreed upon improvements.
(iii)
The final plat is in compliance with any subdivision design and improvement standards adopted by the City pursuant to Texas Local Government Code §212.002 or Texas Local Government Code §212.044, governing plats and subdivision of land within the City’s jurisdiction to promote the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly and healthful development of the City.
(iv)
The final plat meets any county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the City and Dallas County under Texas Local Government Code Chapter 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the ETJ of the City.
(v)
The tract of land subject to the application is adequately served by public improvements, or will be adequately served upon completion by the applicant of required improvements that meet the standards of Sec. 14.1601.
(e)
Expiration
The approved final plat shall be recorded by the City when all obligations by the developer have been met.
Art. 14.1605 Minor, Amending or Vacating Plat Review
Sec. 14.1605 Minor, Amending or Vacating Plat Review
(a)
Applicability
(i)
General
A.
Minor, amending or vacating plats may be approved by the Director in accordance with this Section.
B.
Any plat that requires an Exception from the standards of this Article, any utility dedication, or any dedication of land shall not be processed as a Minor Plat.
(ii)
Minor Plat
A minor plat is a plat with no more than four contiguous lots fronting on an existing street, and not requiring the creation of any new street or public improvements.
(iii)
Amending Plat
An amending plat is a revised plat correcting errors or making minor changes to the original recorded final plat.
(iv)
Vacating Plat
A.
A vacating plat shall allow any final plat or any part of any final plat to be vacated by the proprietors of the tract at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. A vacating plat shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the final plat so vacated and to divest all public rights to the streets, areas and public grounds and dedications laid out and described in such final plat.
B.
If lots subject to the vacating plat have been sold, the final plat, or any part of the final plat, may be vacated on the application of all owners of the lots subject to the final plat.
(b)
Application Requirements
See application requirements for final plat in (b).
(c)
Review Process
(i)
The Director may approve the minor, amending or vacating plat.
(ii)
For any just cause as determined by the Director, the Director may forward any minor, amending or vacating plat to the Commission for review and approval.
(iii)
The Director may not deny a minor, amending or vacating plat. Any such plat that does not meet the requirements of this Code shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for final action.
(iv)
The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the City Council, whose determination shall be final. However, the City Council must approve all vacating plats which involve the vacation of public rights-of-way or easements.
(d)
Recordation
The minor, amending or vacating plat shall not be recorded until it has received the necessary endorsements by the City as required herein.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
11
Art. 14.1605 Minor, Amending or Vacating Plat Review
14-
TM 18015.7.000
12
(e)
Review Criteria
A minor, amending or vacating plat shall be approved if it meets all of the criteria below.
(i)
The plat meets or exceeds the requirements of this Code and any applicable state law.
(ii)
An Exception from the standards of this Article in accordance with provisions herein, utility dedication or dedication of land is not required.
(iii)
The plat meets all subdivision design and improvement standards adopted by the City pursuant to Texas LGC § 212.002 or Texas LGC § 212.044, governing plats and subdivision of land within the City’s jurisdiction to promote the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly and healthful development of the City.
(iv)
The tract of land subject to the application is adequately served by public improvements.
(f)
Expiration
An approved minor, amending or vacating plat that has not been filed with the Dallas County Clerk within 180 days of its approval shall expire and be considered null and void. Any further action shall require a new application, the same fee as required at initial submittal, and shall require the same approval.
Art. 14.1606 Replat Without Vacation Review
Sec. 14.1606 Replat Without Vacation Review
(a)
Applicability
(i)
A replat of all or a portion of a recorded plat may be approved without vacation of the recorded plat if:
A.
The replat is signed and acknowledged by the owners of the property being replatted; and
B.
The replat does not propose to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the recorded plat.
(b)
Partial Replat Without Vacation
Any replat without vacation that adds or deletes lots shall include the original subdivision and lot boundaries. Within the title area, the replat shall reference the subdivision name and recording information, and shall state on the replat the specific block and lots that are being replatted.
(c)
Review Process
(i)
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve or deny the replat without vacation within 30 days of determination of completeness.
(ii)
Reasons for denial shall be furnished to the applicant at the request of the applicant.
(iii)
The replat without vacation shall not be recorded until it has received the necessary endorsements as determined by the City.
(iv)
The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the City Council, whose determination shall be final.
(d)
Review Criteria
A replat without vacation shall be approved if it meets all of the criteria below.
(i)
The replat without vacation is consistent with any City-approved construction plans for any required or agreed upon improvements.
(ii)
The replat without vacation is in compliance with any subdivision design and improvement standards adopted by the City pursuant to Texas Local Government Code §212.002 or Texas Local Government Code §212.044, governing plats and subdivision of land within the City’s jurisdiction to promote the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly and healthful development of the City.
(iii)
The replat without vacation meets any county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the City and Dallas County under Texas Local Government Code Chapter 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the ETJ of the City.
(iv)
The tract of land subject to the application is adequately served by public improvements and infrastructure, including water, storm water and sanitary sewer, or will be adequately served upon completion by the applicant of required improvements.
(e)
Expiration
An approved replat without vacation that has not been filed Dallas County Clerk within 180 days of its approval shall expire and be considered null and void. Any further action shall require a new application, fee and approval.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
13
Art. 14.1607 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
Sec. 14.1607 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
(a)
Purpose
The purpose of a traffic impact analysis is to assist in determining the adequacy of the road network to serve a proposed subdivision or development and whether off-site road dedication and/or improvements are required to mitigate the effects of the proposed subdivision or development.
(b)
When Required
(i)
A traffic impact analysis shall be required with any application for a preliminary and final plat, site plan or other plan for which:
A.
The development exceeds an average of 100 parking spaces per driveway;
B.
The development generates traffic in excess of 1,000 average daily trips, based upon the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual; or
C.
Any driveway in the development is projected to serve 100 ingress vehicles or more in the peak hour of the adjacent street;
(ii)
The City Engineer may also require a traffic impact analysis for:
A.
Any project that proposes access to a street with a current Level of Service “C” or below, or will meet an LOS of C or below as determined by the future land use plan;
B.
Any case where the previous TIA for the property is more than two years old; or
C.
Any case where the Director and the City Engineer determine that the increased land use intensity will result in increased traffic generation or traffic conflicts such as turning movements and topography may affect the speed or safety of the roadway.
(iii)
A traffic impact analysis shall be submitted with a preliminary plat, site plan or as otherwise required by the Director to address situations not addressed herein. An updated traffic impact analysis shall be submitted with each final plat submitted for review if the initial TIA is more than two years old or if staff determines that off-site traffic patterns since the initial TIA have changed that could negatively affect the project scope and initial intent. The traffic impact analysis shall be updated whenever a plat is modified to authorize more intensive development.
(iv)
If a TIA is required with the approval or review of any plat or plan, the TIA must be completed prior to submittal of the plat or plan to the City for review or, if a plat is involved, the applicant shall provide a letter waiving the 30 day approval period at the submission of the plat. If the applicant chooses to have a completed TIA prior to submittal of a plat, the applicant shall pay a sum of 50 percent of the estimated cost prior to the City retaining a consultant. Disclosure of the results of the TIA shall not be made until the balance of the costs has been paid. If payment is not forthcoming, the City shall cause an interest-bearing lien to be placed on the property to recover costs.
(c)
Study Scope
When a traffic impact analysis is required, the scope of the analysis shall be determined during or soon after the pre-application conference. No application requiring a traffic impact analysis may be made until the scope of the required analysis has been determined. The Director or 14-
TM 18015.7.000
14
Art. 14.1607 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
City Engineer may involve representatives of or request assessments from other agencies and departments. The elements to be determined during the pre-application conference shall include the following.
(i)
Definition of Impact Area
The points of access and key streets and intersections that may be affected by development of the subject tract constitute the impact area shall be determined. Traffic recorder and turning movement assessment locations shall be determined.
(ii)
Period of Analysis
Periods of analysis shall include average daily traffic, peak AM and PM and/or weekend peak hour.
(iii)
Analysis Scenarios
Scenarios for analysis shall include existing conditions, opening year conditions with and without development, and 10 years after opening with and without off-site development.
(iv)
Process
The process for determining trip generation and distribution shall include trip generation category, diversion assumptions, distribution assumptions and capacity analysis.
(v)
Growth Rate Assumption
The rate of growth assumed in background traffic assumptions shall be determined.
(vi)
Future Development
Developments that are planned in the area that have been approved or are under review shall be considered.
(d)
Traffic Study Elements
A traffic impact study shall include the following elements.
(i)
Existing Condition Survey
A.
Street System Description
The street system shall be described including geometric features, lane usage, traffic control, signage, sight distances and adjacent uses and curb cuts.
B.
Traffic Volumes
Existing traffic volumes shall be provided for the impact area including both average daily traffic and "design" peak hour volumes. Average daily trips shall be derived from the latest available counts taken by the City, North Central Texas Council of Governments, or Texas Department of Transportation. Peak hour volumes shall be obtained from field counts. Data shall be adjusted for daily and seasonal variations. Turning movement counts for the peak hour shall be provided for critical intersections. Peak hour periods shall be as determined at the pre-application meeting.
C.
Capacity Analysis
Existing capacity of signalized and unsignalized intersections shall be provided.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
15
Art. 14.1607 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
D.
Other
Other items may be required at the discretion of the Director or City Engineer depending upon the type and scale of the project. These may include but are not limited to: queue length analysis, pedestrian counts, accident data, traffic speeds (both 50th and 85th percentile) and stopping sight distances.
(ii)
Future Without Development
Capacity analysis is to be provided for opening year and plus 10-year for key intersections (and roadway segments where appropriate) without the development but including any planned developments. The analysis shall be based upon the Highway Capacity Manual or other methodologies approved in advance by the Director or City Engineer.
(iii)
Future With Development
A.
Projections of the daily and peak hour traffic generation of the project shall be made using the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual unless the Director or City Engineer determines that locally derived data will provide more accurate forecasts. Data from similar facilities may be used where the information is not available from ITE.
B.
The projected trips shall be distributed onto the road network as agreed in the pre-application conference.
C.
Capacity analysis for opening year and plus 10-year for key intersections (and roadway segments where appropriate) shall be provided.
D.
Special analysis may be required to determine warrants for signalization, minimum safe sight distances, gap analysis, turning radius requirements, queue length analysis, turning lane length analysis, curb cut locations or similar requirements. If projected traffic combined with existing traffic warrants signalization, then adequate signalization shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(iv)
Mitigation Plan
Where the analysis indicates that the project will create deficiencies in the impact area, improvements shall be recommended which shall include projected cost estimates. The design of improvements shall be in accordance with specifications of the City Engineer and, where appropriate, the Texas Department of Transportation. The mitigation plan shall also include any dedications necessary to comply with the minimum road standards described below. Where the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that a mitigation plan is not adequate to address the traffic impacts of the project, it may serve as a basis for denial of the plat. Where the Director determines that a mitigation plan is not adequate to address the traffic impacts of the project, it may serve as a basis for denial of a development plan.
(e)
Conduct of TIA
The traffic impact analysis shall be conducted by the City who shall calculate the rough proportionality of the impacts of the subdivision or proposed development. The applicant shall pay all incurred charges prior to the approval of any plat or plan unless otherwise required herein.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
16
Art. 14.1607 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
(f)
Right-of-Way Dedication
Street right-of-way shall be dedicated as required in the Thoroughfare Plan or as determined by the TIA. If multiple lanes are required, the location and placement shall be determined by the City Engineer. In lieu of construction, the City Engineer may require that the cost for construction be placed in escrow if roadway improvements are planned or can be planned by the City within a foreseeable future as determined by the City Engineer, who may defer to the City Council for determination. Additional improvements such as deceleration lane, curb cut location, median openings, stacking lanes and other such issues shall be required as determined in the traffic impact analysis and approved by the City.
(g)
City Evaluation and Action
The City shall evaluate the adequacy of the traffic impact analysis prepared by the applicant. Based upon such evaluation, the City shall determine:
(i)
Whether the application may be approved in the absence of dedication of rights-of-way or construction of improvements to each affected thoroughfare; and
(ii)
The extent of the applicant’s obligations to make such dedications or improvements. The City shall condition the approval of the plan or plat application on one or more of the following performances by the applicant:
A.
Delay or phasing of development until thoroughfares with adequate capacity or intersection improvements are constructed;
B.
A reduction in the density or intensity of the proposed development sufficient to assure that the road network has adequate capacity to accommodate the additional traffic to be generated by the development;
C.
The dedication or construction of thoroughfares or traffic control improvements needed to mitigate the traffic impacts generated by the proposed development.
(h)
Deferral of Obligation
Upon request of the applicant, the obligation to dedicate or improve thoroughfare rights-of-way or to make intersection improvements imposed on an application may be considered by the City to defer to a later stage of the development process. As a condition of deferring the obligation to dedicate rights-of-way for or to improve thoroughfares, which deferral shall be in the sole discretion of the City, the City shall require the developer to execute an agreement specifying the amount and timing of the rights-of-way dedication or improvements to thoroughfares.
(i)
Cash Contributions
In lieu of the obligation to improve thoroughfares or make traffic control improvements, the applicant may propose to make equivalent cash contributions based upon the development project’s proportionate share of the costs of improvements, which the City in its sole discretion may accept. Any funds accepted by the City shall be earmarked for construction of the improvements for which the contribution was made.
(j)
Options
Whenever the proposed development’s share of the costs of a thoroughfare or traffic control improvement needed to mitigate traffic generated by the development is less than 100 percent, the City in its sole discretion may do the following:
(i)
Participate in the excess costs; or
14-
TM 18015.7.000
17
Art. 14.1607 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
14-
TM 18015.7.000
18
(ii)
Aggregate the costs of improving multiple thoroughfares or intersections identified in the traffic impact analysis, and require improvements to only some of the thoroughfares or intersections affected by the development; or
(iii)
Require surety to cover the cost of the developer’s responsibility.
(k)
Appeal of Road Adequacy Conditions
Any appeal of a disapproved plan or plat resulting, in full or in part, from a determination that the mitigation plan was insufficient may be taken to the City Council, whose decision shall be final. The appeal shall include the following.:
(i)
The appeal shall allege that recommended conditions requiring dedication or construction of thoroughfares or traffic control improvements are not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the traffic impacts on the road network created by the development being proposed.
A.
The applicant shall provide a study in support of the appeal
(ii)
The City Council shall consider the appeal and determine whether the requirements are roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts on the road network created by the development proposed. Following such determinations, the City Council may take any of the following actions regarding the road adequacy portion of the appeal only:
A.
Deny the appeal, upon determining that the required dedications of rights-of-way for or improvements to thoroughfares or traffic control improvements are roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the development, and order that such dedication or improvements be made as a condition of approval of the application;
B.
Deny the appeal, finding that the dedication or improvement requirements are inadequate to achieve road adequacy, and either deny the application or require that additional dedications of rights-of-way dedication for or improvements to thoroughfares, or traffic control improvements, be made as a condition of approval of the application;
C.
Grant the appeal and waive in whole or in part any dedication or construction requirement that is not roughly proportional; or
D.
Grant the appeal, and direct that the City participate in the costs of acquiring rights-of-way or constructing improvements sufficient to achieve proportionality.
Art. 14.1608 General Design Standards
Sec. 14.1608 General Design Standards
(a)
General
(i)
Engineering plans and specifications shall be in accordance with applicable design standards of the City pertaining to construction of water, sanitary sewer, paving, drainage, sidewalk, driveways, streets, alleys, culverts, bridge facilities, and any other facilities regulated by City ordinances or design standards.
(ii)
No improvements shall be made until all plans, profiles and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the City or other government agency under whose authority is required to approve.
(iii)
Where another regulatory agency has authority within the City limits or ETJ, the more stringent design standards shall apply.
(b)
Blocks
(i)
Width
Blocks must have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots, phase or plat, except where single tier lots are required to separate residential development from arterial traffic, to separate lots from an incompatible use, to accommodate a requirement for single loaded streets, to allow for unusual topographical conditions, where across from a public park or open space, or when adjacent to the outer perimeter of the subdivision.
(ii)
Length
A.
Blocks in the A-O and SF-E districts shall not exceed 1,600 feet.
B.
In other residential districts, a traditional or modified grid of small blocks should be used as a foundation for new neighborhoods to enhance orientation, walkability, route choices and community interconnectivity. The perimeter of a block shall not exceed 3,000 feet in length. Where a block face exceeds 800 feet, a minimum 20-foot pedestrian access easement shall be provided through the block, except where adjacent to a golf course.
C.
Blocks in all other districts shall not exceed 1,320.
(iii)
Pedestrian Access
A pedestrian access easement a minimum of 12 feet in width may be required to traverse blocks where deemed essential to provide access to institutional and community service uses or to retail and personal service uses.
(c)
Lots
(i)
Zoning Requirements
Lots shall meet all applicable zoning requirements.
(ii)
Access
Unless otherwise approved, each lot shall have vehicular access to a public street. No single-family detached or two-family lot with a frontage of less than 300 feet shall have direct access to any street classed as an arterial or larger.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
19
Art. 14.1608 General Design Standards
14-
TM 18015.7.000
20
(iii)
Land Remnants
Unless otherwise approved by the Director, remnants of land containing less area than the required minimum lot size prescribed by the underlying district shall not be allowed when approving a plat. In making a determination, the Director shall consider adjacency to open space or park land, access to such, and the rights of users.
(iv)
Side Lot Lines
Unless otherwise approved by the Director, side lot lines shall be required to intersect rights of way between 60 and 90 degrees on a straight street, or from the tangent of a curved street.
(v)
Double Frontage
A.
Residential lots less than 5 acres in area shall not have double frontage on roadways.
B.
Nonresidential lots with double frontage shall have offset access points to inhibit cut-through traffic.
(vi)
Lot Numbering
All lots must be numbered consecutively within each block phase or plat.
(d)
Easements
Unless otherwise approved or as required by the appropriate utility, easements for utilities shall be a minimum of 16 feet in width. Eight feet of the easement shall be on each side of common lot lines where lot lines abut. On perimeter rear lots, easements shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width. Side lot easements, where necessary, shall be a minimum of ten feet in width.
(e)
Survey Markers and Monuments
(i)
In all subdivisions corners are established at the corner of each block in the subdivision consisting of a minimum 12 inch iron rod not less than three-quarter inches in diameter and placed no more than four inches below grade. All lot corners shall be installed prior to the final inspection of the subdivision.
(ii)
Lot corner markers are placed at all lot corners except corners which are also block corners, consisting of iron rods or pipes of a diameter of not less than one-half inch and no more than six inches from finished grade. All lot corners shall be installed prior to the final inspection of the subdivision.
(iii)
Curve point markers are established using the same specifications as lot corners. All lot corners shall be installed prior to the final inspection of the subdivision.
(iv)
A monument may be required by the City Engineer of a type and with necessary identification information as required and in a location as determined. Construction specifications and placement of the monument shall be determined by the City Engineer. The monument shall be linked by global positioning using ‘X’, ‘Y’ and ‘Z’ coordinates to the City’s monument network. The accuracy of the monument placement and information contained thereon shall be verified by a registered professional surveyor.
(f)
Street Trees
Street trees shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 14.909.
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
Sec. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
(a)
General
(i)
Streets bordering a lot or subdivision shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the Thoroughfare Plan, traffic impact analysis approved by the City and/or the City’s design criteria.
(ii)
The developer shall dedicate the necessary rights-of way as required on the Thoroughfare Plan or approved traffic impact analysis.
(iii)
Based on the approved traffic impact analysis, the developer shall cause those portions of streets and road to be improved to City standards by using the rough proportionality as determined by the TIA. Improvements shall include mill, overlays, reconstruction or other such improvements as approved by the City Engineer in accordance with City Standards for the impact area. Areas of improvement shall also include intersections, signalization, culverts, drainage crossings and other such areas that are impacted by the improvements to the streets and roads.
(iv)
The City may credit all or a portion of roadway impact fees toward actual construction of primary lanes, not to include deceleration lanes, drives, entryways and other such elements that may be associated with the actual function of the site, as determined by the City Engineer.
(v)
If the City’s design criteria show a roadway cross-section to include a median, the developer shall be required to construct a concrete-curbed median of a size indicated therein or herein, and to install the required turning lanes and openings as required by the City or the TIA. The City shall provide the necessary irrigation and landscaping of the median. The developer shall provide the conduits for irrigation, electricity, future traffic signals and other services as determined by the City Engineer.
(vi)
If a multiple lane road is required by the thoroughfare plan, and the TIA requires fewer lanes to serve the development, based on rough proportionality, the location of the lanes shall be determined by the City Engineer with regard to structural integrity after adding the additional lanes, and other such criteria.
(vii)
The requirements herein shall be applicable to the City and its ETJ.
(b)
Street Dimensional Standards
(i)
Street dimensional standards shall be as shown in the table below. 14-
TM 18015.7.000
21
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
Street Type
Street Section
Major Arterial A
Major Arterial B
Urban Minor Arterial
14-
TM 18015.7.000
22
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
Street Type Street Section
Industrial Minor Arterial
Rural Minor Arterial
Urban Collector
14-
TM 18015.7.000
23
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
Street Type Street Section
Rural Collector
Local Residential
Local Residential Estate
(ii)
The public dedication of all streets and rights-of-way shall be in fee simple.
(iii)
Reserve strips controlling access to streets are permitted only when the control of such strip is given to the City.
(iv)
Maintenance of all public rights-of-way between the edge of pavement or back of curb and the subject property shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner.
(v)
Freeway standards shall conform to the State of Texas Highway Standards.
(vi)
Minimum grade for all streets shall be one-half of one percent.
(vii)
Maximum grade through intersections shall be four percent. The maximum grade shall extend a minimum of 50 feet each direction from the centerline of the intersecting streets.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
24
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
(c)
Alleys and Fire Lanes
(i)
The minimum width of an alley right-of-way shall be 17 feet and the minimum pavement width shall be 12 feet.
(ii)
Alleys shall be provided for nonresidential uses where it is necessary to provide service access, such as access for emergency vehicles, off-street loading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
(iii)
Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement.
(iv)
Dead-end alleys shall not be allowed.
(v)
Alleys shall not access arterial streets.
(vi)
All alleys shall have a minimum of two direct access points to public streets.
(vii)
Alleys shall be subject to the block length criteria included in Section 14.1608(b).
(viii)
Alleys shall be paved and dedicated to the public unless such alleys are part of a private street development as described in paragraph (j) below.
(ix)
A fire lane easement a minimum of 24 feet in width shall be provided when required by the Fire Marshal. The fire lane shall remain free of obstructions and provide access to the subdivision at all times.
(d)
Internal Connectivity
An interconnected street system is necessary in order to promote orderly and safe development by ensuring that streets function in an interdependent manner, provide adequate access for emergency and service vehicles, enhance access by ensuring connected transportation routes, and provide continuous and comprehensible traffic routes.
(i)
Cul de sacs Are Discouraged
Cul de sacs containing more than seven lots shall not be permitted unless an Exception is granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission based on development constraints of a particular property.
(ii)
Connectivity Defined
A.
Connectivity is defined by the ratio of links to nodes in any subdivision.
B.
Connectivity ratio is the number of street links divided by the number of nodes or end links, including cul-de-sac heads.
C.
A link is any portion of a street defined by a node at each end or at one end. Stubs to adjacent property shall be considered links. Alleys shall not be considered links.
D.
A node is the terminus of a street or the intersection of two or more streets.
E.
Any location where a street name changes shall be considered a node.
F.
Any curve or bend of a street that exceeds 75 degrees shall receive credit as a node. Any curve or bend of a street that does not exceed 75 degrees shall not be considered a node.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
25
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
(iii)
Required Ratio
A.
The street network for any subdivision with internal roads or access to any public road shall achieve a connectivity ratio of not less than 1.50, measured within the subdivision.
B.
A higher connectivity ratio in a surrounding area shall not provide justification to reduce the required connectivity of a proposed subdivision.
(iv)
Sample Calculation
The following sample calculation shows how the street connectivity ratio for a subdivision shall be calculated.
EXAMPLE 1: Does not meet ratio
(14 links/10 nodes = 1.4)
EXAMPLE 2: Modified to meet ratio
(18 links/12 nodes = 1.5)
(e)
External Connectivity
(i)
Existing streets in adjacent or adjoining areas shall be continued in a new subdivision. Whenever connections to anticipated or proposed surrounding streets are required by this Section, the right-of-way shall be extended and the street developed to the property line of the subdivided property (or to the edge of the remaining undeveloped portion of a single tract) at the point where the connection to the anticipated or proposed street is expected. Temporary turnarounds may be required to be constructed at the end of such streets pending their extension when such turnarounds appear necessary to facilitate the flow of traffic or accommodate emergency or service vehicles. No temporary dead-end street shall be permitted in excess of 500 feet unless no other practical alternative is available. 14-
TM 18015.7.000
26
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
(ii)
Subdivisions shall require sufficient external access points to the City’s existing or future roadway network and shall be provided in accordance with table below.
BUILDABLE LOTS IN SUBDIVISION
MIN. EXTERNAL ACCESS
POINTS REQUIRED
24 or fewer
1
25 to 49
2
50 to 99
3
100 or more
4
(f)
Street Layout
(i)
Street alignments shall generally conform to the alignments shown in the Thoroughfare Plan.
(ii)
Streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets.
(iii)
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited. Street offsets shall be approved by the Director.
(iv)
Reverse curves on arterials and collectors shall be joined by a tangent a minimum of 100 feet in length.
(v)
Streets shall be designed to bear a logical relationship to the topography.
(vi)
Intersections shall approximate right angles as closely as possible.
(g)
Cul-de-Sacs
Any time a cul-de-sac is created, it shall have a landscaped island including at least one shade tree, and in no case shall exceed the following standards
STANDARD
WITH ISLAND
Maximum Length
750 ft
Minimum Turnaround Radii (including ROW)
62 ft
Minimum Turnaround Radii (to curb)
54 ft
Minimum pavement width
36 ft
Right-of-way width
50 ft
Utility Easement Width
15 ft
Minimum center island radii
10 ft
Maximum center island radii
20 ft
14-
TM 18015.7.000
27
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
(i)
A cul-de-sac shall terminate with a curbed, permanent turn-around.
(ii)
Cul-de-sac length shall be measured along the center line of the cul-de-sac from the single point of access at the public right-of-way to the farthest curb at the turnaround.
(iii)
An unpaved island shall be provided at the center of the turnaround in accordance with the standards in the table under (g) above and :
A.
The island shall be surrounded by a vertical or lay-down curb.
B.
The surface of the island shall be landscaped.
C.
The island shall have a minimum radii of 10 feet measured to the back of the curb.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
28
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
D.
The applicant shall provide for perpetual maintenance of the unpaved island through a homeowners association or other acceptable organization.
(iv)
Permitted alternatives to cul-de-sacs include loop lanes, eyebrows and any similar alternatives approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(h)
Dead-End Streets
Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except for short stubs to permit extension. Temporary turnarounds shall be required where the street stub exceeds one lot or 100 feet in length, whichever is greater. The applicant shall provide a sign at the stub declaring that the particular street will connect with future development.
(i)
Half Streets
The dedication of a half street shall not be accepted unless:
(i)
The applicant obtains for the City a dedication from the abutting landowner of the other half of the street;
(ii)
The applicant obtains from the abutting landowner an agreement in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney that guarantees the cost and construction of the improvements of the half street within a time suitable to the city; and
(iii)
The applicant guarantees the construction of the improvements on the half street that is being dedicating; or
(iv)
Other similar arrangement approved by the City Engineer.
(j)
Private Streets
Private streets shall be allowed in a residential subdivision subject to meeting the requirements of this LDC and the conditions set forth below.
(i)
General
A.
Private streets shall be the principal access easement between a public street and platted lot(s) which do not abut a public street. Such private streets are not dedicated to the public and shall not be publicly maintained. The term “private street” may include both the pavement and easement areas of streets, alleys or service roads within such development.
B.
No part of a private street shall be sold or dedicated to any person other than the City of Lancaster. 14-
TM 18015.7.000
29
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
C.
The dimensional standards for a private street shall match the standards listed in subsection (b) above for the most similar street type in terms of expected average daily trips and shall be approved by the City.
D.
All streets shall be constructed to City street standards.
(ii)
Access
A.
A private street shall be labeled on the plat as an access easement and be assigned a lot and block number from its subdivision.
B.
Private streets shall be reserved for use by owners and residents served by such private streets and all governmental entities providing services and regulatory enforcement, as well as private service entities. Access to subdivisions containing private streets may be controlled by 24-hour security guard or a self-activated gate at the entrance. The gate shall be of a breakaway model which will not damage emergency vehicles responding to a call.
(iii)
Street Yards and Lot Widths
All private street access easements shall be treated as public street rights-of-way for purposes of determining required street yards and lot widths.
(iv)
Platting Private Streets as Lots
A private street shall be designated as a non-buildable lot.
(v)
Maintenance
A.
The final plat shall make reference to recorded restrictive covenants that shall:
1.
Provide for the perpetual maintenance of private streets by a homeowners association to the same standards as connecting public streets for the safe use of persons using the streets;
2.
State that the City has absolutely no obligation or intention to ever accept such streets as public right-of-way; and
3.
Provide for the event that if the homeowners association defaults, the City may provide the required maintenance and assess all property owners the cost of such maintenance.
B.
Such covenants as approved by the City, shall not be altered without City Council approval.
C.
The restrictive covenants shall be recorded prior to the issuance of the first building permit for the subdivision.
(vi)
Future Dedication
Should the lot owners abutting private streets or the homeowners association request the City accept dedication of the private street as a public right-of-way for purposes of maintenance, a condition of such dedication shall require that the private street meet all City standards and be in satisfactory condition for the safe use of such street by the general public. Any such dedication shall require a replat without vacation in accordance with Sec. 14.1601.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
30
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
(k)
Conversion of Public Street to Private Street
(i)
Approval of a vacating plat in accordance with Article 14.1600Sec. 14.1601 shall be required for the conversion of a public street to a private street.
(ii)
The applicant shall provide liability insurance that guarantees indemnification of and a defense for the City should any lawsuit arise from a loss related to the use of the street or other private improvement subsequent to the vacation.
(iii)
A performance bond or other security satisfactory to the City Engineer shall be required to guarantee that a homeowners association shall maintain the streets and other improvements granted to the association. If no formal community association exists in the subdivision, one shall be created in accordance with Section 14.1601(k).
(iv)
Street maintenance shall include keeping the street driving surface in a good state of repair. Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be maintained so as to not present a safety hazard.
(v)
Unless otherwise required by the City Engineer, storm water systems, surface and underground, that collect runoff primarily from the area shall become private.
(vi)
Facilities, such as streetlights and underground utilities, shall be considered separately and the facility shall remain public if it can be shown it is in the best public interest for the facility to remain public.
(l)
Street Bridges
(i)
Street bridges shall be constructed to remain out of the 100-year flood event.
(ii)
Bridges which cross an existing or future trail shall be constructed to accommodate such trail beneath or on their spans.
(m)
Street Names
New streets shall be named so as to provide continuity of name with existing streets and so as to prevent conflict with identical or similar names in other parts of the City. Street names shall be approved by the City.
(n)
Median Openings
(i)
Channelization and median islands for full access and right turn in/right turn out partial access driveways shall be a minimum 150 square feet in area.
(ii)
Median opening to or from a driveway may be allowed if:
A.
The median is of sufficient length to be subdivided into multiple medians, each of which meets or exceeds the minimum median length described in this Chapter.
B.
The median is of sufficient width to permit the construction of an exclusive left turn lane.
(iii)
An engineering study shall justify the opening after consideration of the impact on traffic operations, levels of service and safety.
(iv)
Such opening shall not adversely impact the provision for access to land on the opposite side of the street.
(v)
Minimum length of a median island shall be in accordance with the table below.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
31
Art. 14.1609 Streets and Alleys
14-
TM 18015.7.000
32
THOROUGHFARE PLAN CLASSIFICATION
MINIMUM MEDIAN LENGTH (FT)
Type A+ Thoroughfare
450
Type B+ Thoroughfare
300
(vi)
All medians shall be landscaped in accordance with the adopted Streetscape Master Plan. The Director of Parks and Recreation may allow ornamental trees to be substituted for shade trees in certain limited circumstances where shade trees would provide a nuisance. All landscaping shall be irrigated with a buried system designed by a professional licensed by the State.
Art. 14.1610 Standards Included by Reference
Sec. 14.1610 Standards Included by Reference
(a) Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities
Pedestrian and bicycle facilities shall be provided in conformity with the adopted Hike and Bike Trail Master Plan.
(b) Parks and Open Space
(i)
Parks and open space shall be provided in conformance with the adopted Parks and Open Space Master Plan.
(ii)
Park land fees shall be in conformance with the adopted Parkland Dedication/ Development fee established by resolution of the city council.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
33
Art. 14.1611 Access Management and Driveway Standards
Sec. 14.1611 Access Management and Driveway Standards
(a)
Street Access
(i)
Every building shall be located on a lot abutting a public street or private street built in accordance with the standards in Article 14.1600Sec. 14.1601.
(ii)
Unless otherwise allowed by the Director, out-parcels shall take access from within the development.
(iii)
All retail parcels shall provide a shared access easement with a minimum concrete paving width of 30 feet when abutting another retail-zoned property, unless otherwise approved by the Director. The Director may require a wider width depending on the use of the drive.
(iv)
Where other access is available or where another driveway is possible that conforms to requirements herein, the City or other governmental agency shall have the right to close any driveway where it has been determined by the Director and/or City Engineer that such driveway poses or could pose a threat to public safety. If such is closed, the property owner shall be required to remove the drive approach and associated driveway, install a concrete curb to connect to adjacent curbs, and shall landscape and irrigate the area in accordance with requirements herein for spacing, design, species, etc.
(v)
There shall be no parking or driveway designed in such a way that will require or allow the backing of vehicles into an arterial-classed street.
(vi)
Public streets shall not be used as maneuvering areas for backing into or onto a property.
(vii)
There shall not be allowed any vehicle or obstacle to block driveways intended for use as a fire lane, cross-access easement or required parking.
(b)
Use of Residentially Zoned Property for Access
No land which is residentially zoned shall be used for driveway or vehicular access purposes to any land which is non-residentially zoned.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
34
Art. 14.1611 Access Management and Driveway Standards
(c)
Residential Access to Major Thoroughfares
Access to residential property shall be allowed from any Type A+ through B thoroughfare where:
(i)
Lots have a minimum street frontage of 300 feet; or
(ii)
Are accessed by a margin access street or slip-road street.; or
(iii)
Are accessed by a public or private drive around a landscaped court.
(d)
Driveways for Multifamily and Nonresidential Use
(i)
Unless otherwise approved or required by the City, a platted lot shall be permitted only one driveway. Such determination by the City shall consider site design, pedestrian and vehicle circulation, adjacent uses, topography, speed of traffic on the road being exited from, and other such considerations. Where required, driveways shall be contained wholly within the property frontage or as part of a joint access easement with an adjacent platted lot, tract, or parcel of land.
(ii)
Unless approved or required by the City, the permitted driveway for a corner lot shall connect to the street with the lower Thoroughfare Plan classification except that no access shall be permitted to a local residential street without approval by the City.
(iii)
Additional driveways may be considered. The table below is intended to provide criteria that will be used in making a determination. In addition, evaluation shall consider the minimum driveway spacing and location requirements are met as follows, or where analysis has determined size and configuration of a single driveway cannot accommodate the traffic.
LOT FRONTAGE
PERMITTED ADDITIONAL
DRIVEWAYS
200 feet of frontage or less
No additional driveways
201 feet to 400 feet of frontage
1 additional driveway
201 feet to 600 feet of frontage
2 additional driveways
201 feet to 800 feet of frontage
3 additional driveways
(iv)
Additional driveways based on actual or projected peak hour exiting trips from the lot, parcel, or tract of land may be permitted as follows. 14-
TM 18015.7.000
35
Art. 14.1611 Access Management and Driveway Standards
PEAK HOUR
EXITING TRIPS
PERMITTED ADDITIONAL
DRIVEWAYS
100 exiting trips or less
No additional driveways
101 – 200 exiting trips
1 additional driveway
201 – 600 exiting trips
2 additional driveways
(v)
One additional driveway may be permitted by the City Engineer for access to and from a corner lot unless there are already two driveways serving the corner lot.
(vi)
Entering and exiting lanes shall be as required below. Such lanes shall be 15 feet in width. For the purpose of computation of additional driveways, entry only and exit only partial access driveways shall be considered to be one-half of a right turn in/right turn out partial access driveway or full access driveway.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN
CLASSIFICATION
DRIVEWAY TYPE
ENTERING LANES
EXITING LANES
Type A+ through C
Full Access
1
2
Type A+ through C
Right Turn In – Right Turn Out
1
1
Type A+ through C, or Minor
Entry Only
1
0
Type A+ through C, or Minor
Exit Only
0
1
Type C and Minor
Full Access or Right In/Right Out
1
1
(vii)
The following table indicates minimum driveway spacing for each adopted Thoroughfare Plan street classification for full access driveways and right turn in/right turn out partial access driveways. The distance shall be measured between the nearest edges of driveway pavements at the street right-of-way line exclusive of curb return radii.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN
CLASSIFICATION
MINIMUM
SPACING (ft)
Type A+ and A
150
Type B+ and B
150
Type C
100
Minor
Minimum Spacing
(viii)
All driveways shall be separated from street intersections according to the following table, unless approved by the Director where site dimensions prohibit such spacing. Driveway spacing shall be measured from back of curb or edge of pavement.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
36
Art. 14.1611 Access Management and Driveway Standards
14-
TM 18015.7.000
37
THOROUGHFARE PLAN CLASSIFICATION
INTERSECTING WITH
CLEARANCE(FT)
Type A+ or A
Type A+ or A
200
Type A+ or A
Type B+ or B
150
Type A+ or A
Type C
150
Type A+ or A
Minor or Alley
50
Type B+ or B
Type A+ or A
100
Type B+ or B
Type B+ or B
100
Type B+ or B
Type C
50
Type B+ or B
Minor or Alley
50
Type C
All
50
Minor
All
50
(ix)
Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, the following median length/driveway offset shall govern.
MEDIAN LENGTH
MINIMUM DRIVEWAY
OFFSET (FT)
Less than 220 feet
95
220 feet to 280 feet
(Median Length / 2) – 15
Greater than 280 feet
125
Driveways shall meet the standards established in the City’s General Design Manual.
(x)
The minimum curb return radius shall be as provided in the following table.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN CLASSIFICATION
DRIVEWAY TYPE
MINIMUM CURB RETURN RADIUS (FT)
Type A+ through B Thoroughfare
All Types
45
Type C
All Types
30
Minor
All Types
20
Art. 14.1612 Utilities
Sec. 14.1612 Utilities
(a)
General
(i)
Unless otherwise waived by the City Council, all lots within the City limits shall be connected to the City water and sanitary sewer systems.
(ii)
In the ETJ, all lots shall connect to the City systems. If in the opinion of the City Council it is not feasible to connect to the City systems, the applicant shall connect to an existing public system. Any lot that is approved for using septic tanks or private water wells shall meet all requirements of the County and State health department regulations.
(iii)
The applicant shall pay all costs for connecting to the City system, or, if the subdivision is in the ETJ and the City Council so approves, to an existing public system for the following public utilities, that is complete, in place and ready for service as follows:
A.
Water mains, customer services, meter boxes, valves, fittings, fire hydrants and all appurtenances to make a complete operating water system within the subdivision or other development;
B.
A complete sanitary sewer system including laterals and mains, manholes, clean-outs, customer service wyes, tees, lift stations, force mains, lines, and all appurtenances; and
C.
Storm water improvements as required herein or according to adopted ordinance or Master Plan under consideration by the City.
(iv)
In the event oversized utilities improvements are required, arrangements for reimbursement could be made whereby the applicant may be allowed to recover the cost of the utilities or off-site improvements that have been provided by him beyond the needs of his development. The qualifications, method and time of payment under the reimbursement shall be established in accordance with the city's ordinances and policies relating to the emplacement of such oversized utilities.
(b)
Water
(i)
Water Supply and Fire Protection Standards
A.
All lots shall be provided with water supply and distribution systems for fire protection and domestic use. The design of such systems shall be approved and enforced by the City Engineer in accordance with applicable city, state and federal statutes, codes, established engineering principles and Standard Specifications and Design Criteria for the City.
B.
Fire hydrants shall be provided as part of the water distribution system and as required by the City’s General Construction Design Manual.
(ii)
Water System Required
Applicants shall be responsible for providing an approved public water supply system consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Where an approved public water supply or distribution main is within reasonable distance of the subdivision, but in no case less than one-half mile away and connection to the system is both possible and permissible, the applicant shall be required to bear the cost of connecting the subdivision or their development to an existing water supply.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
38
Art. 14.1612 Utilities
(iii)
General Water System Design
A.
The design and construction of the public water system shall comply with regulations covering extension of public water systems adopted by the City, the Water Master Plan and the General Design and Construction Details.
B.
Water systems shall be of sufficient size to furnish adequate domestic water supply to furnish fire protection and water services to all lots, and to conform to the Master Water Plan for the City.
C.
No main line extensions shall be less than, and the developer shall be required to install such a line up to, eight inches. The City may participate in over-sizing a line that is not required by the Water Master Plan.
D.
Fire flows are required to conform to Insurance Standards Office (ISO) standards. The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for providing required fire flows for distribution to applicants. The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for updating this general listing whenever ISO standards change.
(c)
Sanitary Sewer
(i)
Sanitary Sewer System Required
An applicant shall be responsible for providing an approved public sanitary sewer system, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, throughout the entire subdivision or other development such that all lots, parcels, or tracts of land will be capable of connecting to the sanitary sewer system unless otherwise allowed do to site conditions and/or constraints. Connection shall be required for all lots and subdivisions unless otherwise determined by the City. The design and construction of a public sanitary sewer system shall comply with regulations covering extension of public sanitary sewer systems adopted by the City, the Wastewater Master Plan and the General Design and Construction Details.
(ii)
General Sanitary Sewer System Design
A.
All new public sanitary sewer systems shall be designed and constructed to conform to the Standard Specifications and Design Criteria of the City.
B.
If lift stations and/or force mains are required and approved by the City Engineer, the applicant shall be responsible for installation.
(d)
Storm Water
No plat shall be approved unless the project meets the minimum requirements herein for control of the quantity of storm water runoff to the benefit of both future owners of property within the subdivision and other lands within the watershed as determined by the City.
(i)
General Requirements
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to design and construct a system for the collection and conveyance of all storm water run-off flowing onto and generated within the subdivision in accordance with:
A.
Any specific or general requirements of these regulations;
B.
Standard Specifications and Design Criteria for the City;
C.
Drainage and Flood Control Ordinance of the City Code;
D.
Established engineering practices;
14-
TM 18015.7.000
39
Art. 14.1612 Utilities
E.
City-approved plans, including any regional storm water plans; and
F.
City adopted Storm Water Master Plan
(ii)
Basic Design Objectives
A.
In general, the storm water management system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the adopted Storm Water Ordinance and Design Manual and in a manner that promotes the development of a network of both natural and built drainage ways throughout the community and so as to:
1.
Retain natural flood plains in a condition that minimizes interference with flood water conveyance, floodwater storage, aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, and ground and surface water;
2.
Reduce exposure of people and property to the flood hazard and nuisance associated with inadequate control of run-off;
3.
Systematically reduces the existing level of flood damages;
4.
Ensure that corrective works are consistent with the overall goals of the City;
5.
Minimize erosion and sedimentation problems and enhance water quality;
6.
Protect environmental quality, social well being and economic stability;
7.
Plan for both large flooding events and smaller, more frequent flooding by providing both major and minor drainage systems;
8.
Minimize future operational and maintenance expenses;
9.
Reduce exposure of public investment in utilities, streets and other public facilities;
10.
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the public;
11.
Acquire and maintain a combination of recreational and open space systems utilizing flood plain lands; and
12.
Preserve natural drainage patterns so as to prevent erosion, maintain infiltration and recharge of groundwater, and attenuate the harm of contaminants collected and transported by storm water.
(iii)
General Design Requirements
A.
The storm water management system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and its use shall not interfere with the operation and maintenance of road networks or utility systems.
B.
Any use of retaining walls or similar construction shall be indicated on construction plans for such structure.
C.
To preserve the use of land and to improve the quality of aesthetics along streets and roads, no open storm water detention facility shall be located within the front street yard or exterior side yard of a property fronting, siding or backing to an Interstate or any arterial unless determined by the Director and City Engineer that placing such detention underground is technically unfeasible. Underground detention shall be allowed on any part
14-
TM 18015.7.000
40
Art. 14.1612 Utilities
of the lot with the exception of under a structural foundation of a building, unless otherwise designed by a professional engineer. The surface area of a parking lot may be used as part of the detention facility when approved by the City Engineer. Above-ground detention visible from a public street shall receive heightened landscaping to screen such as determined by the Director, unless it is created and improved as an open space amenity, as approved by the Director.
D.
No lot or building site shall take access to a public street across a waterway unless such access is approved by the City Engineer.
E.
Areas subject to inundation under design storm conditions shall be indicated with the minimum floor elevation of each lot so affected on the preliminary plat. The appropriate final review authority for plat approval may, when it deems necessary for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of the present and future populations, place restrictions on the subdivision, regarding the design and use of areas within a drainage way that may also include a minimum finished floor elevation 12 inches or more above design storm conditions.
F.
Design of major drainage ways through a subdivision and major structures such as box culverts or bridges across a major drainage channel shall be coordinated with the requirements of the County when any portion of the subdivision lies outside the City limits, and when applicable, a letter requesting a local flood plain map amendment from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) shall be provided prior to final construction plan approval.
(iv)
Drainage Easements
The requirements set forth herein are not intended to be exhaustive and wherever it is necessary to make additional requirements in order to maximize the effectiveness of the drainage plan in question, such requirements shall be made by the Commission.
A.
General Requirements
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way shall be provided that conforms substantially with the contours of such watercourse. Additional width may be required for necessary flood control measures. The minimum requirements for such easements shall be based on the 100-year flood. When parking lots or other approved use areas serve a dual function, including detention, those areas shall be designated on the plat or plan as detention areas. The drainage shall, at a minimum, be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks having adequate width to contain the volume of flow generated by the design storm under ultimate development conditions, unless otherwise required herein.
B.
Design Requirements
1.
Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within the street right-of-way, as determined by the City Engineer, perpetual unobstructed easements a minimum of 16 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory
14-
TM 18015.7.000
41
Art. 14.1612 Utilities
14-
TM 18015.7.000
42
access to the road. Easements shall be recorded by separate instrument and indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
2.
When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, drainage easements shall be secured and recorded by separate instrument in the property records of the County and shown on the construction plans.
3.
Low lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways except where modification can be shown to benefit the community and as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. All development activity within the regulatory floodplain must comply with City and FEMA floodplain management regulations.
4.
All sedimentation, filtration, detention and/or retention basins and related appurtenances shall be within a drainage easement that is recorded in the property records of the County. The owners of the tracts upon which are located such easements, appurtenances, and detention facilities shall maintain same and be responsible for their upkeep. Notice of such duty to maintain shall be shown on the plats.
(e)
Other Utilities
(i)
Utility services shall be placed underground unless a temporary above-grade connection is approved by the City.
(ii)
The applicant shall make the necessary arrangements including any construction or installation charges with each of the serving utilities for the installation of such facilities and shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations for their construction. Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, ducts, and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities may be placed above the ground in a location approved by the City. Electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and communication long-distance trunk and feeder lines and necessary appurtenances may be placed above the ground. Such facilities shall be placed within easements or public rights-of-way.
(iii)
Other improvements not specifically mentioned herein but found necessary due to conditions found on the site by the City may be required.
Art. 14.1613 Stormwater Management
Sec. 14.1613 Stormwater Management
(Insert Stormwater Ordinance adopted July 26, 2004)
14-
TM 18015.7.000
43
Art. 14.1614 Improvement Guarantees
Sec. 14.1614 Improvement Guarantees
(a)
Construction Prior to Recordation of Plat
If, upon final plat approval, the applicant elects to construct the improvements required in this Article prior to recording of the final plat, all construction shall be inspected while in progress and shall be approved only upon satisfactory completion by the City Engineering.
(b)
Security In Lieu of Construction Prior to Recordation of Plat
If the applicant elects to file security in lieu of completing construction prior to recording of the final plat, the applicant may utilize one of the following methods of posting security. If the applicant elects to file security, the final plat shall not be approved unless the applicant has done one of the following:
(i)
Performance Bond
The applicant may post a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State of Texas, and acceptable to the City Council on the form provided by the City, in an amount of 125 percent of the cost of improvements required by this Article as estimated by a Texas licensed professional engineer and approved by the City Engineer. The performance bond shall be approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney.
(ii)
Escrow Agreement
The applicant may place on deposit in an escrow account in a bank or trust company in the name of the City a sum of money equal to in an amount of 125 percent of the cost of improvements required by this Article as estimated by a Texas licensed professional engineer and approved by the City Engineer. Selection of the trustee shall be subject to approval by the City Council, and the escrow agreement shall be executed on the form provided by the City and approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney. Periodic withdrawals may be made from the escrow account for a progressive payment of installation costs. The amounts of such withdrawals shall be based upon progress work estimates approved by the City Engineer.
(iii)
Irrevocable Letter of Credit
The applicant may file with the City an irrevocable letter of credit from a local bank or federally insured savings and loan association or other financial institution, acceptable to the City, agreeing to pay to the City, on demand, 125 percent of the cost of improvements required by this Article as estimated by a Texas licensed professional engineer and approved by the City Engineer. The irrevocable letter of credit shall include a letter that states the name of the subdivision, and shall list the improvements for which the applicant is required to provide that are secured by the letter of credit.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
44
APPENDIX I FORMS
APPENDIX I FORM
PLAT CERTIFICATES
The following shall appear on the face of all final, vacating, amending or minor plats as applicable:
CITY CERTIFICATION
This plat is hereby approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Lancaster, Texas
____________________________________ ___________
Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission Date
ATTEST:
___________________________________ ___________
Signature Date
__________________________________
Name & Title
The Director of Community Development of the City of Lancaster, Texas hereby certifies that to the best of his knowledge or belief, this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the Code of Ordinances, or as may have been amended or modified, as allowed, by the Planning and Zoning Commission as to which his approval is required.
____________________________________ ___________
Director of Community Development Date
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATION
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That I, ____________________________________, do hereby certify, that I prepared this plat from an actual on the ground survey of the land as described and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed under my personal supervision in accordance with the of the City of Lancaster.
_________________________________________
Registered Professional Surveyor
PLACE THE FOLLOWING ON FINAL PLATS AS APPLICABLE
SAMPLE OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
(If no homeowners’ association in involved)
14-
TM 18015.7.000
45
APPENDIX I FORMS
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF DALLAS §
WHEREAS, John Doe and Joe Dokes are the Owners of a tract of land situated in the J. Foreman Survey, Abstract No. 483, Dallas County, Texas and being out of a 40 acre tract conveyed to them by Joe Smith and Tom Smith and a 0.54 acre tract conveyed to them by Jim Henry and being more particularly described as follows:
(Enter accurate property description here)
NOW THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That I/we, John Doe, Joe Dokes, Owners, do hereby bind themselves and their heirs, assignees and successors of title this plat designating the hereinabove described property as New Town Estates, an addition to the City of Lancaster, and do hereby dedicate to the public use forever the streets, alleys, and right-of-way easements shown thereon, and do hereby reserve the easement strips shown on this plat for the mutual use and accommodation of garbage collection agencies and all public utilities desiring to use or using same. Any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths that in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easements strips, and any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easement strips for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. Additionally, I/we certify that I/we (indicate correct options) are the sole owners of the dedicated property and that no other’s interest are attached to this property unless otherwise indicated on the required Mortgage Holder Certification that is included on this plat. This plat approved subject to all ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Witness our hands at Dallas, Texas, this _______ day of _________________, 200__.
___________________________ _____________________________
Joe Dokes, Owner John Doe, Owner
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF DALLAS §
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, on this day personally appeared John Doe and Joe Dokes, Owners, known to me to be the persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that they each executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed.
Given under my hand and seal of office, this ______ day of _________, 200_.
______________________
Notary Public in and for
the State of Texas
MORTGAGE HOLDER CERTIFICATION
14-
TM 18015.7.000
46
APPENDIX I FORMS
(If no homeowners’ association in involved)
That I, , hold a mortgage or represent holders of a mortgage on the described property herein, do hereby consent to the submission and filing of this plat designating the hereinabove described property as New Town Estates, an addition to the City of Lancaster and do hereby dedicate to the public use forever the streets, alleys, and right-of-way easements shown thereon and do hereby reserve the easements shown on this plat for the mutual use and accommodation of garbage collection agencies, public utilities desiring to use or using same and fire and access easements. Any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easements and any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easement strips for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. This plat approved subject to ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
Witness our hands at , Texas, this _______ day of _________________, 200__.
_______________________________
Signature
_______________________________
Title
_______________________________
Company
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF DALLAS §
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, on this day personally appeared ______________________________________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed.
Given under my hand and seal of office, this _______ day of __________________, 200__.
______________________
Notary Public in and for
the State of Texas
SAMPLE OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
(If a homeowners’ association is involved)
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF DALLAS §
WHEREAS, John Doe and Joe Dokes are the Owners of a tract of land situated in the J. Foreman Survey, Abstract No. 483, Dallas County, Texas and being out of a 40 acre tract conveyed to them by Joe Smith and Tom Smith and a 0.54 acre tract conveyed to them by Jim Henry and being more particularly described as follows: 14-
TM 18015.7.000
47
APPENDIX I FORMS
(Enter accurate property description here)
NOW THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That I/we, John Doe, Joe Dokes, Owners, do hereby bind themselves and their heirs, assignees and successors of title this plat designating the hereinabove described property as New Town Estates, an addition to the City of Lancaster, and do hereby dedicate to the public use forever the streets, alleys, and right-of-way easements shown thereon, and do hereby reserve the easement strips shown on this plat for the mutual use and accommodation of garbage collection agencies and all public utilities desiring to use or using same. Any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths that in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easements strips, and any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easement strips for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. Additionally, I/we certify that I/we are the sole owners of the dedicated property and that no other’s interest is attached to this property unless otherwise indicated on the required Mortgage Holder Certification that is included on this plat.
Furthermore, as the owner of the property described herein, and in consideration of establishing the subdivision described herein, I/we agree to the following:
•
Every owner of fee simple title to every individual lot within the subdivision shall be a member of the homeowners’ association;
•
The homeowners’ association shall have the authority to collect membership fees;
•
As applicable as it pertains to conditions shown herein, the homeowners’ association shall be responsible for the maintenance of all common areas, screening walls, landscaped areas, private streets and alleys.
•
The homeowners’ association shall grant the City the right of access to any areas to abate any nuisances on such areas, and attach a lien upon each individual lot for the prorated costs of abatement.
•
The homeowners’ association shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all costs, expenses, suits, demands, liabilities, damages, or otherwise, including attorney fees and costs of suit, in connection with the City’s maintenance of common areas.
•
The homeowners’ association shall, where additional rights-of-way has been dedicated for the purpose of providing landscaping, additional areas for sidewalks, walls or other amenities, enter into a license agreement with the City and shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of all landscape areas in the public rights-of-way.
This plat approved subject to ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions of the City of Lancaster, Texas.
__________________________________
Signature of Owner
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF DALLAS §
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, on this day personally appeared John Doe and Joe Dokes, Owners, known to me to be the persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that they each executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed.
Given under my hand and seal of office, this ______ day of _________, 200_.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
48
APPENDIX I FORMS
______________________
Notary Public in and for
The State of Texas
MORTGAGE HOLDER CERTIFICATION
(If a homeowners’ association is involved)
That I, , hold a mortgage or represent holders of a mortgage on the described property herein, do hereby consent to the submission and filing of this plat designating the hereinabove described property as New Town Estates No. 2, an addition to the City of Lancaster and do hereby dedicate to the public use forever the streets, alleys, and right-of-way easements shown thereon and do hereby reserve the easement strips shown on this plat for the mutual use and accommodation of garbage collection agencies and all public utilities desiring to use or using same. Any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easements strips and any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easement strips for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. This plat approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions of the City of Lancaster, Texas, and to requirements placed on the homeowners’ association as indicated herein and remedies to the abatement of nuisance and liens on properties therein and as required.
Witness our hands at , Texas, this _______ day of _________________, 200__.
_______________________________
Signature
_______________________________
Title
_______________________________
Company
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF DALLAS §
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, on this day personally appeared ______________________________________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed.
Given under my hand and seal of office, this _______ day of __________________, 200__.
______________________
Notary Public in and for The State of Texas 14-
TM 18015.7.000
49
APPENDIX I FORMS
14-
TM 18015.7.000
50
APPENDIX II AMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
APPENDIX II. AMMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
Amend Art. I General Provisions with the following:
Sec XX Dormant Projects and Vested Rights
(c)
Dormant Projects
(i)
An application that was approved or filed under the predecessor subdivision regulations before February 12, 2005 for a plat or a plan that was not subject to an expiration date or for a final plat that was not recorded shall expire at 5:00 p.m. on February 12, 2007.
(ii)
The owner of the land subject to a plat or plan that expires under paragraph (i) above may petition the City Council to reinstate such plat or plan in accordance with subsection (d) below within 60 working days of February 12, 2007. The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation of one of the following:
A.
As of February 12, 2005, one of the following events had occurred:
1.
In the case of an approved preliminary plat application:
a.
A final plat for all or part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat was approved, or was filed and was subsequently approved;
b.
An application for a final plat was submitted for all or part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat, but such application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness;
c.
Costs for development of the land subject to a plat or plan, including but not limited to costs associated with public improvements designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent or more of the most recent appraised market value of the land; or
d.
Fiscal security was posted to ensure performance of an obligation required for development of all or a part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat.
2.
In the case of an approved, unrecorded final plat application:
a.
Costs for development of the land subject to the preliminary plat, including but not limited to costs associated with public improvements designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent or more of the most recent appraised market value of the land;
b.
Fiscal security was posted after approval of the final plat to ensure performance of an obligation required for all or a part of the land subject to the approved final plat; or
c.
Utility connection fees or impact fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved final plat were paid.
3.
In the case of an approved plan:
14-
TM 18015.7.000
51
APPENDIX II AMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
a.
Costs for development of the land subject to an approved plan, including but not limited to costs associated with public improvements designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of 15 percent or more of the most recent appraised market value of the land;
b.
Fiscal security was posted after approval of a plan to ensure performance of an obligation required for all or a part of the land subject to the approved plan.
(iii) A dormant project shall not be reinstated if it is found that standards and/or regulations have been adopted since the plat or plan went dormant that are intended to accomplish goals of the City.
B.
After February 12, 2005 but before the expiration date specified in paragraph (i), one of the following events had occurred:
1.
A final plat was approved for all or part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat, and remained in effect for such land on such expiration date; or
2.
A complete application for approval of a final plat for all or part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat was pending for decision on such expiration date.
(iii)
After reviewing the petition described in paragraph (ii), the City Council may take one of the following actions:
A.
Reinstate the expired preliminary or final plat without an expiration date, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one of the criteria listed in paragraph (ii)A;
B.
Reinstate the preliminary plat for all or part of the subject land, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one of the criteria listed in paragraph (ii)B, subject to such expiration dates or other conditions that assure that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending final plat application will be developed in a timely fashion. In granting relief under this provision, the Council may require that development of such remaining land is subject to standards enacted after approval of the preliminary plat;
C.
Deny the petition, if it finds that the petitioner has failed to meet any of the criteria in paragraph (ii); or
D.
Reinstate the initial permit for only that part of the land subject to a pending final permit application, if it finds that the petitioner has met the criteria in paragraph (ii)B.2 and the pending application subsequently was approved, and deny the petition for the remaining land subject to the expired initial permit.
(d)
Determination of Vested Rights
(i)
Vested Rights Petition
A.
Purpose
The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine if:
14-
TM 18015.7.000
52
APPENDIX II AMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
1.
The standards of this Article should not be applied to a preliminary or final plat application;
2.
The standards of a previous set of subdivision regulations should apply to a preliminary or final plat; and
3.
An approved plat has expired per this sub-section..
B.
Applicability
1.
The provisions of this subsection shall apply to any plat for which an applicant desires to establish rights under Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code.
2.
A vested rights petition may be filed with an application for a preliminary or final plat application.
3.
The provisions of Chapter 245 shall only apply to the specified subdivision standards set forth in the vested rights petition. Any modification of the subdivision standards shall be considered a new project subject to the provisions of this LDC.
4.
The provisions of Chapter 245 shall not apply to any of the following:
a.
Regulations that do not affect open space dedication or that do not change development permitted by a restrictive covenant required by the City;
b.
Fees imposed in conjunction with a development review procedure;
c.
Regulations for annexation that do not affect landscaping or tree preservation or open space dedication;
d.
Regulations for utility connections;
e.
Regulations to prevent imminent destruction of property or injury to persons from flooding that are effective only within a flood plain established by a federal flood control program and enacted to prevent the flooding of buildings intended for public occupancy;
f.
Construction standards for public works located on public lands or easements; or
g.
Regulations to prevent the imminent destruction of property or injury to persons if the regulations do not:
i.
Open space dedication or the timing of a project; or
ii.
Change development permitted by a restrictive covenant required by the City.
h.
Regulations governing landscaping, tree preservation and lot standards
C.
Effect
Upon approval of a vested rights petition, the plat application shall be decided in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior subdivision regulations, or the approved plat otherwise subject to expiration shall be extended.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
53
APPENDIX II AMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
(ii)
Petition Requirements
A.
A vested rights petition may be filed with a preliminary or final plat application for which a vested right is claimed, or by the holder of a plat subject to expiration pursuant to subsection (c) above or (e).
B.
A vested rights petition shall contain the following information:
1.
A narrative description of the grounds for the petition;
2.
A copy of each approved or pending development application which is the basis for the contention that the City may not apply current standards to the plat application which is the subject of the petition;
3.
The date of submittal of the plat application, or of a development plan pursuant to which the plat was subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date established under Sec. 14.203.
4.
The date the project for which the application for the plat was submitted was commenced.
5.
Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the plat application from which relief is sought;
6.
Identification of the standards which the petitioner contends apply to the plat application;
7.
Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the plat application at issue;
8.
A copy of any prior vested rights determination by the City involving the same land; and
9.
Where the petitioner alleges that a plat subject to expiration under subsection (c) above or (e) should not be terminated, a description of the events, including any plat or other development applications on file, which should prevent such termination.
(iii)
Review Process
A.
Director of Community Development Review
1.
The Director shall review the vested rights petition and, considering the review criteria in paragraph (iv) below, make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2.
The director’s report and each decision on the vested rights petition shall be memorialized in an order identifying the following:
a.
The nature of the relief granted, if any;
b.
The approved or filed plat applications upon which relief is premised under the petition;
c.
Current standards which shall apply to the plat application for which relief is sought;
d.
Prior standards which shall apply to the plat application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards;
14-
TM 18015.7.000
54
APPENDIX II AMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
e.
The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition;
f.
For petitions filed pursuant to subsection (c) above or (e), whether the approved plat should be terminated, and the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for the plat.
B.
Planning and Zoning Commission Final Action
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall take any of the following final actions in conjunction with its decision on the plat application.
1.
Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the plat application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards;
2.
Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the plat application shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior subdivision regulations;
3.
Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards shall be applied to the plat application, while standards contained in identified prior subdivision regulations also shall be applied; or
C.
For petitions filed pursuant to subsection (c) above or (e), determine whether the approved plat Appeal of Decision on Petition
1.
The petitioner or any interested person may appeal the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision on the vested rights petition within 10 working days of the date of such decision to the City Council. Such appeal stays acceptance of further filing of any related development applications.
2.
The City Council on appeal shall decide the vested rights petition. The request shall be accompanied by an Exception of the time for decision on the plat application imposed under this Article pending decision by the Council, which shall stay further proceedings on the application. The Council shall decide the petition, after considering the recommendation of the Director of Community Development and the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
(iv)
Review Criteria
In making a recommendation or taking final action on a vested rights petition, the applicable development review bodies shall consider the following criteria.
A.
The nature and extent of prior plat or other development applications filed or approved for the land subject to the petition;
B.
Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition;
C.
Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law;
D.
Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in this Article from which the applicant seeks relief;
E.
Whether any prior approved plat or other development applications relied upon by the petitioner have expired; and
14-
TM 18015.7.000
55
APPENDIX II AMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
F.
For petitions filed pursuant to subsection (c) above or (e), whether any of the events preventing expiration have occurred.
(v)
Application Following Relief Order
A.
Following the final decision on the vested rights petition, the petitioner shall revisethe plat application to conform with such decision. If the plat application on file is consistent with the relief granted on the vested rights petition, no revisions shall be necessary.
B.
Where proceedings have been stayed on the plat application pending referral of the vested rights petition to the City Council, proceedings on the application shall resume after the Council's decision on the vested rights petition.
(vi)
Expiration
Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events:
A.
The petitioner fails to submit a required revised plat application consistent with the relief granted within 30 days of the final decision on the petition;
B.
The plat application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied under the criteria made applicable through the relief granted on the petition; or
C.
The plat application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
56
APPENDIX II AMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
Amend Article XV I Definitions with the following:
Easement. Authorization by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons, of any designated part of his property for specific purposes.
Engineer. A person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereinafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering.
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Within the terms of the Texas Municipal Annexation Act, the term "extraterritorial jurisdiction" means the unincorporated area, not a part of any other city, which is contiguous to the corporate lines of the city, the outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the city outward for such distances as may be stipulated in the Texas Municipal Annexation Act in accordance with the total population of the incorporated city in which area, within the terms of the act, the city may enjoin the violation of its ordinances and codes.
Floodplain. As defined in the Drainage and Flood Control Ordinance as found in Chapter 3, Article 3.1400 of the City Code or as defined by FEMA.
General Design and Construction Details. Engineering design and construction details as may be adopted by the City, including the General Design Manual.`
General Design Manual.
Hike and Bike Trail Master Plan. The City’s adopted hike and bike trail plan as may be amended from time to time.
Improvements. All facilities constructed or erected by an applicant within a subdivision to permit and facilitate the use of lots or blocks for a principal residential, business or manufacturing purpose. Improvements shall include all facilities listed in (g). The term may be used synonymously with “development.”
Owner. Any person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations or any other legal entity having legal title to land sought to be subdivided under these regulations.
Open Space, Public. Land in a predominantly natural state which is free of any structures not directly related to the function of the open space.
Parks and Open Space Master Plan. The City’s parks and open space plan as may be amended from time to time.
Property Line. The boundary of any lot, parcel or tract as the same is described in the conveyance to the owner, and shall not include the streets or alleys upon which the said lot, parcel or tract may abut.
Reserve Strip. A narrow strip of land along a property line reserved to control access to abutting properties or public rights-of-way.
Right-of-Way, Public. All streets, roadways, sidewalks, alleys and all other areas reserved for present or future use by the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel.
Sidewalk. A paved pedestrian walkway, extending for the entire length of a block or blocks parallel to a street right-of-way line or street pavement edge, which walkway shall be constructed within the right-of-way of any public street.
Storm Water Master Plan. The City’s adopted storm water plan as may be amended from time to time.
Streetscape Master Plan. The City’s adopted streetscape plan as may be amended from time to time.
Wastewater Master Plan. The City’s adopted wastewater plan as may be amended from time to time.
14-
TM 18015.7.000
57
APPENDIX II AMENDMENTS TO OTHER SECTIONS OF LDC
14-
TM 18015.7.000
58
Water Master Plan. The City’s adopted fresh water supply plan as may be amended from time to time.

City of Lancaster
Storm Water Management
Exhibit A
Ordinance 2004-07-21 (R)
Adopted July 26, 2004
Revised August 2007
Prepared by
1701 N. Market Street, #500, LB51
Dallas, TX 75202
(214) 920-2500
wwwfreesecom
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page i
ARTICLE 14.1700 TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 14.1701 GENERAL PROVISIONS......................................................................................1
A. Statutory Authorization....................................................................................................................1
B. Findings of Fact...............................................................................................................................1
C. Statement of Purpose.......................................................................................................................1
D. Methods of Reducing Flood Loss....................................................................................................2
E. Scope of Authority...........................................................................................................................2
F. Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies.........................................................................................2
G. Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance and Storm Water Design Manual.......................2
H. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard..............................................................3
I. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions...............................................................................................3
J. Interpretation....................................................................................................................................3
K. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability...............................................................................................3
L. Severability......................................................................................................................................3
M. Regulatory Permits...........................................................................................................................4
N. Appeal..............................................................................................................................................4
O. Variance...........................................................................................................................................4
P. Penalty Clause..................................................................................................................................4
Q. Maintenance.....................................................................................................................................5
R. Compliance......................................................................................................................................5
SECTION 14.1702 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT POLICY.....................................................6
A. General.............................................................................................................................................6
B. Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance and Storm Water Design Manual.......................6
C. Planning...........................................................................................................................................6
D. Engineering/Design..........................................................................................................................9
E. Financing.......................................................................................................................................10
F. Construction...................................................................................................................................11
G. Operation and Maintenance...........................................................................................................11
SECTION 14.1703 DEFINITIONS.......................................................................................................12
SECTION 14.1704 ADMINISTRATION.............................................................................................20
A. Duties of City Officials..................................................................................................................20
B. Responsibilities of Property Owners.............................................................................................21
C. Plat Review and Approval Process................................................................................................21
D. Deviations from Permit Terms.......................................................................................................23
E. Plan Requirements.........................................................................................................................23
SECTION 14.1705 DRAINAGE STUDIES..........................................................................................26
A. General...........................................................................................................................................26
B. Preliminary Drainage Study...........................................................................................................26
C. Final Drainage Study.....................................................................................................................26
SECTION 14.1706 RUNOFF CALCULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS..........................................27
A. General...........................................................................................................................................27
B. Drainage Improvements Required for Development.....................................................................27
C. Limitation of Runoff......................................................................................................................28
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page ii
D. Procedure for Drainage Areas Less Than 160 Acres.....................................................................28
E. Procedure for Drainage Areas Greater than 160 Acres..................................................................28
SECTION 14.1707 DESIGN OF LOCAL DRAINAGE SYSTEMS..................................................30
A. Design Storm Frequencies.............................................................................................................30
B. Storm Drain Design Standards.......................................................................................................30
C. Drainage Easements for Enclosed Storm Drains...........................................................................30
SECTION 14.1708 SPECIAL DRAINAGE FACILITIES..................................................................31
A. Channels.........................................................................................................................................31
B. Lakes and Dams.............................................................................................................................31
C. Levees............................................................................................................................................31
D. Detention and Retention Facilities.................................................................................................32
E. Flumes............................................................................................................................................32
F. Connections from Buildings to Storm Drains................................................................................32
SECTION 14.1709 FLOODPLAIN GUIDELINES.............................................................................33
A. Lands to Which This Section Applies............................................................................................33
B. General Floodplain Regulations....................................................................................................33
C. General Standards..........................................................................................................................34
D. Specific Standards..........................................................................................................................34
E. Standards for Subdivision Proposals.............................................................................................37
F. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)...........................................................38
G. Floodways......................................................................................................................................38
H. Verification of Floodplain Alterations...........................................................................................39
SECTION 14.1710 EROSION CONTROL GUIDELINES................................................................40
A. Lands to Which This Section Applies............................................................................................40
B. General Guidelines........................................................................................................................40
C. Erosion Control Required..............................................................................................................41
D. Erosion Control Plans....................................................................................................................42
E. Development Compliance..............................................................................................................42
F. Residential Lots with a Building Permit........................................................................................44
G. Enforcement...................................................................................................................................45
H. Appeals..........................................................................................................................................45
I. Stream Bank Erosion.....................................................................................................................46
SECTION 14.1711 FUNDING OF IMPROVEMENTS......................................................................47
A. Developer Responsibilities............................................................................................................47
B. City Participation...........................................................................................................................48
SECTION 14.1712 ADOPTION............................................................................................................49
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 1
SECTION 14.1701 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A.
Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Texas has delegated the responsibility to local governments to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses and manage the floodplains in areas under their jurisdiction. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Lancaster, Texas, does ordain this Ordinance.
B.
Findings of Fact
The drainage ways, creeks and flood hazard areas of the City of Lancaster, Texas, are subject to periodic inundation which may result in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses could be created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains that increase flood heights and velocities and by placing structures and other improvements vulnerable to floods in flood hazard areas.
The development of land causes large quantities of soil to be displaced and transported to downstream locations. This soil displacement can create significant soil erosion and sedimentation problems. Although erosion is a natural process, excessive levels of erosion may result in potentially destructive consequences. A buildup of sediment degrades water quality, destroys valuable environmental resources and obstructs watercourses and storm drains which can cause flooding, thereby damaging public and private lands and property. These problems result in a serious threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the City of Lancaster. Streams and floodplain areas in the City of Lancaster are valuable resources to the citizens of Lancaster in that they provide recreational opportunities, improve the aesthetics of the community, convey storm water runoff and filter out water quality pollutants.
C.
Statement of Purpose
Storm water management policies shall govern the planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance of storm drainage and erosion control facilities within the City of Lancaster. This Ordinance sets forth the minimum requirements necessary to provide and maintain a safe, efficient and effective drainage system within the City of Lancaster and to establish the various public and private responsibilities for the provision thereof. Further, the purpose of this Ordinance is the following:
1.
Protect human life, health and property.
2.
Minimize the expenditure of public money for building and maintaining flood control and storm drainage projects and cleaning sediment out of storm drains, streets, sidewalks and watercourses.
3.
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric service, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges and drainage ways due to storm water runoff and erosion.
4.
Help maintain a stable tax base and preserve land values.
5.
Provide assistance upon request to potential buyers if property is in an area of special flood hazard.
6.
Manage storm water runoff and the sediment load in that runoff, from points and surfaces within new and existing developments.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 2
7.
Establish a reasonable standard of design for development which prevents potential flood and erosion damage.
8.
Reduce the pollutant loading to streams, ponds and other watercourses.
9.
Minimize prolonged interruption of business and the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding.
10.
Preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community.
11.
Obligate those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard to assume responsibility for their actions.
D.
Methods of Reducing Flood Loss
In order to accomplish its purposes, this Section uses the following methods:
1.
Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
2.
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
3.
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters.
4.
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage.
5.
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
E.
Scope of Authority
Except as exempted by Section 3.1710, any person, firm, utility, corporation or business proposing to develop land or improve property within the jurisdiction of the City of Lancaster is subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. This Ordinance also applies to individual building structures, subdivisions, excavation and fill operations and similar activities.
F.
Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies
This Ordinance shall apply to all areas of land within the incorporated limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Lancaster, Texas. Certain provisions of this ordinance apply only to special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Lancaster, while other provisions exempt certain other tracts. These limited areas of application are explained in Section 3.1708 and Section 3.1709. The erosion control provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to land under active agricultural use. As soon as construction or modification to the lands under active agricultural use is proposed so that the use of land will change from agriculture to any other use, then the provisions of this Ordinance shall be applicable to the once-exempted land. Section 3.1710 explains this exemption in greater detail.
G.
Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance and Storm Water Design Manual
The Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance and the most current version of the Storm Water Design Manual shall become part of the official storm water management plan for streams, channels, detention/retention facilities and pipe drainage systems. Deviations shall not be permitted unless the following criteria are met: (1) it can be clearly shown by approved procedures that the deviation will not
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 3
adversely affect conditions either upstream or downstream of the point of deviation, and (2) the owners directly affected by the deviation are in written agreement, and (3) the deviation is not in conflict with any other regulations adopted by the City, the state or federal agencies. Requests for deviation are subject to approval by the City Public Works Director. The Public Works Director will have the authority to update the Storm Water Design Manual as needed in response to changing conditions, design methodologies, regulations, etc.
H.
Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special flood hazard, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the most current “Flood Insurance Study” with the accompanying “Flood Insurance Rate Maps” and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The flood insurance study is on file with the City.
I.
Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance and another municipal ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever ordinance imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
J.
Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, all provisions shall be:
1.
considered as minimum requirements,
2.
liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and
3.
deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state or federal statutes.
K.
Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degrees of flood, storm drainage, and erosion protection required by this Ordinance are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and are based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas shall be free from flooding or flood damages. In addition, this Ordinance does not imply that erosion controls will survive inundation by runoff from storms greater than the design flood for erosion controls. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Lancaster, any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
L.
Severability
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this Ordinance shall be judged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional; nor shall such unconstitutionality or invalidity have an effect on any other ordinances or provisions of ordinances of the City of Lancaster.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 4
M.
Regulatory Permits
It shall be the Developer’s responsibility to secure all regulatory permits associated with development of drainage improvements. These include but are not limited to U.S. Corps of Engineer 404 Permits, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Section 401 permits, Federal Emergency Management Agency floodplain revision permits, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits and any City of Lancaster permits.
N.
Appeal
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Public Works Director may appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Public Works Director to the City Manager. The aggrieved person shall file an appeal in writing with the City Manager within seven (7) days from the date of the decision. If no resolution of the appeal can be reached with the City Manager within twenty-eight (28) days, the aggrieved person may appeal in writing to the City Council.
O.
Variance
Deviations from the provisions of this Ordinance shall not be permitted unless the following criteria are met:
1.
It can be clearly shown by approved procedures that the deviation will not adversely affect conditions either upstream or downstream of the point of deviation.
2.
The owners directly affected by the deviation are in written agreement.
3.
The deviation is not in conflict with any other regulations adopted by the City, the state or federal agencies.
4.
A showing of good and sufficient cause.
5.
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
6.
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local, state, or federal laws or regulations.
Requests for deviation shall be approved by the Public Works Director. Variances for any type of permit or storm drainage facilities shall be issued only upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard, drainage problems and soil loss. Variances concerning development permits may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section provided the proposed work shall not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
Any applicant to whom a variance for building or renovating in a floodplain is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
P.
Penalty Clause
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a penalty or fine. Each and every day such
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 5
an offense is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense. In addition, the violator shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Lancaster from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Any developer, owner or builder who fails to obtain a Development Permit before beginning the subject project is in violation of this Ordinance. No building permit, plat, site plan, Certificate of Occupancy or other use permit may be issued for any construction, reconstruction or development upon any land where such construction, reconstruction or development is not in conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance. It shall be an offense for a Responsible Party or a third party performing work on a project to violate any of the requirements of this Ordinance.
Q.
Maintenance
Public drainage improvements dedicated (in right-of-way or by fee simple dedication to the public) and accepted by the City shall be maintained and operated by the City or by the property owner if a separate private maintenance agreement is executed.
R.
Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 6
SECTION 14.1702 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT POLICY
A. General
1.
Storm water management policies shall govern the planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance of storm water management facilities within the City’s jurisdiction.
2.
It is the policy of the City of Lancaster to adopt and maintain design standards that protect and provide for the safety and general welfare of the community.
3.
It is the policy of the City of Lancaster to implement drainage and erosion control standards to minimize flood damage and soil erosion to private and public facilities within the community.
4. It is the policy of the City of Lancaster to implement storm water control standards to be used during design, construction and post-construction that provide for water quality pollution prevention.
5. These storm water management policies are defined by Storm Water Management Ordinance 2004-07-21, adopted on July 26, 2004 and amendments thereto. All amendments, additions or modifications to this Ordinance are considered effective upon the date of acceptance, in whole or in part by the City of Lancaster. These storm water management policies shall apply to any storm water management system improvement not having plans released for construction on or before the date of City Council approval of revised ordinance provisions.
B.
Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance and Storm Water Design Manual
The Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance and the most current version of the Storm Water Design Manual shall become part of the official storm water management plan for streams, channels, regional detention/retention facilities and pipe drainage systems. Deviations shall not be permitted unless the criteria in Subsection O (Variance) of Section 3.1701 are met. The Public Works Director will have the authority to update the Storm Water Design Manual as needed in response to changing conditions, design methodologies, regulations, and other relevant factors.
C.
Planning
1. Storm Water Management Site Planning
The following principles of Storm Water Management Site Planning shall be encouraged within the City of Lancaster:
a.
Preserve the natural features of the site which can be used to help manage storm water runoff from new development.
b.
Fit the new development to the terrain and minimize land disturbance.
c.
Reduce the impervious surface areas as much as possible.
d.
Preserve and utilize the natural drainage systems wherever possible.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 7
e.
Design structural controls, if required, as low maintenance, multi-purpose and aesthetically pleasing facilities.
f.
Conduct downstream assessments to demonstrate the impact of new development on downstream drainage systems.
2. Utilization of Natural Floodplains
Utilization of natural floodplains shall be the preferred consideration in providing storm water management control within the City of Lancaster. Natural floodplains for major streams as defined in this Section 3.1703 of this article shall be maintained to provide regional flood control measures, enhance water quality and mitigate regional erosion. Where maintaining natural floodplains is deemed impractical by the City, structural improvements and drainage systems shall be designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts on the floodplain.
3. Review and Permit Process
The review and permit process established in the Storm Water Management Ordinance shall be utilized by the City of Lancaster to provide control of development activities related to erosion control and storm water runoff through natural and constructed facilities.
4. Relocation and Reclamation
To implement storm water control measures in existing areas of private ownership, the City of Lancaster may consider the acquisition of private land, the relocation of property owners and the reclamation of existing developed areas to their natural condition.
5. Development around Regional Detention/Retention Facilities
The City of Lancaster shall control future development upstream, downstream and in the watershed of all regional detention/retention facilities. A detailed engineering study shall be performed on all future development that impacts or is impacted by regional detention/retention facilities. This study will provide a technical basis for future development and meet either of the following requirements, as appropriate:
a.
Dam and spillway will be designed to meet Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) dam safety requirements.
b.
Development and improvements will be restricted within the floodplain as established by a dam breach analysis from the dam to the downstream limit of the dam breach impact.
6. Drainage of Lots
Existing drainage between developed lots shall remain the responsibility of the affected property owners. Future developments less than one acre in area may drain surface runoff from an individual lot to no more than one additional lot before entering a public right-of-way or drainage system contained in a public drainage easement. Surface runoff from future developments of lots one acre or larger must immediately enter a public right-of-way or drainage system contained in a public drainage easement.
7. Dedication of Drainage Easements
Public drainage systems designed to convey the design storm runoff shall be contained within a drainage easement or a floodplain/floodway easement. Developed flows from the site must be contained in a drainage easement to a point of entry into the public drainage system.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 8
8. Platting of Property Along Drainage Channels
Future platting along streams and drainage channels within the 100-year floodplain, based on fully developed watershed conditions, shall require compliance with one of the following:
a.
Dedication of a floodplain easement
b.
Dedication of a floodway easement if floodplain reclamation is approved
c.
Dedication of the floodplain for use as a park, common open space or environmental preservation area as mutually agreed upon by the developer and the City
9. Erosion Hazard Setbacks
Erosion hazard setback determinations shall be made for every stream in which natural channels are to be preserved. Erosion hazard setbacks shall be required to protect structures and lot improvements from erosion hazards.
10. Illicit Discharge Prohibition
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water. Illicit connections to the storm sewer system are prohibited, including the following:
a.
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
b.
This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
c.
A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
a.
The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance, unless it is determined that the discharges adversely impact storm water quality:
i.
water line flushing
ii.
runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation using potable water groundwater, or surface water sources,
iii.
diverted stream flows, rising groundwater and springs,
iv.
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration,
v.
uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
vi.
foundation or footing drains,
vii.
air conditioning condensation,
viii.
water from crawl space pumps,
ix.
non-commercial washing of vehicles,
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 9
x.
natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
xi.
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
xii.
pavement and exterior building wash water conducted without the use of detergents or other chemicals, and
xiii.
discharges or flows from fire fighting activities.
b.
Discharges specified the City as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
c.
Dye testing is an allowable discharge with authorization from the City prior to the time of the test.
d.
The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations.
D.
Engineering/Design
1. Design of Drainage Systems
Storm water runoff determinations for drainage systems shall be based on the designated design storm frequency. The design storm frequencies for drainage systems for the City of Lancaster are provided in the Storm Water Design Manual.
2. Fully Developed Watershed Conditions
All drainage systems, whether upstream, downstream or on-site, shall be designed for fully developed watershed conditions based on the City’s most recent Land Use Map.
3. Limitation of Runoff / Downstream Assessment
Storm water runoff, based on fully developed watershed conditions, shall be allowed from all future developments provided that the receiving drainage systems and/or natural channels can adequately convey the design storm runoff so that there are no adverse impacts to structures, property or receiving water quality and there is no significant increase in shear stress or erosion potential. Calculations to verify downstream adequacy shall be performed:
a.
to the nearest major receiving stream; or
b.
downstream to the point where the developed property is no more than ten percent (10%) of the total drainage area for each proposed development (the Ten Percent Rule). The Storm Water Design Manual provides detailed instructions for conducting a downstream assessment using the Ten Percent Rule.
If the receiving drainage systems and/or natural channels cannot adequately convey storm water runoff based on fully developed conditions, runoff from the site shall be limited to the flow that can adequately be conveyed in downstream drainage systems and/or natural channels. All downstream improvements must be in accordance with the City’s Storm Water Master Plan and/or with the approval of the Public Works Director in order to avoid increasing downstream flooding or erosion problems.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 10
4. Erosion and Sediment Control During Construction
Guidelines for controlling erosion resulting from development or construction activities shall be identified in the Storm Water Management Ordinance and Storm Water Design Manual. Developers and/or builders must provide a detailed erosion control plan for approval prior to the start of construction activities for entire developments and for individual lots.
5. Stream Bank Erosion
Erosion control methods identified in the Storm Water Design Manual shall be utilized for erosion control along streams and drainage channels. On-site, upstream and downstream erosion control impacts shall be evaluated during design.
6. Regional Detention/Retention Facilities
The regional detention/retention facilities shall maintain their original design to collect sediment from storm water runoff and to provide regional flood control. Detailed engineering and technical analysis shall be performed for each watershed containing an existing regional detention/retention facility prior to development activities. If the dam and spillway(s) do not meet Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) dam safety requirements, the following restrictions shall apply:
a.
No construction shall be allowed within the downstream flood area of a dam determined by a breach flow analysis.
b.
Development upstream shall not be allowed that adversely impacts the integrity of the dam and/or spillway structure.
c.
Development upstream shall not be allowed that would increase the downstream flood area of a dam determined by a breach flow analysis.
Design for upgrading dams shall comply with TCEQ dam safety requirements, this Ordinance, and the Storm Water Design Manual.
7. Structural and Non-Structural Improvements
Storm water control may be achieved by structural (physical) improvements, non-structural (natural/regulatory) means or a combination of both. Design of improvements shall comply with the Storm Water Design Manual guidelines.
8. Regional Detention/Retention of Storm Water Runoff
Existing regional detention/retention facilities provide storm water retention. This retention volume was considered in establishment of the design flood and shall be maintained.
9. Reclamation of Floodplains
Portions of the 100-year floodplain, based on fully developed conditions, may be reclaimed provided there is no increase in the water surface elevation and acceptable velocities are maintained. In addition, for major streams an equivalent volume of valley storage must be provided within the floodplain.
E.
Financing
Financing of improvements is possible through various mechanisms depending on the circumstances of the improvements. The Developer shall be responsible for financing on-site and off-site improvements
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 11
when the existing system is inadequate as a result of the development activities. Cost-sharing opportunities between Developers and between the City and Developers, City contributions derived from storm water utility fees, drainage impact fees and erosion deposit accounts per this Ordinance are also potential funding sources.
F.
Construction
1. Erosion Control
Development activities shall comply with state and federal erosion control permit requirements for construction activity and regulated industrial facilities, erosion control guidelines in the Ordinance and with methods and procedures in the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) Design Manual for Construction or revisions thereof. The City must be provided access to inspect the adequacy and maintenance of erosion control measures on the site.
2. Stream Bank Erosion
Stream bank erosion shall be minimized by utilizing procedures, guidelines and mitigation measures provided in the Storm Water Design Manual and NCTCOG Design Manual for Construction or revisions thereof.
3. Protection/Replacement of Trees
The protection of trees and vegetation shall be maximized to the extent practicable without adverse impacts to drainage improvements during all development activities. Replacement of trees along natural channels destroyed by storm water improvements is encouraged. All protection and mitigation of trees shall comply with other city tree requirements.
4. Water Quality Pollution Prevention
All construction activities shall comply with the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) storm water permit program for construction activities as administered by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
G.
Operation and Maintenance
Public drainage improvements dedicated to and accepted by the City shall be maintained and operated by the City as required to maintain flow in the system.
1.
Floodplain and drainage easements shall be maintained by the City or a private maintenance agreement shall be executed defining maintenance responsibility.
2.
Operation and maintenance of regional detention/retention facilities shall have a maintenance agreement executed defining responsibility for each entity. The City shall coordinate and cooperate with these entities to provide maximum protection for the citizens of Lancaster.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 12
SECTION 14.1703 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Ordinance it’s most reasonable application:
Active agricultural use: The presently ongoing use of land for cropping or livestock.
Angle of flare: The angle between the direction of a wingwall and the centerline of a culvert or storm drainage outlet or inlet.
Appeal: A request for review or interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance or a request for a variance.
Applicant: Any firm, entity, partnership, company, public utility company or individuals, who plan to clear, grub, fill, excavate, grade or otherwise remove the vegetative cover of land, or who plan to either subdivide land and install the appropriate infrastructure or renovate existing structures, shall become applicants for a development permit upon submission of the appropriate application materials.
Apron: A floor or lining to protect a surface from erosion, for example, the pavement below chutes or spillways or at the toes of dams.
Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map. The base flood depths range from one to three feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, and the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate.
Area of special flood hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, determined based upon the FEMA guidelines and as shown in the current effective flood insurance study. This 100-year mean recurrence interval storm event is based on existing watershed conditions (also see "design flood").
Base flood elevation: The water surface elevation resulting from the base flood.
Builder: A person, partnership or corporation engaged in clearing, grubbing, filling, excavating, grading, constructing a pad, installing service utility lines and/or constructing or placing a building(s) or other structure(s) on a lot or other type of tract of land that is owned by the person, partnership or corporation, and that will not be further subdivided into other lots.
Channel: A natural or artificial stream that conveys water. Channels are often further classified by their size and purpose. For example, there are primary and secondary channels based on size, but diversions, waterways and chutes are also channels.
Channel improvement: The improvement of the flow characteristics of a channel by clearing, excavating, realigning, lining or other means in order to increase its capacity. The term is sometimes used to mean channel stabilization.
Channel stabilization: Erosion prevention and stabilization of velocity distribution in a channel using jetties, drops, revetments, vegetation and other measures.
Check dam: A small dam constructed in a gulley or other small watercourse to decrease the streamflow velocity, minimize channel scour and promote deposition of sediment.
City-maintained land: Any land in actual ownership of the City of Lancaster; it does not include any type of easements that remain in private ownership.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 13
Conduit: Any closed device for conveying flowing water.
Cover, vegetative: All plants of all sizes and species found on an area, irrespective of whether they have forage or other value, but especially used to refer to vegetation producing a mat on or immediately above the soil surface. Temporary vegetative cover refers to the use of annual plants for the cover, while permanent vegetative cover refers to the use of perennial plants.
Crest: The top of a dam, dike, spillway or weir, frequently restricted to the overflow portion.
Critical feature: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood-protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Design basin: A dry basin or depression constructed for the purpose of temporarily storing storm water runoff and discharging all of that water over time at a rate reduced from the rate that would have otherwise occurred.
Design flood: When in the context of floods, floodplains or flood hazards, the design flood is that flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, based upon fully developed watershed conditions (also see "base flood").
Developer: A person, partnership or corporation who owns a tract of land and who is engaged in clearing, grubbing, filling, mining, excavating, grading, installing streets and utilities to be dedicated to or accepted by the City of Lancaster and/or otherwise preparing that tract of land for the eventual division of the tract into one or more lots on which building(s) or other structure(s) will be constructed or placed.
Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, adding buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, grading, clearing or removing the vegetative cover.
Discharge (hydraulics):
1.
Rate of flow; specifically, fluid flow
2.
A volume of fluid passing a point per unit time, commonly expressed as cubic feet per second
Disturbance: Any operation or activity, such as clearing, grubbing, filling, excavating, mining, cutting and grading, or removing channel linings, which results in the removal or destruction of the protective cover of soil, including vegetative cover, channel linings, retaining walls, and slope protection.
Disturbed areas: Any area or tract of land in which a disturbance is occurring or has occurred but that has not been stabilized.
Drainage area: The land area from which water drains to a given point.
Elevated building: In the case of FEMA-designated zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, "elevated building" includes a building elevated by means of fill, so that the lowest finished floor of the building is at least two feet above the water surface elevation of the design flood.
Emergency spillway: A spillway built to carry runoff in excess of that carried by the principal spillway.
Entrance head: The head required to cause flow into a conduit or other structure; it includes both entrance loss and velocity head.
Entrance loss: The head lost in eddies or friction at the inlet to a conduit, headwall or structure.
Equal conveyance: The principle of reducing stream conveyance for a proposed alteration with a corresponding reduction in conveyance to the opposite bank of the stream. The right of equal conveyance applies to all owners and uses and may be relinquished only by written agreement.
Erosion: The wearing away of land by action of wind and water.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 14
Existing construction: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date (January 31, 1978) of Ordinance No. 1046. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The federal agency which administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1.
the overflow of inland waters and/or
2.
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study: The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary/floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Flood protection system: Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or flood-prone area: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
Floodway: The channel of the river or other water course and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge without increasing flood depth.
Flume: Any open conduit on a prepared grade, trestle or bridge.
Freeboard: The distance between the design flood elevation and the top of an open channel, dam, levee or detention basin to allow for wave action, floating debris or any other condition or emergency without overflowing the structure.
Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities.
Gabion: A galvanized wire basket filled with stone for structural purposes. When fastened together, they may be used as retaining walls, revetments, slope protection and similar structures.
Grading: Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling or combination thereof which modifies the existing land surface contour.
Grass: Any member of the botanical family Gramineae; herbaceous plants with bladelike leaves arranged in two ranks on a round to flattened stem. Common examples are fescue, Bermuda grass and Bahia grass. The term "grass" is sometimes used to indicate a combination of grass and legumes grown for forage or turf purposes.
Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Hydraulic gradient: A line representing the pressure head available at any given point within the drainage system.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 15
Hydrograph: A graph showing, for a given point on a stream or drainage system, the discharge, stage, velocity or other property of water with respect to time.
Inlet (hydraulics):
1.
A surface connection to a closed drain
2.
A structure at the diversion end of a conduit
3.
The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow
Levee: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system: A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Letters of Map Change:
1.
CLOMA: A Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA) is FEMA's comment on whether a proposed project would be excluded from the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. There is no appeal period. The letter becomes effective on the date sent. This letter does not revise an effective NFIP map, it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would or would not be removed from the SFHA by FEMA if later submitted as a request for a Letter of Map Amendment.
2.
CLOMR: A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is FEMA's comment on a proposed project that would affect the hydrologic and/or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway or effective Base Flood Elevations. There is no appeal period. The letter becomes effective on the date sent. This letter does not revise an effective National Flood Insurance Program map, it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would or would not be removed from the Special Flood Hazard Area by FEMA if later submitted as a request for a Letter of Map Revision.
3.
CLOMR-F: A Conditional Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (CLOMR-F) is FEMA's comment on whether a proposed project involving the placement of fill would exclude an area from the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. There is no appeal period. The letter becomes effective on the date sent. This letter does not revise an effective NFIP map, it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would or would not be removed from the SFHA by FEMA if later submitted as a request for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill.
4.
LOMA: A Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) is an official amendment, by letter, to an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMA establishes a property's location in relation to the Special Flood Hazard Area. There is no appeal period. The letter becomes effective on the date sent.
5.
LOMR: A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is an official revision, by letter, to an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMR may change flood insurance risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway boundary delineations, planimetric features, and/or Base Flood Elevations. See the LOMR Effective Chart to determine when a LOMR becomes effective.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 16
6.
LOMR-F: A Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) is an official revision, by letter, to an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the Base Flood Elevation and excluded from the Special Flood Hazard Area. The letter becomes effective on the date sent.
Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of FEMA 60.3.
Major streams: The major streams in the City of Lancaster, as defined in the Ordinance, are Bear Branch, Deep Branch, Halls Branch, Floyd Branch, Keller Branch, Keller Tributary, Mills Branch, Newton, Branch, Runyon Springs, Ten Mile Creek, and any other stream within the City limits with a FEMA-defined floodplain.
Manning equation: The uniform flow equation used to relate velocity, hydraulic radius and energy gradient slope and roughness characteristics of the flow path.
Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level: For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
Mulching: The application of plant or other suitable materials on the soil surface to conserve moisture, reduce erosion and aid in establishing plant cover.
Natural drainage: The dispersal of surface waters through ground absorption and by drainage channels formed by the existing surface topography which exists at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or formed by any manmade change in the surface topography.
Natural floodway: The effective area of a channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the "design flood" without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation. This floodway differs from the "regulatory floodway."
New construction: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the adoptive date of this Ordinance.
Open channel: A channel in which water flows with a free surface.
Other municipal ordinances: Ordinances such as, but not limited to, zoning, subdivision and construction specifications.
Outfall: The point where water flows from a stream, river, lake or artificial drain.
Peak discharge: The maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a specific location.
Permanent erosion controls: Stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by the use of means or techniques that will provide protection against erosion losses for an indefinite time period.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 17
Permissible velocity (hydraulics): The highest velocity at which water may be carried safely in a channel or other conduit (see the Storm Water Design Manual).
Principal spillway: Generally, is constructed of permanent material and designed to regulate the normal water level, provide flood protection and reduce the frequency of operation of the emergency spillway.
Probable maximum flood: The upper limit of a flood likely to occur as determined by the Corps of Engineers' criteria.
Public erosion nuisance: A situation in which erosion of or sediment from one location is causing a bothersome or unsightly condition on another property owned by a different individual or entity. A bothersome or unsightly condition or burden includes sediment, mud or similar debris originating from one property but being deposited onto a second off-site property in which that off-site owner may have to remove or clean up the deposit due to liability, statutory, aesthetic, drainage or property damage concerns. The adversely affected off-site property owner could be a private citizen, corporation, government or other entity.
Rainfall intensity: The rate at which rain is falling at any given instant, usually expressed in inches per hour.
Rational formula: The means of relating runoff with the area being drained, the characteristics of the land use and the intensity of the storm rainfall.
Regulatory floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the "base flood," as calculated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. This floodway is used by FEMA to determine compliance with its regulations.
Retention basins: A pond or other water body which has been designed to have both a conservation pool for holding some water indefinitely and a flood storage pool for storing storm water runoff on a temporary basis for the purpose of reducing the peak discharge from the basin.
Riprap: Broken rock, cobbles, boulders, or concrete placed on earth surfaces, such as the face of a dam or the bank of a stream, for protection against the action of water.
Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that makes its way toward stream channels or lakes as surface or subsurface flow. When the term "runoff' is used alone, surface runoff usually is implied.
Sediment: Solid soil material, both mineral and organic, that is being moved or has been moved from its original site by wind, gravity, flowing water or ice. Also sometimes referred to as "silt" or "sand."
Sheet flow: Water, usually storm runoff, flowing in a thin layer over the ground surface. Synonymous with "overland flow."
Significant rise: Any rise in the design flood water surface elevation at a particular stream location.
Soil: The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of plants.
Special flood hazard area: Areas inundated by the design flood and/or floodplain areas designated on the current flood insurance rate maps.
Stabilized: To be protected from possible erosion losses, usually by the use of vegetative cover.
Standard project flood: A flood that has a magnitude of approximately one-half of the probable maximum flood, as determined on a case-by-case basis using the Corps of Engineers' current criteria.
Start of construction: For a structure, "start of construction" includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 18
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction of a structure does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
Storm frequency: An expression or measure of how often a hydrologic event of given size or magnitude should, on an average, be equaled or exceeded.
Structure: A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a substation or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. When used in the context of storm water, the term means a drainage improvement, such as dams, levees, bridges, culverts, headwalls, flumes, etc.
Substantial improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction or improvements of a structure, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the initial market value of the structure either:
1.
before the first improvement or repair is started, or
2.
if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. Incremental improvements over a period of time, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value at the time of the first improvement, shall be considered a substantial improvement. The term does not, however, include either of the following:
1.
Any project for the improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions
2.
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places
Temporary erosion protection: The stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas for a specific time period, usually during a construction job.
Time of concentration: The estimated time in minutes or hours required for a drop of water to flow from the most remote point in the drainage area to the point at which the discharge is to be determined.
Use: Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
Use permit: The permit required before any use may be commenced.
Variance: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this Ordinance. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance.
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this Ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence, as required by the Public Works Director, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 19
Watershed: The area drained by a stream or drainage system.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 20
SECTION 14.1704 ADMINISTRATION
A. Duties of City Officials
The Floodplain Administrator shall administer and implement the provisions of this section and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. The duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:
1.
Review and approve or disapprove all Development Permits to determine that the requirements of this Ordinance have been met.
2.
Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance, including floodproofing certifications.
3.
Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submitting evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, as mandated by state and federal requirements.
4.
Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
5.
Inspect sites to determine compliance with the erosion control guidelines.
6.
Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes shall be reasonably safe from flooding.
7.
Review permits for proposed development to see what permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1334) from which prior approval is required.
8.
Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
9.
When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this Ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available form a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Ordinance.
10.
When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other developments (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation on the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
11.
Under provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, the Floodplain Administrator may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that an application and approval for a conditional FIRM revision is made and received from FEMA.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 21
12.
For structures built on fill in or near the flood plain, require a minimum setback distance of 20 feet from the flood plain in accordance with guidelines in FIA-TB-10 issued by FEMA.
B. Responsibilities of Property Owners
1.
The owner or developer of a property to be developed shall be responsible for managing all storm drainage flowing through or abutting such property. This responsibility also includes drainage directed to that property by ultimate development as well as the drainage naturally flowing through the property by reason of topography. The owner, builder or developer of a property shall be responsible for any silt or soils from his property transported downstream from the property by drainage. It is the intent of this Ordinance that provisions be made for managing storm drainage and preventing erosion and sedimentation problems.
2.
Where the improvement or construction of a storm drainage facility is required along a property line common to two or more owners, the owner hereafter proposing the development of the property shall be responsible for obtaining the necessary City permits, making the required improvements at the time of development and acquiring or dedicating the necessary rights-of-way or easements to accommodate the improvements. The initial developer may recover a portion of the cost from the adjacent developer in accordance with a Developers’ Agreement. Also, the cost of oversized drainage structures may be participated in by the City in accordance with Provisions of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto.
3.
Where an applicant proposes development or use of only a portion of the property, provisions for storm drainage and erosion control shall only be required in that portion of the property proposed for immediate development, except as construction or improvements of a drainage facility or erosion controls outside that designated portion of the property are deemed essential to the development of that designated portion.
4.
The owner or developer of a property must provide sufficient evidence that all necessary, local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
C. Plat Review and Approval Process
The City of Lancaster has several approval processes and permits in place which relate to storm water drainage and floodplains. These processes and permits include but are not limited to:
1.
Platting Process
In accordance with the City's subdivision regulations, a construction plan and profile sheets for all public improvements, including drainage facilities, shall be submitted with the final plat. All on-site and off-site drainage easements to be utilized by the development must be submitted with the construction plans. Requirements for preliminary and final plat submission are outlined in the Storm Water Design Manual of the City of Lancaster.
2.
Dedication of Drainage Easement
Public drainage systems designed to convey the design storm runoff shall be contained within a drainage easement or a floodplain/floodway easement or property dedicated to the Public. In addition to completely containing the design storm runoff, these easements shall be widened ten (10) feet on either side for maintenance access.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 22
3.
Platting of Property Along Drainage Channels
Platting along streams and drainage channels within the 100-year storm event floodplain, based on fully developed watershed conditions, shall require compliance with one of the following conditions:
a.
Dedication of a floodplain easement
b.
Dedication of a floodway easement if floodplain reclamation is approved
c.
Dedication of floodplain land for use as a park, common open space or environmental preservation area.
4.
Erosion Hazard Setbacks
Erosion hazard setbacks shall be utilized to provide stream bank protection for the major streams, as defined in this Ordinance, within the City which are to be maintained as natural floodplains. Erosion setbacks may also be required for other streams within the City where a future determination is made that the stream shall be maintained as a natural floodplain.
Natural channel banks shall be protected by use of the determined setbacks unless a plan to stabilize and protect streambanks is approved. Where setbacks are established, no building, fence, wall, deck, swimming pool or other structure shall be located, constructed or maintained within the area encompassing the setback.
The setback requirement for each stream shall be determined as described in Section 2.12 of the Storm Water Design Manual and shown on the final plat.
5.
Development Permits (Flood-Prone Areas)
All developers, owners or builders shall obtain a building permit before beginning any projects in floodplain areas, including but not limited to: constructing new buildings and infrastructure, filling land, altering waterways, substantially improving existing structures located in flood hazard areas or channelizing, impounding, realigning, deepening or other altering of a natural drainage way. A construction or renovation project cannot begin until the City has issued a building permit for the project. Approval or denial of a building permit by the City shall be based on the applicant’s adherence to provisions of this Ordinance, including each of the following relevant factors:
a.
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage
b.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner
c.
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others
d.
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development
e.
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles
f.
The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
g.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transportation of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 23
h.
The necessity for the facility to have a waterfront location, where applicable
i.
The availability of an alternative location, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use
j.
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
6.
Proceeding Without Approval
Any developer, owner or builder who fails to obtain a building permit before beginning the subject project is in violation of this ordinance. In addition to the penalties outlined in Section 3.1701, subsection P, no building permit, plat, site plan, certificate of occupancy or other use permit shall be issued for any construction, reconstruction or development upon any land where such construction, reconstruction or development is not in conformity with the requirements and intent of this Ordinance. Anyone who violates any of the terms and provisions of this Ordinance shall be denied the use permit until the violation is corrected. The city shall also not forward application materials for altering the federal flood insurance maps to the Federal Emergency Management Agency until the application materials are in compliance with the terms of this Ordinance.
D. Deviations from Permit Terms
Permits may be revoked by the City if, upon periodic inspection, it is determined that the work is not progressing in accordance with specifications of the approved plan and permit, or if it is determined that erosion from a building or construction site is not being controlled in a satisfactory manner.
Field changes to drainage system plans can be made upon approval by the City. Record drawings of the drainage system shall be submitted to the City at the completion of the project.
E. Plan Requirements
Application materials and plan requirements for drainage systems or floodplain alterations are listed below. All engineering plans for storm drainage and floodplain alteration projects shall be sealed by a Professional Engineer (P.E.) who is licensed in the State of Texas and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for preparing the engineering plans and implementing the plans shall be borne by the applicant.
1. Storm Drainage Plans
As part of the development process, storm drainage reports and plans shall be prepared and submitted with construction plans. These reports and plans shall include drainage systems and easements for both off-site and on-site drainage, so that the proper transition between the two can be maintained. Criteria for on-site development shall also apply to off-site improvements. The construction of all improvements shall be in accordance with the current specifications and regulations adopted by the City of Lancaster. Storm drainage plans shall be prepared in accordance with the Storm Water Design Manual.
2. Application Materials
Owners or builders who are planning to renovate existing structures or construct new structures shall apply for a building permit. If it is determined during the permit review that the proposed project is located in a flood-prone area, then the building permit applicant shall also be required to submit to the Floodplain Administrator for review copies of the appropriate materials listed below.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 24
Owners or developers who are proposing to build or expand subdivisions shall submit a building permit application form. If the city staff determines the proposed work to be in flood hazard areas, then the applicant shall submit duplicate copies of the additional appropriate materials outlined below.
It is recommended that applicants coordinate the application materials listed below with those needed with other City of Lancaster permits and with the data requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Such coordination will facilitate staff review, and drawings could be combined to save the applicant from making multiple drawings.
a.
Projects involving an existing structure located in flood-prone areas:
xiv.
Plan view to scale, showing existing and proposed locations, dimensions, lowest finished floor elevations (FFE) (including basements) and extent or elevation of the base flood and the design storm event
xv.
A cost estimate of the proposed improvements or a copy of the contract amount for making the improvements
xvi.
One of the following:
(a)
Plans, sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the State of Texas, of any floodproofing techniques and elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed
(b)
A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect, stating that the floodproofing techniques used on nonresidential structures meet the requirements of this Ordinance
(c)
Elevation Certificate tied to City benchmark.
b.
All subdivisions and new construction in flood-prone areas:
i.
An engineering report with the following recommended format, as applicable:
(a)
Project description
(b)
Description of the hydrologic and hydraulic analyses used, including the method used to determine historic rainfall and stream data, soils reports used to determine erosive velocity values and discharges and water surface elevations for both the base flood and the design flood
(c)
Vicinity map
(d)
Table of values for existing and proposed water surface elevations and velocities
(e)
Documentation that the principle of equal conveyance has been achieved
(f)
Engineering calculations for existing and proposed conditions for both the design flood and 100-year storm event discharges
(g)
Evaluation of the natural floodway and floodplain limits for the design flood. The natural floodway differs from the FEMA regulatory floodway. The natural floodway is established to allow the City of Lancaster to effectively manage floodplain
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 25
areas. FEMA requirements for the regulatory floodway must also be met by applicants.
ii.
Engineering drawings consisting of the following recommended elements, as applicable:
(a)
Water surface profile, including channel flow line, existing and proposed water surface elevations and location and number designation of cross sections
(b)
Delineation of the Base Flood Elevations (BFE) as shown in the latest FEMA flood insurance study, if available
(c)
Plan view on 24-inch by 36-inch paper, including:
(i)
Scale and north arrow
(ii)
Title block
(iii)
Boundary lines and nearest street intersections
(iv)
Existing and proposed contours
(v)
Existing and proposed floodplain limits, and limits of the natural floodway and the regulatory floodway
(vi)
Area to be removed from the floodplain or area to be altered
(vii)
Top and toe of fill and/or side slopes and the numerical slope of the fill and/or side slopes labeled
(viii)
Location, dimensions, etc., of all other associated improvements or alterations to the creek and/or floodplain, such as check dams, swales, channel modifications, existing structures, etc.
(ix)
Location of cross sections
(x)
Location of all existing and proposed easements and dedications
(xi)
Site vicinity map
(d)
Plots of cross sections, including:
(i)
Scale
(ii)
Title block
(iii)
Existing and proposed ground elevations
(iv)
Cut and/or fill areas labeled
(v)
Limits of and numerical values for existing and proposed "n" values
(vi)
Equal conveyance removed from both sides
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 26
SECTION 14.1705 DRAINAGE STUDIES
A. General
It is the policy of the City of Lancaster to require a drainage study on industrial, commercial, or multiple lot residential developments to be developed in the City. If a Final Drainage Study was not completed on an area that was previously platted, a Final Drainage Study may be required at the time of permitting for improvements.
B. Preliminary Drainage Study
When Required: It is the policy of the City of Lancaster to discuss and conceptually resolve drainage issues of a development at the Preliminary Plat stage. The applicant shall submit a Preliminary Drainage Study with the submittal of any preliminary plat of a proposed development. A Preliminary Drainage Study may also be required by the City when reviewing the merits of a change in zoning, especially when the proposed use is more intense than the current land use. Approval of the preliminary plat or zoning change may be contingent on the acceptability of the solutions proposed by the Preliminary Drainage Study.
Qualification to Prepare the Study: The Preliminary Drainage Study shall be prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Texas, experienced in Civil Engineering, and having a thorough knowledge of the study of drainage issues. The Preliminary Drainage Study shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the person preparing the study.
Requirements: The requirements for a Preliminary Drainage Study shall be established and periodically updated. These requirements are found in the Storm Water Design Manual.
Exemptions: The City may waive the requirement of the Preliminary Drainage Study or may limit certain requirements where the Public Works Director determines that such requirements are not necessary for a proper review of the development.
C. Final Drainage Study
When Required: It is the policy of the City of Lancaster to resolve drainage issues of a development at the Final Plat stage. The applicant may be required to submit a Final Drainage Study with the submittal of the Final Plat, Replat or construction permitting phase, if a Final Drainage Study has not been previously completed for the proposed development or conditions have been modified. Approval of the above mentioned plats or construction may be contingent on the acceptability of the solutions proposed by the Final Drainage Study.
Qualification to Prepare the Study: The Final Drainage Study shall be prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Texas, experienced in Civil Engineering, and having a thorough knowledge of the study of drainage issues. The Final Drainage Study shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the person preparing the study.
Requirements: The requirements for a Final Drainage Study shall be established and periodically updated by the City. These requirements are found in the Storm Water Design Manual.
Exemptions: The City may waive the requirement of the Final Drainage Study or may limit certain requirements where the Public Works Director determines that such requirements are not necessary for a proper review of the development.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 27
SECTION 14.1706 RUNOFF CALCULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
A. General
The selection of an appropriate method for calculating runoff depends upon the size of the drainage area contributing runoff at a most downstream point of a project. The Rational Method is acceptable for situations in which the drainage area is generally less than 160 acres. A unit hydrograph method is required for situations with larger drainage areas. These methods are described in the Storm Water Design Manual.
Runoff computations shall be based upon fully developed watershed conditions in accordance with the City’s latest land use projections.
B. Drainage Improvements Required for Development
All developments shall provide for any new drainage systems, the improvement of any existing drainage systems, channel improvements or grading, driveway adjustments, culvert improvements or any other improvement, drainage facility, or work which is necessary to provide for the storm water drainage needs of the development and the downstream areas impacted. Sheet flow into drainage channels or creeks shall be limited to non-erosive velocities as determined in the Storm Water Design Manual.
No proposed development shall be constructed which impedes or constricts runoff from an upstream watershed based on fully developed conditions.
It shall be the developer’s responsibility to determine the type, sizes, grades and capacities of all downstream drainage systems that convey runoff from the proposed development. The developer shall verify that the capacities of these systems are not exceeded as a result of the proposed development, and if off-site improvements are required as a result of the proposed development, the developer shall be responsible for constructing the needed improvements.
If no Storm Water Master Plan for a given watershed addressing downstream drainage systems has been prepared or the factors upon which a previous Storm Water Master Plan was based have been substantially changed, as determined by the Public Works Director, the developer shall, at the developer’s sole cost and expense, have a downstream analysis prepared in accordance with the Storm Water Design Manual Criteria by a Licensed Professional Engineer. The downstream analysis shall be performed to the point where the developed property is no more than 10% of the total drainage area. The downstream analysis shall determine:
1.
the necessary future capacities of the drainage systems to adequately convey the 100-year design flows from the watershed at full development,
2.
the existing 100-year flows and runoff coefficients within the watershed prior to the proposed development,
3.
the 100-year flows and runoff coefficients generated by each undeveloped tract within the watershed at full development based on current zoning or proposed zoning,
4.
the existing 100-year flows in excess of the existing system’s capacities within the watershed, if any,
5.
the various facilities and total cost of construction to provide downstream drainage systems with adequate capacities for the 100-year full development flows within the watershed, and
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 28
6.
the proportionate share of increased runoff attributable to the development of each undeveloped tract within the watershed. This will be based upon the incremental increase in storm water runoff from each undeveloped tract at full development compared to the total increase from full development in the entire watershed above the existing 100-year flows. Portions of the watershed which lie outside the city limits of Lancaster shall be analyzed and accommodated as if fully developed.
Financing of on-site and off-site drainage facilities shall be in accordance with Section 3.1711 (Funding of Improvements) of this Ordinance.
C. Limitation of Runoff
Calculations to verify downstream adequacy shall be performed to the nearest major receiving stream or downstream to the point where the developed property is no more than 10% of the total drainage area for each proposed development. The Storm Water Design Manual details the procedure to identify the downstream point for the 10% drainage area analysis (Ten Percent Rule). The City may also require additional downstream analysis if, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, other downstream areas are prone to flooding or erosion. Runoff from that development shall be limited as follows:
1.
If the downstream analysis demonstrates that there is adequate capacity for the fully developed watershed conditions the developer may proceed with site discharge equivalent to the maximum developed for the site in the drainage analysis.
2.
If the downstream analysis demonstrates there is not adequate capacity for fully developed watershed condition, the developer shall be required to either:
a.
Limit discharge to predevelopment conditions or less, or
b.
Improve downstream structures to handle the entire fully developed watershed conditions and proceed with site discharge equivalent to the maximum developed for the site in the drainage analysis.
D. Procedure for Drainage Areas Less Than 160 Acres
Computation of storm water runoff for drainage areas less than 160 acres shall be by the Rational Method, which is based on the principle that the maximum rate of runoff from a given drainage area for an assumed rainfall intensity occurs when all parts of the area are contributing to the flow at the point of discharge. The Rational Method formula and design parameters for utilizing the formula for runoff calculation are contained in the Storm Water Design Manual.
E. Procedure for Drainage Areas Greater than 160 Acres
For drainage areas in excess of 160 acres where the use of the Rational Method does not provide reliable results, a unit hydrograph method shall be used. The use of a unit hydrograph calculation shall be based upon standard and accepted engineering principles normally used in the profession, subject to the approval of the Public Works Director. Acceptable methods and parameters for the Unit Hydrograph Method are contained in the Storm Water Design Manual.
The unit hydrograph method shall be based upon fully developed watershed conditions. The detention effects of large regional detention facilities can be taken into account in unit hydrograph methods.
Circumstances that may require the use of a unit hydrograph method include sizing open channels, reclaiming floodplains, creating lakes or building other types of drainage-related facilities on major drainage courses. Design engineers of these types of facilities should be aware that the requirement of designing for fully developed watershed conditions will mean that they will have to calculate these fully
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 29
developed flows, instead of using the flows calculated in the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) flood insurance studies. FEMA's flows shall not be used, because the flows are based upon existing watershed conditions. (For more information, see Section 3.1708 (Special Drainage Facilities) on the sizing of channels and other major drainage facilities, and Section 3.1709 (Floodplain Guidelines) for floodplain alteration procedures.)
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 30
SECTION 14.1707 DESIGN OF LOCAL DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
A. Design Storm Frequencies
The calculations of runoff quantities that must be accommodated in drainage systems require the selection of the design storm frequency. The design flood levels for various drainage facilities are found in the Storm Water Design Manual.
Drainage Facility
Design Recurrence Interval
Roadway ditches
25-year with 100-year spread of water not to extend beyond 1 open lane of traffic in residential estates type subdivisions.
Closed storm drain systems
25-year with 100-year positive overflow for inlets on grade in streets, such that the depth of flow in the street does not exceed the top of the curb. Inlet bypass flows shall be in accordance with the Storm Water Design Manual.
Closed storm drain systems and inlets at street low point, sag or sump
100-year
Culverts and bridges
100-year
Concrete-lined channels
100-year
Earthen channels
100-year
Levees
Standard project flood
Dams above natural ground/spillways
Spillway design flood varies with the class of structure (see Storm Water Design Manual)
The approved drainage system shall provide for positive overflow at all low points. The term "positive overflow" means that, when the inlets do not function properly or when the design capacity of the conduit or roadway ditch is exceeded, the excess flow can be conveyed overland along an open course. Normally, this would mean along a street or alley, but it can be constructed on private property within the dedication of a special drainage easement.
B. Storm Drain Design Standards
Storm drain design standards are found in the Storm Water Design Manual, including street and alley capacity, inlets and manholes capacity and placement, pipe and culvert design, and other standard methods and formulas for calculation of flow and depth.
C. Drainage Easements for Enclosed Storm Drains
All storm drain conduits to be dedicated to the City of Lancaster shall be located in the Right-Of-Way (R.O.W.) or in a drainage easement dedicated to the City of Lancaster at the time of final recording of a plat. Easement widths shall be determined in accordance with the Storm Water Design Manual.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 31
SECTION 14.1708 SPECIAL DRAINAGE FACILITIES
A. Channels
1. Channel Design
If the drainage area is less than 160 acres, runoff shall be contained within an underground closed system, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director. Open channels may be approved by the Public Works Director for water quality protection purposes or to protect the environmental and aesthetic benefits of trees, springs, exposed channels and other significant natural features. Criteria for the design of open channels are found in the Storm Water Design Manual.
2. Starting Water Surface Condition
When performing hydraulic analyses for channel or drainageway design, the starting water surface shall be based on the criteria found in the Storm Water Design Manual.
B. Lakes and Dams
1. General
In the event that a property owner or developer desires to create or modify an existing pond or lake or desires to impound storm water by filling or constructing an above ground dam, thereby creating a lake, pond, lagoon or basin as part of the development of that property, the criteria listed in the Storm Water Design Manual shall be met before City approval of the impoundment can be given. Ponds or lakes created by excavation of a channel area without erecting a dam above natural ground elevation or instream low water check dams are also subject to the criteria. The dam safety requirements of the State of Texas must also be met for the construction of dams, lakes and other impoundments.
2. Maintenance and Liability
a.
The owner or developer shall retain their private ownership of the constructed lake, pond or lagoon or basin and shall assume full responsibility for the protection of the general public from any health or safety hazards related to the lake, pond or lagoon constructed.
b.
The owner or developer shall assume full responsibility for the maintenance of the lake, pond or lagoon or basin constructed. The owner or developer shall keep the Public Works Director advised, in writing, of the currently responsible agent for this maintenance.
C. Levees
In the event that developers or owners wish to build levees to protect an area from flooding, applicable FEMA guidelines, State of Texas dam safety guidelines and the criteria listed in the Storm Water Design Manual shall apply.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 32
D. Detention and Retention Facilities
Detention/retention facilities to reduce runoff rates may be required due to inadequate storm drainage systems or a change in land use resulting in a significant increase in runoff. Inadequate storm drainage systems to be considered include downstream structures, channels, etc. and identifiable flood prone areas.
Detention/retention facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable design requirements of all Local, State or Federal ordinances, laws or regulations, including the regulations for dam safety of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. Detention/retention pond design criteria is outlined in the Storm Water Design Manual.
E. Flumes
Flumes are not recommended for widespread use. Flumes shall not be permitted when the purpose of a permanent flume is to carry runoff down the sides of earthen channels. A flume may be used to direct overflow runoff along property lines until the runoff can be intercepted by streets or conduit flows. Flumes crossing sidewalks shall be covered or bridged, so as to minimize danger to pedestrians. Applicants shall dedicate drainage easements for flumes. Those easements shall have sufficient width to allow future maintenance accessibility, and in no case shall the easement be less than 15 feet wide.
F. Connections from Buildings to Storm Drains
Drainage from areas such as roof tops should be allowed to flow overland before joining the storm drain system. Seepage into basements that is pumped to ground level, seepage from springs and runoff from roof drains on nonresidential buildings that would flow onto or across driveways, sidewalks or other areas commonly crossed by pedestrians or vehicles that create a public hazard or nuisance shall be tied directly to the nearest storm drain. Pumped lines from basements shall have backflow prevention devices.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 33
SECTION 14.1709 FLOODPLAIN GUIDELINES
A. Lands to Which This Section Applies
Applicants shall comply with the requirements of this Section and the Storm Water Design Manual for special flood hazard areas before making substantial improvements to or increasing the outside dimensions of an existing structure or developing land within the design flood line of a creek or stream, whether or not the land has been formally designated as a special flood hazard area. Special flood hazard areas shall also include all areas inundated by the design flood and the floodplain areas shown in the latest Flood Insurance Study and on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and subsequent amendments thereto.
B. General Floodplain Regulations
1. Regional Detention/Retention of Storm Water Runoff
Existing regional detention/retention facilities provide storm water retention as a design feature. This retention volume was considered in establishment of the design flood and shall be maintained. Natural floodplains for major streams shall be maintained to provide regional flood control measures, enhance water quality and mitigate regional erosion. Major streams for the City of Lancaster are defined in Section 3.1703.
2. Reclamation of Floodplains
Portions of the 100-year floodplain, based on fully developed conditions, may be reclaimed provided there is no increase in the water surface elevation and acceptable velocities are maintained. In addition, for major streams, an equivalent volume of valley storage must be provided within the floodplain.
3. Permitted uses of floodplain areas
To minimize possible losses of life and property, the following uses are permitted in a floodplain area, provided they are also permitted in the underlying zoning district:
a.
Farm or ranch
b.
Local utilities, electrical substation, water reservoir or pumping station and water treatment plant
c.
Public park or playground, private recreation club or area, private community center and golf course
d.
Parking lots in accordance with this Ordinance
e.
Outside commercial amusement, approved by a specific use permit
f.
Helistop, approved by a specific use permit
g.
Radio, television or microwave tower and amateur communications tower with a special permit
Structures customarily associated with the above uses may be constructed within a floodplain area only if the proposed structure meets the same engineering requirements applicable to filling in a floodplain.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 34
Open private recreation clubs or areas and private community centers without exterior walls are permitted in floodplain areas. Private facilities listed above, with enclosed walls that would incur damage, are not permitted in floodplain areas.
Uses and structures other than those mentioned above shall not be permitted in floodplain areas.
C. General Standards
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
1.
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
2.
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
3.
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
4.
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding according to established design flood elevations.
5.
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into the flood waters.
6.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Specific Standards
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction
New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to a minimum of one foot (1') above the design flood (i.e., fully developed conditions 100-year) elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or registered professional land surveyor (RPLS) shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied.
2. Nonresidential Construction
New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at a minimum of one foot (1') above the design flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 35
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
3. Enclosures
New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a.
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b.
The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot above grade.
c.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Manufactured Homes
a.
All manufactured homes to be placed within a special flood hazard area shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b.
Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within a special flood hazard area must be located in one of the following:
i.
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
ii.
in a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
iii.
in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or
iv.
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one foot (1') above the design flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
5. Recreational Vehicles
Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within special flood hazard areas either:
a.
be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or
b.
be full licensed and ready for highway use, or
c.
meet the permit requirements of this Ordinance and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 36
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
6. Streets, Parking Lots and Bridges
The top of the curb or street crown of all new streets to be built in reclaimed floodplain areas shall be at least one foot (1’) above the design flood elevation. The low beam of all new bridges to be constructed across floodplains shall be a minimum of one foot (1’) above the design flood elevation. All new private bridges to individual homes shall have their low beams at one foot above the design flood elevation. Parking lots associated with residential uses in reclaimed floodplain areas shall be at least at the design flood elevation. Parking lots for commercial and industrial uses may be built at one foot below the design flood elevation. Parking lots for public parks or playgrounds, private recreation clubs or areas, private community centers and golf courses may be located below the design flood elevation if approved by the Public Works Director.
7. Utilities
All new and replacement water supply systems, sanitary sewer facilities and other public utilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
8. Fences
In any floodplain or positive overflow areas, fences (private and public screening) shall be constructed such that blockage of surface water flow does not occur.
9. Trees
The planting of trees in existing drainage channels, designated floodways, floodplain or floodway easements, hazard setback zones, or positive overflow areas shall not be allowed if it will impede the natural flow of the drainage channels designated floodway, floodplain or floodway easement, hazard setback zone or positive overflow area.
10. Fill Areas
Where fill is proposed for placement to raise the ground surface to at least one foot (1’) above the design flood elevation, design engineers proposing the reclamation shall demonstrate that the fill will not settle below the design elevation of the fill; and that the fill will be adequately protected from erosion, scour or differential settlement. Fill slopes shall be permanently protected from erosion losses by grassing, establishing vegetative cover approved by the Public Works Director or installing channel linings when allowed by the other provisions of this ordinance. A qualified geotechnical analysis certifying compaction of the fill to no less than 95 percent of the standard proctor densities is required. For structures built on fill in or near the flood plain, a minimum setback distance of 20 feet from the flood plain will be required in accordance with guidelines in FIA-TB-10 issued by FEMA.
11. Additional Construction Standards for Structures
All substantial improvements and new construction permitted in a floodplain area must comply with the following requirements:
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 37
a.
Structures must be securely anchored to the foundation to prevent flotation and collapse during inundation and designed to prevent damage to nonstructural elements during inundation.
b.
Thermal insulation used below the first floor elevation must be of a type that does not absorb water.
c.
Adhesives must have a bonding strength that is unaffected by inundation.
d.
Doors and all wood trim must be sealed with a waterproof paint or similar product.
e.
Mechanical, electrical and utility equipment shall be located a minimum of one foot (1’) above the design flood elevation.
f.
Water heaters, furnaces, electrical distribution panels and other critical mechanical or electrical installations must not be placed in basements. Electrical circuits for basements shall be separate from circuits serving floors above the basement, and circuits for basements shall be installed lowered from above.
g.
Basements are permitted for nonresidential structures only if they are designed to preclude inundation by the design flood elevation, either by:
i.
the elimination of exterior openings below the design flood elevation, or
ii.
the use of watertight closures, such as bulkheads and flood shields. However, no basements are permitted in soil whose permeability meets or exceeds the minimum local standards of permeability established for the installation of individual sewer disposal systems.
h.
Plywood used at or below the lowest floor elevation must be of an "exterior" or "marine" grade and of a water-resistant or waterproof variety.
i.
Wood flooring used at or below the lowest floor elevation must be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without incurring structural damage to the building.
j.
Basement ceilings for nonresidential structures must be of sufficient wet strength and be so installed as to survive inundation.
k.
Paints or other finishes used at or below the lowest floor elevation must be capable of surviving inundation.
l.
All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the lowest floor elevation must be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
m.
Tanks must be vented at a location above the design flood elevation.
E. Standards for Subdivision Proposals
1.
All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of this Ordinance.
2.
Design flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than either 50 lots or 5 acres, if not otherwise provided pursuant to this Ordinance.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 38
3.
All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
4.
All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
F. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazard associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. The following provisions apply:
1.
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
2.
All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
a.
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two (2’) feet if no depth number is specified), or
b.
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
3.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this section are satisfied.
4.
Within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures, are required.
G. Floodways
Floodways - Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
1.
Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses preformed in accordance with standard engineering practice by a licensed professional engineer or architect that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the design and base flood discharges, and approval of the Public Works Director is obtained.
2.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Ordinance.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 39
H.
Verification of Floodplain Alterations
1.
Certified Minimum Proposed Finished Floor Elevations (FFEs)
Prior to final acceptance by the city of utilities, street or other public construction for projects involving floodplain alterations or adjacent to defined floodplains, creeks, channels and drainage ways, a certified statement shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor or licensed professional engineer, showing that all lot elevations, as developed within the subject project, meet or exceed the required minimum finished floor elevations (FFEs) shown on the plans and plat. This certification shall be filed with the City.
2.
Certified Elevations of Constructed Finished Floor
In addition, at any time in the future when a building permit is desired for existing platted property which is subject to flooding or carries a specified or recorded minimum finished flood elevation, a registered professional land surveyor or a licensed professional engineer shall prepare a certified statement that sites are built to the design elevations. The certified survey data showing the property to be at or above the specified elevation shall be furnished to the Floodplain Administrator for approval. A certificate of compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, pertaining to specified finished floor elevations, shall be required.
3.
Issuance of Development Permits
The applicants shall furnish, at their expense, to the Floodplain Administrator the above certifications and any other certified engineering and surveying information requested by the Floodplain Administrator to confirm that the required minimum floor and pad elevations have been achieved. Development permits shall not be issued until a conditional letter of map revision or amendment has been issued by FEMA.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 40
SECTION 14.1710 EROSION CONTROL GUIDELINES
A. Lands to Which This Section Applies
Private property owners, developers or builders shall be accountable for any erosion of their property or construction site which results in accumulation of sediment in dedicated streets, alleys, any waterway or other private properties. Any accumulation or deposit of soil material beyond the limits of the property or in City streets, alleys or drainage facilities in an amount sufficient to constitute a threat to public safety and comfort as determined by the City shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. The only exceptions to this provision are lands under active agricultural use. As soon as construction or modification to the exempted land is to begin so that the use of the land will change from agriculture to any other use, then the land shall lose its exemption and become subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. General Guidelines
1.
Maximum use shall be made of vegetation to minimize soil loss.
2.
Natural vegetation should be retained wherever possible.
3.
Where inadequate natural vegetation exists or where it becomes necessary to remove existing natural vegetation, temporary controls shall be installed promptly to minimize soil loss and reduce erosion and sedimentation to the greatest degree practicable.
4.
Wherever possible during construction, erosion controls and Best Management Practices shall be used on hillsides to slow drainage flow rate.
5.
Erosion control elements and Best Management Practices must be installed prior to the start of construction activity in accordance with applicable TCEQ storm water general permit requirements.
6.
Waste or disposal areas and construction roads should be located and constructed in a manner that shall minimize the amount of sediment entering streams.
7.
Frequent fording of live streams shall not be permitted; therefore, temporary bridges or other structures shall be used wherever an appreciable number of stream crossings are necessary.
8.
When work areas or material sources are located in or adjacent to live streams, such areas shall be separated from the stream by a dike or other barrier to keep sediment from entering a flowing stream. Care shall be taken during the construction and removal of such barriers to minimize the sediment transport into a stream.
9.
Should preventative measures fail to function effectively, the applicant shall act immediately to bring the erosion and/or siltation under control by whatever additional means are necessary.
10.
Erosion control devices shall be placed to trap any losses from stockpiled topsoil.
11.
The selection and timing of the installation of erosion controls shall be based upon weather and seasonal conditions that could make certain controls not practicable.
12.
Vegetation used for vegetative cover shall be suitable for local soil and weather conditions. Ground cover plants shall comply with listings from the Texas Agricultural Extension Service for North Central Texas.
13.
Runoff shall be diverted away from construction areas as much as possible.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 41
14.
Stripping of vegetation from project sites shall be phased to the degree practicable so as to expose the minimum amount of area to soil erosion for the shortest possible period of time. Phasing shall also consider the varying requirements of an erosion control plan at different stages of construction.
15.
Final acceptance shall also be contingent upon having all necessary erosion control measures installed to minimize off-site sediment. A site may be accepted without erosion control measures if perennial vegetative cover is actively growing.
C. Erosion Control Required
1. State Requirements
The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) regulates storm water discharges from construction sites. Prior to initiating any construction project, the state requirements should be reviewed to determine the current requirements. TCEQ requirements for storm water protection from construction activity must be followed. For construction activity that disturbs one or more acres, a storm water pollution prevention plan must be developed and erosion control measures must be implemented throughout construction activity. To obtain coverage under the general permit for construction activities which disturb more than five acres, a Notice of Intent (NOI) must be prepared and submitted to the TCEQ. The NOI must include certification that a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) has prepared in accordance with the requirements of the general permit.
For storm water discharges from construction sites five acres or larger into the City’s storm sewer system, a copy of the completed NOI must be submitted to the City Engineer. For storm water discharges from construction sites between one and five acres into the City’s storm sewer system, a copy of the construction site notice must be submitted to City Engineer.
2. Application of Section
A Responsible Party engaging in any land disturbing activity or any construction activities shall prepare an Erosion Control Plan and submit that Plan to the City Engineer for approval. This Ordinance shall apply regardless of whether a Responsible Party is required to obtain a permit from the City in order to conduct such land disturbing or construction activity. The Responsible Party shall also be held liable for violations of this Ordinance committed by third parties engaging in activities related to the Responsible Party’s project.
3. Erosion Control Plan Implementation and Compliance
Each Responsible Party shall implement and maintain the erosion control measures shown on its approved Erosion Control Plan in order to minimize the erosion and the transport of silt, earth, topsoil, etc., by water runoff or construction activities, beyond the limits of the Responsible Party’s site onto City streets, drainage easements, drainage facilities, storm drains of other City property prior to beginning any land disturbing activity.
4.
Off-Site Borrow, Spoil and Staging Areas
Where applicable, off-site borrow areas, spoil areas and construction staging areas shall be considered as part of the project site and shall be governed by this Ordinance.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 42
5.
Related Land Areas
The erosion control requirements of this Ordinance shall apply to all related land areas. Additionally, when land disturbing activity occurs on a project, all disturbed land areas related to the project shall have permanent erosion control established before final occupancy of structures located thereon or final acceptance of the subdivision may be obtained. This section applies whether or not a building permit is required.
6.
Below Ground Installations
All discharges resulting from below ground installations shall be passed through City approved erosion control devices or removed from the site for proper disposal.
D. Erosion Control Plans
Each Erosion Control Plan required by this Ordinance shall clearly identify all erosion and sediment control measures to be installed and maintained throughout the duration of the project for which that Plan is submitted. The Responsible Party shall install and maintain erosion control devices in accordance with the City-approved Erosion Control Plan as required by this Ordinance.
E. Development Compliance
When construction or land disturbing activities are conducted as part of a construction project, permanent erosion control shall be established prior to the occupancy of any structure. Phased occupancy shall be allowed only when there are no outstanding erosion control violations for the project for which the request is made.
In addition to the other requirements of this Ordinance, when construction or land disturbing activities are conducted as part of a project, the following shall apply:
1. Erosion Control Deposit Account
Prior to the Pre-construction Meeting, the Developer shall submit an Erosion Control Plan for approval by the City and shall pay an erosion control deposit to the City in the amount of $500.00 per acre with a maximum of $20,000.00 and a minimum of $1,000.00. If a Developer has more than one subdivision under construction, a deposit account shall be established for each development. The deposit(s) shall be posted to compel the Developer to implement and maintain the City approved Erosion Control Plan. At no time shall a deposit balance fall below $5,000.00, or the initial deposit amount, whichever is less. If the fund has less than $5,000.00, work on the project shall stop until additional funds are deposited to bring the balance above $5,000.00. No inspection of any type may be performed on a project or portion thereof until a City approved Erosion Control Plan is implemented by the Responsible Party.
2. Final Acceptance
Permanent erosion control devices and when applicable, temporary erosion control devices, as specified in the approved Erosion Control Plan shall be installed and maintained prior to final acceptance of a subdivision. The Developer for such subdivision shall continue to maintain all temporary erosion control devices until permanent erosion control has been established on all those lots within the subdivision for which a building permit has not been issued.
3. Transfer of Property by Developer
If the Developer sells all of the lots in a subdivision to one purchaser, that purchaser:
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 43
a.
becomes the Responsible Party for the subdivision,
b.
is liable for violation of this Ordinance, and
c.
shall post an erosion control deposit as required by this Ordinance.
The balance remaining in the original Developer’s account shall be released as provided herein upon the submission of written proof of transfer of lots and a new erosion control deposit by the purchaser. As required by this Ordinance, the purchaser shall post an erosion control deposit with the City.
4. Deductions from Erosion Control Deposit Account/Stop Work Orders/Citation
The City shall inspect the erosion control devices located at a site for compliance with the approved Erosion Control plan submitted by a Developer. If a Developer fails to implement or maintain erosion control devices as specified in his approved Erosion Control Plan, the City shall provide such party with written notice of noncompliance identifying the nature of the noncompliance. Such notice shall also inform the Developer of the circumstances under which a deduction from his deposit account will be made and the time frame for the filing of an appeal of such action by the City. The Developer shall have twenty-four (24) hours to bring his erosion control devices into compliance with the approved Erosion Control Plan for the site to which notice of noncompliance was issued. Correction shall include sediment clean-up, erosion control device repair, erosion control device maintenance and/or installation of additional erosion control devices to prevent re-occurrence of the violation. The twenty-four (24) hour cure period, may be extended for inclement weather or other factors at the discretion of the City.
At the end of twenty-four (24) hour cure period, the City shall re-inspect the site and shall deduct a re-inspection fee of $75.00 from the Developer’s erosion control deposit account. If at the time of such re-inspection, the erosion control devices at the site have not been brought into compliance with the approved Erosion Control Plan, the City may issue a stop work order and issue a citation for each violation of this Ordinance.
If a violation is not resolved within the twenty-four (24) hour cure period, the City may, at its sole discretion, cause erosion control devices to be installed or repaired, sediment to be removed, or take other actions necessary to correct the problem. Costs for such work, an administration fee, and re-inspection fees shall be charged against the Erosion Control Deposit Account. Stop work orders shall be issued until the total amount of charges is refunded by the Developer into the Erosion Control Deposit Account. A citation shall also be issued for each violation in which the City acts to cure the violation. The Responsible Party shall have the right of appeal as set forth in this Ordinance.
5. Erosion Control Deposit Account Balance-Deposit Refund
After building permits have been issued for ninety percent (90%) of the lots within the development, the Developer may request the return of the remainder of his deposit by submitting a written request to the City Engineer. However, the Developer shall continue to maintain temporary erosion control devices on those remaining lots for which building permits have not been issued and for any other areas upon which permanent erosion control has not been established. The balance of the deposit remaining in an account after deductions for all violations have been made shall be refunded within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written request for refund along with a list of all deductions made from the deposit account. The Responsible Party shall have the right of appeal as set forth in this Ordinance.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 44
6. Erosion Control Deposits
Erosion control deposits posted pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance shall not accrue interest.
F. Residential Lots with a Building Permit
When land disturbing activities are conducted on a residential lot for which a building permit must be issued, the Responsible Party shall comply with the following:
1. Erosion Control Plan
Prior to approval of a building permit for a residential lot by the City, the Builder/Contractor of other Responsible Party obtaining the building permit shall submit an Erosion Control Plan for approval by the City. No construction may be performed on a project until a City-approved Erosion Control Plan is implemented.
2. Stop Work Order/Citation
The City shall inspect the erosion control devices located at a site for compliance with the approved Erosion Control Plan submitted for such site. If a Responsible Party fails to implement or maintain erosion control devices as specified in the approved Erosion Control Plan, the City shall provide such party with written notice of noncompliance identifying the nature of such noncompliance. The Responsible Party shall have twenty-four (24) hours to bring the erosion control devices into compliance with the intent of the approved Erosion Control Plan for the site where the violation occurred. Modifications to the approved erosion control plan may be required to maintain all sediment on-site. Correction shall include sediment clean-up, erosion control device repair, erosion control device maintenance, and/or installation of additional erosion control devices to prevent re-occurrence of the violation. The twenty-four (24) hour cure period may be extended for inclement weather or other factors at the discretion of the Building Official. If the intent of the approved control plan (maintaining sediment on-site) is not met, then the Responsible Party shall take action within twenty-four (24) hours to control soil eroding from the site and clean up any sediment and shall have one week to submit a new erosion control plan. Work may continue during the review period. Implementation of this plan shall be required within twenty-four (24) hours of plan approval by the City. If no plan is submitted within one week, then construction activities shall be halted until a new plan is submitted and approved.
At the end of the twenty-four (24) hour cure period, the City shall re-inspect the site and may assess a re-inspection fee. If at the time of such re-inspection, the erosion control devices at the site have not been brought into compliance with the approved Erosion Control Plan, the City may issue a stop work order and issue a citation for each violation of the City’s erosion control requirements. When a stop work order has been issued, a re-inspection fee shall be assessed. To obtain a re-inspection for removal of the stop work order, a request must be submitted therefore and a re-inspection fee of $75.00 shall be paid.
3. Removal of Erosion Control Devices
Upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or upon establishing permanent ground cover on a lot, all temporary erosion control devices shall be removed.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 45
G. Enforcement
1. Violations
It shall be an offense for a Responsible Party or a third party performing work on a project to violate any of the requirements of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, the following:
a.
Conducting any land disturbing or construction activity without an approved Erosion Control Plan for the location where the violation occurred
b.
Failing to install erosion control devices or to maintain erosion control devices throughout the duration of land disturbing activities, in compliance with the approved Erosion Control Plan for the location where the violation occurred
c.
Failing to remove off-site sedimentation that is a direct result of land disturbing activities where such off-site sedimentation results from the failure to implement or maintain erosion control devices as specified in an approved Erosion Control Plan for the location where the violation occurred
d.
Allowing sediment laden water resulting from below ground installations to flow from a site without being treated through an erosion control device
e.
Failing to repair damage to existing erosion control devices, including replacement of existing grass or sod
2. Notice of Violation
Written notice of violation shall be given to the Responsible Party or his job site representative as identified in the Erosion Control Plan for a site. Such notice shall identify the nature of the alleged violation and the action required to obtain compliance with the intent of the approved Erosion Control Plan.
3. Class C Misdemeanor
Any person, firm, or corporation performing land disturbing activities and violating any of the provisions or terms of this Ordinance and not complying within the time periods stated in this document shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
H. Appeals
1. Appeal to Public Works Director
Upon notice of noncompliance, a Responsible Party may appeal the City’s decision to take deductions from his erosion control deposit pursuant to Section 3.1711, subsection A of this Ordinance, by filing a written appeal to the Public Works Director within seven (7) days of the City’s written notice of its intent to make such deduction for costs as allowed herein. An Appeal filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the basis for the aggrieved party’s challenge to the City’s authority to take deductions under this Ordinance.
2. Standard for Appeals
When reviewing an appeal filed pursuant to this Section, the Public Works Director shall evaluate all evidence submitted. The burden of proving that a violation of this Ordinance occurred shall be on the City. The City shall provide evidence sufficient to reasonably support a determination
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 46
that the Responsible Party failed to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance as alleged by the City.
3. Issuance of Opinion by Director
Decisions of the Public Works Director shall be issued within twenty (20) days of the City’s receipt of the written appeal. Decisions of the Public Works Director shall be final.
I.
Stream Bank Erosion
Erosion control shall be provided along streams and drainage channels. This Ordinance provides for erosion hazard setback zones along streams for which natural channels are to be preserved. Where bank stabilization or other erosion protection measures are required to protect streams and channels, the practices provided in the Storm Water Design Manual for the City of Lancaster shall be utilized as approved by the City.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 47
SECTION 14.1711 FUNDING OF IMPROVEMENTS
A.
Developer Responsibilities
1.
On-Site Improvements
a.
The on-site drainage system improvements required by a proposed development shall be identified in the Preliminary Drainage Study and Final Drainage Study for that development and located completely within the limits of the proposed development, unless otherwise authorized by the City as part of an executed agreement.
b.
The cost of any on-site drainage system improvements required by this Ordinance or proposed by the Developer shall be financed entirely by the Developer.
c.
If the City determines that enlargement of the on-site drainage improvements beyond the requirements of this Ordinance is beneficial to the City, the City shall fund the difference between the enlarged drainage improvements and the on-site drainage improvements required by this Ordinance, if adequate funds are available.
2.
Off-Site Improvements
a.
If the Preliminary Drainage Study or Final Drainage Study demonstrates that off-site drainage improvements are not required due to adequate downstream capacity for the fully developed watershed conditions, the Developer may proceed with site discharge equivalent to or less than the maximum developed for the site in the Preliminary or Final Drainage Study.
b.
If the Preliminary or Final Drainage Study identifies necessary off-site drainage system improvements due to only partially adequate downstream capacity for the fully developed conditions, the Developer must conduct the following with the approval of the City and the affected downstream property Owners:
i.
Improve downstream structures to handle the development’s impact at the fully developed watershed condition and proceed with site discharge equivalent to or less than the maximum developed for the site in the Drainage Study, or
ii.
Improve downstream structures to handle the flow of fully developed discharge of the site under development and the discharge for existing conditions on other areas in the watershed, or
iii.
Limit the post-development discharge to pre-development discharge or less.
c.
The Developer shall be responsible for financing the Developer’s equitable share of improvements to off-site drainage systems that are not adequate to convey the design runoff from the proposed development.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 48
3.
Developer-Proposed Improvements that Exceed Ordinance Requirements
If the Developer proposes drainage system improvements that exceed the requirements of this Ordinance, the Developer shall be responsible for financing the entirety of the improvements.
4.
Regional Detention/Retention Facilities
For regional detention/retention facilities proposed by a Developer, the engineering analysis to evaluate the upstream and downstream impacts shall be financed by the Developer and approved by the City.
B.
City Participation
1.
If enlargement of off-site drainage improvements beyond the requirements of this Ordinance is determined to be beneficial to the City, the City may fund the difference between the enlarged drainage improvements and the off-site drainage improvements required by this Ordinance, if adequate funds are available.
2.
Where the City is requested to participate in the construction of drainage improvements, the City may participate in the cost of such drainage improvements in an amount not to exceed the difference in the total cost of the drainage improvements and the cost of the drainage improvements required for the Developer as specified in the Storm Water Ordinance.
3.
Where the City agrees to participate in the construction of drainage improvements, and adequate City funds are not available, the Developer may elect to provide for financing of improvements.
a.
Upon prior execution of an agreement with the City for reimbursement, the Developer is entitled to recover from the City the portion of the improvements attributable to the City once City funds become available.
b.
Where City funds are not available, the Developer may elect to finance the entire improvements.
4.
City Financing Mechanisms
a.
The City may establish a storm water utility fee to provide funding for drainage-related activities, including but not limited to the construction, operations, and maintenance of drainage facilities.
b.
The City may establish a drainage impact fee for an entire watershed or sub-watershed(s) to finance the cost of drainage improvements.
c.
The City may require Developers and/or Builders to establish and maintain an Erosion Control Deposit Account to implement and provide for continued maintenance of the Site Erosion Control Plan submitted to and approved by the City.
City of Lancaster Storm Water Management Ordinance
Page 49
SECTION 14.1712 ADOPTION
WHEREAS, the present Storm Water Management Ordinance of the City of Lancaster does not provide for adequate storm drainage facilities, flood control, erosion control and water quality pollution prevention in the developed and developing areas within the jurisdiction of the City, and that the inadequacy constitutes an urgency in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare, this ordinance shall become effective on July 26, 2004, except that documents meeting at least one of the following conditions shall be exempted from provisions of this ordinance exceeding requirements of the previously adopted Storm Water Management Ordinance:
1.
Buildings or subdivision phases for which a complete preliminary plat has been accepted but not recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance and for which construction of such subdivision phase or building is underway within one year of the effective date of the ordinance
2.
Buildings for which a complete site plan has been accepted prior to the effective date of the ordinance and for which construction is underway within one year of the effective date of the ordinance
3.
Buildings for which a plat has been recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance but for which a complete site plan has not been accepted prior to the effective date of the ordinance, and for which construction is underway within one year of the date of recording of the final plat
4.
Subdivisions recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance for which a replat is filed
5.
Subdivisions recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance for which a replat is being filed, provided that the number of lots is not being increased through the replat and provided that no other substantive changes to the subdivision design are proposed; except that it is expressly provided that no developments shall be exempted from provisions of Sections 14.1709 and 14.1710 of this ordinance relating to Floodplain Guidelines and Erosion Control Guidelines, respectively.
DULY PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of Lancaster, Texas, on this the 26th day of July, A.D. 2004.
CORRECTLY ENROLLED:
Dolle K. Shane, City Secretary

Zone standards
District
Maximum Density
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling
Front Yard Setback
Rear Yard Set Back
Side Yard Setback
Max. Building Height
AR 0.2 NA 40 ft. 25 ft. 10% 50 ft. 35 ft.
SF-1 1 2,100 sq. ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft.
SF-2 2 2,100 sq. ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 
SF-4 4 2,100 sq. ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 
SF-5 5 1,750 sq. ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 
SF-6 6 1,750 sq. ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 35 ft. 
R1 7 1,750 sq. ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft.
R2 6 1,200 sq. ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 7 ft. 35 ft. 
R3 16 1,500 sq. ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft.
MH 6.6 1,350 sq. ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 35 ft. 
MF-16 16  800 sq. ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 
NS - - - - 25 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft.

Notes:
1. Guest Quarters/ Secondary Living Units are allowed but must meet the standards for such units in Article IV Permissible Uses.
2. For Residential Portable and Accessory Buildings Setbacks, see Sub-Section 3.1 General Residential Standards
4. Accessory buildings such as garages without guest quarters/secondary living unit, shall be a maximum of 20 feet in height; 15 ft. in MH.
5. Garages/Carports must be setback a minimum of 20 feet from side or rear property lines that they face.
6. Corner lots should be a minimum of 10% larger than the average internal lots.
7. 1,200 s.f. for a 2-bedroom unit, 1,000 s.f. for a 1 bedroom unit.
8. 30 ft. setback from a public roadway; 15 ft. from a private road.
9. If rear wall contains windows or doors then there shall be a 20 ft. setback from residentially zoned property.
10. If side yard is adjacent to residentially zoned property, then a 10 ft. side yard shall be required; 20 ft. in CH; 30 ft. in CS.
11. 140 ft. in height, but shall not exceed 60 ft. in height within 100 ft. of a property zoned as MF, 2F, or SF.
12. The minimum Dwelling size is modified for a certain percentage of units by the requirement for Empty Nester type homes.
June 28, 2021
City of Lancaster Zoning Ordinance
3. Side yard setback adjacent to a side street must equal at least 85% of the minimum required front yard setback; 100% for MF and other non-residential
uses.