CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LIVE OAK, TEXAS 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted: May 27, 1986 
Effective: May 27, 1986 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF LIVE OAK, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ralph Cullip 
Mayor 
____________ 
Norm Tremblay 
Ronald McConnell 
Walter Conway 
Barry Martin 
City Council 
____________ 
Charles W. Pinto 
City Manager 
____________ 
Mayo J. Galindo 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Marian Elbel 
City Secretary 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF LIVE OAK, TEXAS 
2010 
____________ 
Mary Dennis 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ed Cimics 
Susan R. Kirschner 
Loretta L. Kusek 
Robert "Bob" Tullgren 
City Council 
____________ 
Matt Smith 
City Manager 
____________ 
Debby Goza 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code is a codification of the ordinances of Live Oak, Texas, of a general and permanent nature. 
    The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the tenth section of Chapter 9 is 9-10. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 6-4 and 6-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 6-4.1, 6-4.2 and 6-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices of the Code have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indicates themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Zanne Ebersole, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Ms. Debby Goza, City Secretary for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
  
  
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO: 1411 
    AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF LIVE OAK, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIVE OAK, TEXAS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Live Oak, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 24, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 14, 2008, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not greater than that allowed to be imposed by a home rule municipality, given the nature and type of offense, under state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code Section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 14, 2008 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective September 29, 2009. 
Passed and adopted this 29 th day of September, 2009. 
/s/ Joseph W. Painter 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Deborah L. Goza 
      City Secretary     
APPROVED AS TO LEGAL SUFFICIENCY: 
      City Attorney's Office   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 3 1412  9-29-09 Included 1161 11-12-02 Included 1433  8-10-10 Included 1437  9-14-10 Omitted 1438  9-14-10 Omitted 1439  9-28-10 Included 1440 10-12-10 Included 1441 10-12-10 Omitted 1445 12-14-10 Included 1447  2-22-11 Included 1448  2-22-11 Omitted 1449  3-29-11 Omitted 1823(Res.)  5-23-11 Included 1451  5-31-11 Included 1452  6-28-11 Included 1454  7-26-11 Include 1458 10-25-11 Included 1460  1-10-12 Included 1461  1-10-12 Included 1464  2-14-12 Included 1466  6-12-12 Included 1467  6-12-12 Included Supp. No. 4 1469  6-26-12 Included 1471  7-31-12 Included 1475  1- 8-13 Included 1849(Res.)  5-15-13 Omitted 1850(Res.)  5-28-13 Included Supp. No. 5 1483  8-13-13 Included 1484  8-27-13 Included 1487 10-29-13 Included 1488 11-12-13 Included 1489 12-10-13 Included 1490 12-10-13 Omitted 1502  7- 8-14 Omitted Supp. No. 6 1842(Res.)  6-12-12 Included 1479  6-25-13 Omitted 1482  7-30-13 Omitted 1492  1-28-14 Included 1500  5-27-14 Omitted 1508  1-13-15 Omitted 1509  1-27-15 Included 1513  4-14-15 Omitted 1514  4-28-15 Omitted 1517  5-26-15 Included Supp. No. 7 1496  3-25-14 Omitted 1518  6- 9-15 Included 1519  6-30-15 Omitted 1520  8-11-15 Omitted 1521  8-11-15 Included 1522  9- 8-15 Omitted 1523  9- 8-15 Omitted 1524  9-29-15 Included 1525  9-29-15 Omitted 1526 10-27-15 Omitted 1527  1-26-16 Omitted 1528  3- 8-16 Omitted 1529  3- 8-16 Omitted 1530  5-10-16 Included 1531  5-10-16 Included 1532  5-31-16 Omitted Supp. No. 8 1533  7-12-16 Included 1534  7-26-16 Omitted 1536  9-13-16 Omitted 1537  9-13-16 Omitted 1538  9-13-16 Omitted 1539  9-27-16 Included 1540 10-25-16 Omitted 1541 11- 8-16 Included 1542  1-31-17 Omitted 1544  3-28-17 Omitted Supp. No. 9 1547  6-27-17 Omitted 1548  9-12-17 Omitted 1549  9-12-17 Omitted 1551  9-26-17 Included 1552  9-26-17 Included 1553 10-30-17 Included 1554 11-28-17 Omitted 1556  1-30-18 Included 1922 (Res.)  1-30-18 Included 1559  3-27-18 Included 1560  3-27-18 Included 1561  5- 8-18 Omitted 1562  5-29-18 Omitted 1563  5-29-18 Included 1564  5-29-18 Omitted Supp. No. 10 1255  5-30-06 Included 1849(Res.)  5-15-13 Omitted 1565  6-26-18 Included 1566  6-26-18 Included 1569  9-25-18 Omitted 1570 10-30-18 Omitted 1571 12-11-18 Omitted 1573  2-26-19 Omitted 1574  2-26-19 Omitted 1575  3-26-19 Omitted 1576  3-26-19 Omitted 1577  3-26-19 Included 1578  3-26-19 Included 1579  4-30-19 Included 1580  4-30-19 Included 1581  6-11-19 Included  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the citizens of Live Oak, Texas, in order to establish a home rule municipal government, provide for the future progress of our city and obtain more fully the benefits of local self-government, do hereby adopt this home rule charter in accordance with the statutes of the State of Texas; and do hereby declare the residents of the City of Live Oak in Bexar County, Texas, living within the legally established boundaries of the said city, to be a political subdivision of the State of Texas incorporated forever under the name and style of the "City of Live Oak" with such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The home rule charter of the city is set out herein in Part I as approved by the voters of the city at an election on August 31, 1976, and as amended by a vote of the citizenry on April 2, 1983. The charter is set out as adopted except that certain minor nonsubstantive changes have been made for purposes of maintaining a uniform printing style and material in brackets has been inserted where necessary for clarification. 

ARTICLE I. - BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.01 - Boundaries established. 
    The boundaries of the City of Live Oak are hereby established as described in the original order of incorporation and in current or future city ordinances and displayed on an official map maintained and kept on file by the city secretary. 
Section 1.02 - Extension of boundaries. 
    Additional territory may be annexed to the city in any manner and by any procedure that may now be provided by law or that may be hereafter provided by law. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
Section 1.03 - Disannexation. 
    Any area of the City may be disannexed pursuant to any procedure allowed under state law and whenever, in the opinion of the City Council, there exists within the corporate limits of the City a territory not suitable or necessary for City purposes, the City Council may by ordinance discontinue said territory as part of the City after notice and a public hearing. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Ref. of 5-9-09) 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY 

Section 2.01 - General powers. 
    The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under this charter and the constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. 
Section 2.02 - Construction. 
    With the consent of the city council, the powers of the city under this charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in the article. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90) 
Section 2.03 - Intergovernmental relations. 
    The city may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more states or civil divisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof. 
Section 2.04 - Eminent domain. 
    The city shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this charter or by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The city may exercise the power of eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the city to take the fee in land so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purpose, excluding the taking of private property for the purposes of subsequent private development. 
(Ref. of 5-13-06) 
Section 2.05 - Acquisition. 
    The city may acquire, own, operate and maintain any character of public utility, including, without limitation, water, sanitary sewer, gas, light, power, telephone, telegraph and transportation systems, by any lawful means. 
Section 2.06 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former § 2.06, which exempted the city from giving court cost security, was deleted because such subject is now covered by Section 6.002 of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code. The deletion was approved at referendum on May 5, 1990. 
ARTICLE III. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 3.01 - Establishment. 
    The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council manager government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the statutes of this state, and this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the "city council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the city manager, who in turn shall be held responsible to the city council for the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, subject to the state constitution and statutes of the state, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY COUNCIL 

Section 4.01 - Number, selection and term. 
    The city council shall be composed of the mayor and five (5) council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected from the city at large. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided in Article IX of this charter for two (2) year terms. Each council member shall occupy a position on the council, such positions being numbered one (1) through five (5). At the first general election held under this charter and each odd numbered year thereafter, council members to fill positions 1, 3, and 5 shall be elected. The following year and each even numbered year thereafter, the mayor and the council members filling positions 2 and 4 shall be elected. 
Section 4.02 - Qualifications. 
    The mayor and each council member must, at time of taking office, have attained the age of 21, be a qualified voter and have been a resident of the city for at least twelve (12) consecutive months. 
Section 4.03 - Judge of election qualifications. 
    The city council is the final judge of all elections and the qualifications of its members and any other elected officials of the city. 
Section 4.04 - Compensation. 
    Members of the city council shall serve with such compensation as determined by the council. An increase in compensation shall not be effective for any member of the council during the term for which elected and the increase was voted. Payment of expenses incurred in performance of official duty may be approved by the council. 
Section 4.05 - Mayor. 
    The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city council and shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law. The mayor may debate and discuss any matters before the council but may vote only in the event of a tie. The mayor shall, when authorized by the council, sign all official documents such as conveyance, grant agreements, official plats, contracts and bonds. With consent of the council, the mayor shall appoint special committees deemed advisable and as instructed by the council. These committees are temporary in nature and are to perform some special task, secure more information, investigate a situation and ultimately bring back a report or a recommendation to the council. The mayor shall perform such other duties consistent with this charter or as may be imposed by the council. The mayor shall sign such ordinances and resolutions as the incumbent may approve. The mayor may delay any ordinance or resolution passed by the council by: 
(1)  Not signing it, and taking no further action with respect thereto, in which case such ordinance or resolution shall go into effect without the mayor's signature following the expiration of three (3) days after the date of passage of the same, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays provided by state law. 
(2)  Not signing it and filing written objections with the city secretary not later than the third (3rd) day after the date of passage of the same, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays provided by state law, in which case such ordinance or resolution shall not go into effect. The resolution or ordinance must be reconsidered at the next regular meeting, at which time an affirmative vote of the majority of the whole number of council members present shall constitute enactment. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Ref. of 5-2-98; Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
Section 4.06 - Mayor pro-tem. 
    The mayor pro-tem shall be a council member elected by the council at the first regular council meeting following each regular city election. The mayor pro-tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor and when acting in this capacity he shall retain the right to vote. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98) 
Section 4.07 - Vacancies, forfeiture, filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies: The office of a council member or office of the mayor shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, mental or physical disability, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture of incumbent's office. Determination of mental or physical disability shall be on the certificate of two (2) physicians qualified to practice medicine in the State of Texas. 
(b)  Forfeiture: The mayor or a council member shall forfeit office upon: 
(1)  Final conviction of a felony or offense involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  Ceasing to be a resident of the City. 
(3)  Failure to regularly attend council meetings without an approved absence obtained by a majority vote by City Council either before or after the absence. There shall be a presumption of failure to regularly attend when four (4) regular meetings are missed during a term year without obtaining an approved excuse from City Council. 
    If the Mayor or a council member forfeits his/her office, and does not immediately resign, the council and mayor may conduct a hearing to determine if the office holder has forfeited and should vacate his/her office. The hearing shall be held within 60 days of the council, as a body, learning of the alleged forfeiture. The council may, by an affirmative vote of four (4) members, declare the office of said office holder to be forfeited and vacant. Disposition of the matter under this charter is final and is res judicata. Further relief may be sought in a court of law. The office holder subject to the forfeiture shall not have a vote. The mayor shall vote unless he/she is the office holder subject to the forfeiture. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies: When a vacancy occurs in the city council, the remaining members of the council shall, within thirty (30) days, appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired term. An appointment must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least three (3) council members. At no given time shall two (2) appointed council members serve on the council. In case a vacancy has been filled by the council prior to a subsequent vacancy or vacancies, the vacancy shall be filled at the next authorized election date in accordance with state law. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-9-09; Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
Section 4.08 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding other office: No mayor or council member shall hold any other public office which is incompatible with their office as provided by state law or be employed with the city. 
(b)  Non-interference: Neither the mayor nor council members shall dictate the appointment or removal of any city employee whom the city manager is empowered to appoint or remove. 
(c)  Dealing with city employees: Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to office by the city manager or by any city manager subordinates. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
Section 4.09 - Powers of the council. 
    All city powers shall be vested in the council, except as otherwise provided by law or this charter. The city council shall have the power to create by ordinance and appoint the members of such boards, committees and/or commissions it deems necessary to effectively carry on the business and welfare of the city, such boards, when so created to be comprised of five (5) or more members and to be empowered to act by ordinance authorizing its duties, powers and responsibilities. 
(Ref. of 4-3-83; Ref. of 5-5-90) 
Section 4.10 - Meetings and procedures. 
(a)  Regular, special meetings: The council shall meet at least once each month at a time and place prescribed by ordinance. Special meetings may be called by the mayor on the mayor's own motion. On application of three (3) council members, the mayor shall call a special meeting. 
(b)  Quorum: Three council members (excluding the mayor) shall constitute a quorum and no action shall be valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of three or more members of the council. 
(c)  Rules of procedure: The council shall, by ordinance, determine its own rules and order of business. Provision shall be made for the taking of minutes, which shall be a public record. Voting, except on procedural matters, shall be by roll call, and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes. 
(d)  Passage of ordinances: Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced to the city council only in written or printed form. The subject or subjects of all ordinances shall be clearly expressed in the title. Except as may be otherwise prescribed in this charter, an ordinance or resolution shall be finally passed by an affirmative vote of three or more council members. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIVE OAK, TEXAS": and every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and the city secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by council. 
(1)  Penal ordinances: Caption or title and penalties of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture shall, after passage thereof, be published one (1) time in the official newspaper of the City of Live Oak and shall take effect after publication. 
(2)  Franchise ordinances: All ordinances granting, confirming, extending, renewing or amending a franchise shall be accepted in writing by the grantees and before taking effect shall be published as otherwise provided in this charter for penal ordinances. 
(3)  Effective date: Every ordinance passed by the city council shall be enrolled by the city secretary as soon as practicable after its passage. If the ordinance was published, the city secretary shall note the time and place of publication which shall be prima facie proof of publication thereof. The affidavit by printer or publisher shall also be prima facie proof of the publication. Enrollment of an ordinance shall be prima facie proof of the publication. Enrollment of an ordinance shall be prima facie proof of its legal adoption and effect. 
(4)  Codification of ordinances: The city council shall have the power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. All printed ordinances or codes of ordinances shall be admitted as evidence in all courts without proof, and shall have the same force and effect as did the original ordinance. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-13-06; Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
ARTICLE V. - CITY MANAGER 

Section 5.01 - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
(a)  Appointment and qualifications: The full city council, excluding the mayor, shall appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all the affairs of the city. Four (4) elected council members must vote in favor of the appointment. It is the intention of the provisions of this charter that the mayor have no vote in the appointment of the city manager. The city manager shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of executive and administrative training, experience, and ability. The individual selected need not be a resident of the City of Live Oak or State of Texas at the time of appointment, but must agree, prior to such appointment to become a resident of the City of Live Oak within six (6) months from the date of appointment. If the individual selected fails to become a resident of the City of Live Oak within that six (6) month period, the individual shall be deemed to have forfeited the appointment and the office shall be declared vacant by announcement of the mayor at the first meeting of the council following the expiration of the six (6) month period. No member of the city council shall, during the term to which elected and one year thereafter, be appointed city manager. 
(b)  Term and salary: The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council by an affirmation vote of four elected city council members. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of such suspension or removal in the city council. The city manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the council. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-13-06; Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
Section 5.02 - Powers and duties of city manager. 
    The city manager shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this charter. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Appoint and remove all department heads, direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(b)  Attend all council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
(c)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(d)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(e)  Submit to the council and make available to the public a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(f)  Make such other reports as the council may require concerning the operation of city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(g)  Keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. 
(h)  Perform such duties as may be prescribed by this charter or may be required by the city council, not inconsistent with this charter. 
(i)  Ensure the printed Code of Ordinances conforms to the exact ordinances passed by the council. 
(j)  The city manager shall maintain a complete and current inventory report of all city property. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Ref. of 5-13-06) 
Section 5.03 - Acting city manager. 
    By letter filed with the city secretary the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his temporary absence or disability, the council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or his disability shall cease. Three (3) elected council members must vote in favor of the designation of an acting city manager or the revocation of such designation. 
(Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
ARTICLE VI. - OTHER DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES OR AGENCIES 

Section 6.01 - General provisions. 
(a)  Creation of departments: The council may continue or establish city departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created by this charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and agencies, except that no function assigned by this charter to a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless this charter specifically so provides, assigned to another department. 
(b)  Direction by manager: All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and supervision of the manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the manager. With the consent of council, the manager may serve as the head of one or more such departments, offices or agencies or may appoint one person to serve as the head of two or more of them. 
Section 6.02 - Personnel rules. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of personnel rules, which rules shall be submitted by him to the council. The council may accept and adopt such rules as proposed or may adopt them with such amendments as the council deems necessary or may reject them in their entirety and direct the city manager to further consider the rules and present new proposals at a subsequent meeting. 
Section 6.03 - City attorney. 
    The city manager shall appoint a city attorney for an indefinite term and fix his or her compensation by and with the consent of the city council. The city attorney must be a member of the State Bar of Texas. The city attorney shall serve as chief legal advisor. The city attorney shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city manager and may be relieved by the city manager with the consent of the city council. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-13-06) 
Section 6.04 - Judge of the municipal court. 
    The council shall establish a municipal court. The city council shall appoint a judge(s) of the Live Oak Municipal Court of Record and fix his/her compensation. The person(s) so appointed shall be a member of the State Bar of Texas. Sessions of the municipal court shall be held at such times as the city council may determine after considering recommendations as to the times for such sessions submitted by the judge(s) of the municipal court. The dates of such court sessions and each change thereto shall be filed with the city secretary. It is the intention of this charter that the mayor have no vote in the appointment of the judge of the municipal court of the City of Live Oak. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-13-06) 
Section 6.05 - Term of office of judge(s); removal. 
    The Judge of the Live Oak Municipal Court of Record shall be appointed to a term of office as pursuant to State law. The Judge may, subject to the other provisions hereof, be removed from office for willful or persistent violation of rules promulgated by the Supreme Court of Texas, incompetence in performing the duties of the office, willful violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct, or willful or persistent conduct that is clearly inconsistent with the proper performance of his duties or casts public discredit upon the judiciary or administration of justice. Any person holding such office may be disciplined or censured, in lieu of removal from office, as provided by this section. Any person holding an office specified in this subsection may be suspended from office with or without pay by the City Council immediately on being indicated by a State or Federal grand jury for a felony offense or charged with a misdemeanor involving official misconduct. Upon the motion of the City Council or on the filing of a sworn complaint charging a person holding such office with willful or persistent violation of rules promulgated by the Supreme Court of Texas, incompetence in performing the duties of the office, willful violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct, or willful and persistent conduct that is clearly inconsistent with the proper performance of his duties or casts public discredit on the judiciary or on the administration of justice, the City Council, after giving the person notice and an opportunity to appear and be heard before the City Council may, after considering the record of such appearance may, suspend with or without pay, censure, or otherwise discipline the Judge; or remove the Judge from office. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-13-06; Ref. of 5-9-09) 
Section 6.06 - City secretary. 
    The city manager shall appoint the city secretary and such assistant city secretaries as needed. The city secretary, or an assistant city secretary, shall give notice of council meetings, shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of such meetings, shall authenticate by signature and record in full in a book kept and indexed for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign and those elsewhere provided for in this charter. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

Section 7.01 - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September. 
Section 7.02 - Submission of budget. 
    The city manager shall submit to the city council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message not later than sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. 
Section 7.03 - Budget message. 
    The manager's budget shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of a work program. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the coming fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes in principle from the prior year along with reasons for the changes, summarize the city's debt position, and include other fiscal information as the manager deems necessary. 
Section 7.04 - Budget. 
    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and must contain a complete financial statement of the municipality that shows: 
(a)  The outstanding obligations of the municipality; 
(b)  The cash on hand to the credit of each fund; 
(c)  The funds received from all sources during the preceding year; 
(d)  The funds available from all sources during the ensuing year; 
(e)  The estimated revenue available to cover the proposed budget; 
(f)  The estimated tax rate required to cover the proposed budget; 
(g)  The proposed capital additions and deletions along with the method of financing should be shown in a separate section; 
(h)  The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90) 
Section 7.05 - Capital program. 
    The city manager shall at his/her own initiative, or when directed by the city council, or when submitting an annual budget, prepare and submit a capital program to the city council. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98) 
Section 7.06 - Council action on budget. 
(a)  Notice and hearing: The council shall have published in the official newspaper of the city a general summary of the budget and a notice stating: 
(1)  The time and place where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public, and 
(2)  The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. 
(b)  Amendment before adoption: After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase expenditures to an amount greater than the estimated income. 
(c)  Adoption: The council shall adopt the budget on or before the 20th day of the last month of the fiscal year currently ending. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it pro-rated accordingly, until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. 
Section 7.07 - Amendments after adoption. 
(a)  Supplemental appropriations: If, during the fiscal year, the manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the council may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
(b)  Emergency appropriations: To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the council may by such ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed as necessary. 
(c)  Reduction of appropriations: If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the city manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may reduce one or more appropriations. 
(d)  Transfer of appropriations: At any time during the fiscal year the manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a fund department, office or agency and, upon written request by the manager, the council may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one fund department, office or agency to another. 
(e)  Limitations; effective date: No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
Section 7.08 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 1850, § 2, adopted May 28, 2013, repealed § 7.08 which pertained to the city's purchase procedure and derived from the original home rule charter. 
Section 7.09 - Lapse of appropriations. 
    Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
Section 7.10 - Administration of budget. 
(a)  Work program and allotments: At such time as the city manager shall specify, each department, office or agency shall submit work programs for the ensuing fiscal year showing the requested allotments of its appropriation by periods within the year. The city manager shall review and authorize such allotments with or without revision as early as possible in the fiscal year. The city manager may revise such allotments during the year if deemed desirable and shall revise them to accord with any supplemental, emergency, reduced or transferred appropriation made pursuant to section 7.07. 
(b)  Payments and obligations prohibited: No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation unless the city manager or city manager's designee first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotments or appropriations and that sufficient funds therefrom are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this charter shall be void and any payment so made illegal, such action shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligation, and the individual shall also be liable to the city for any amount so paid. However, except where prohibited by law, nothing in this charter shall be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such action is made or approved by ordinance. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98) 
Section 7.11 - Audit of city books and accounts. 
    The city council shall appoint a certified public accountant to make a complete audit of the books and accounts of every city department at the close of every fiscal year and present this report to the city council. Such audit report shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be available for public inspection no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of the city's fiscal year. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNING AND ZONING 

Section 8.01 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 1850, § 2, adopted May 28, 2013, repealed § 8.01 which pertained to establishment of the planning and zoning commission and derived from the original home rule charter. 
ARTICLE IX. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Section 9.01 - City elections. 
(a)  All City Elections shall be held pursuant to State law. 
(b)  The regular city election shall be held on the first (1st) Saturday of May in each calendar year or as may be prescribed by City Council pursuant to ordinance. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
Section 9.02 - Nominations. 
    Any person having the qualifications set for council member under Section 4.02 in this charter shall have the right to file an application to have his/her name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for any one elective office. Such application shall be made in writing and shall include name, address, date of birth; and personal signature of such candidate. Such application shall be accompanied by a loyalty affidavit, as prescribed by Section 141.031 (k) Texas Election Code shall be filed with the city secretary or appropriate authority in accordance with state law, and shall entitle such applicant to a place on the official ballot A filing fee of five dollars ($5.00), or such other amount as may hereafter be set by the city council, will be paid to the city secretary by each candidate upon presentation of application fee. In lieu of the filing fee, a candidate may present a petition. The minimum number of signatures on the petition is the greater of: 
(1)  25; or 
(2)  One-half of one percent of the total vote received in the territory from which the office is elected by all candidates for mayor in the most recent mayoral general election. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-9-09) 
Section 9.03 - Determination of election results. 
    At any regular or special municipal election the candidate for each office who shall have received the greater number of votes cast in such election, shall be declared elected. In the event a tie vote makes it impossible to determine the winning candidate or candidates, such tie shall be decided as provided in Texas Election Code. 
Section 9.04 - Council ballots. 
    The names of all candidates for office, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots, without party designation. The order on the ballot will be determined in a drawing of lots conducted by the city secretary. Early voting shall be governed by the general election laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Ref. of 5-2-98) 
Section 9.05 - Ballots for ordinances and charter amendments. 
    An ordinance or charter amendment to be voted on by the city shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement, describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the following question: "Shall the above described (ordinance) (amendment) be adopted?" Immediately below such question shall appear, in the following order, the words "yes" and "no." An amendment may not contain more than one subject. The ballot shall be prepared so that a voter may approve or disapprove any one or more amendments without having to approve or disapprove all of the amendments. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90) 
ARTICLE X. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Section 10.01 - General authority. 
(a)  Initiative: The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose ordinances to the council. If the council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed, or passes the ordinance with substantial changes, the qualified voters shall have the power to adopt or reject it at a city election. 
(b)  Referendum: The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the council of any adopted ordinance. If the council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, the qualified voters shall have the power to approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. 
(c)  Recall: The qualified voters of the city shall have the power to petition for recall of the mayor or any member of the city council. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98) 
Section 10.02 - Commencement of proceedings; petitioner's committee; affidavit. 
    Any five qualified voters may commence initiative, referendum, or recall proceedings by filing with the city secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Within five (5) working days after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed the secretary shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee. 
Section 10.03 - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of signatures: Initiative, referendum or recall petitions shall be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election, but in no event less than two hundred (200) such petitioners. However, no signatures to any petitions shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five days, prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of city secretary. 
(b)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address and voter registration number of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)  Affidavit of circulation: Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Filing referendum petitions: Referendum petitions must be filed within 60 days after adoption by the council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
Section 10.04 - Procedure after filing. 
(a)  Certificate of city secretary; amendment: Within twenty (20) days after the petition is filed, the city secretary shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall within that twenty (20) day period send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the city secretary within two days after receiving the copy of his certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of sub-sections (b) and (c) of section 10.03, and within five days after it is filed, the secretary shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request council review under sub-section (b) of this section within the time required, the city secretary shall at the next regular council meeting present his certificate to the council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)  Council review: If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be revised by the council. The council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such requests and approve or disapprove it, and the council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)  Court review, new petition: A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Section 10.05 - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition complying with all the provisions of section 10.03 and 10.04 is filed with the city secretary the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(a)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or 
(b)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, or 
(c)  The council repeals the ordinance, or 
(d)  Voters sustain the ordinance in an election. 
Section 10.06 - Action on petitions. 
(a)  Action by council on initiative or referendum: When an initiative or referendum petition has been fully determined sufficient, the council shall at their next regular council meeting consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in article IV or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the council, within sixty (60) days from the date a proposed initiative ordinance has been fully determined sufficient, fails to adopt the ordinance or adopts it with substantive change, the proposed initiative ordinance shall be submitted to the voters of the City. If the council, within thirty (30) days from the date a referendum has been fully determined sufficient, fails to repeal the referred ordinance, the referendum shall be submitted to the voters of the City. 
(b)  Action by council on petition for recall: The recall petition must be addressed to the city council of the City of Live Oak and must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated. If there be more than one ground, such as for incompetence, misconduct or malfeasance in office, the petition shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the office sought to be removed, notice of the matters and things with which he is charged. The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the city council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the city council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing. If the office whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the city council to order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election on the earliest allowable uniform election date as provided by the Texas Election Code. 
(c)  Recall restrictions: No recall petition shall be filed against any office of the City of Live Oak within three (3) months after an election for such officer's recall. 
(d)  Submission to voters: The vote of the city on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held on the earliest allowable uniform election date as provided by the Texas Election Code. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls to registered voters. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-13-06; Ref. of 5-9-09) 
Section 10.07 - Results of election. 
(a)  Initiative: If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall he treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Referendum: If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(c)  Recall: If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be "NO," that is, against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such election be "YES," that is, for the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy be filled as vacancies in the city council are filled, as provided in section 4.07, subsection (c) of this charter. 
[(d)]  Repeal or amendment: No ordinance which may have been passed by the City Council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this Section may be repealed or amended by the City Council for a period of three (3) years from the date said ordinance became effective. An ordinance which may have been passed by the City Council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this Article may be repealed or amended at any time in response to a referendum petition. 
(Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC UTILITIES, FRANCHISES 

Section 11.01 - Powers of the city. 
    The city shall have such powers with respect to public utilities and franchises as may now or hereafter be granted and defined under the constitution, the general laws of the State of Texas, and by ordinance. 
    The city shall have the power through eminent domain proceedings to acquire any public utility operating with or without a franchise and furnishing a public service to the citizens of Live Oak. The city shall, by ordinance, adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable for the acquiring and operation of any such public utilities and shall further provide appropriate methods to determine the value of all such utilities' assets, including, but not limited to all of its real property, personal property, franchises and intangible assets. 
    The procedure to be used in the acquisition of such property through eminent domain proceedings shall be that as set forth in Section 21.001 et seq., Texas Property Code. 
    Prior to the acquisition of any existing franchise and/or public utility system, either according to the terms of the franchise or by eminent domain, the city council must submit the question of the acquisition to the qualified voters of the City of Live Oak, and the same must be approved by a majority of those voting in the election. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90) 
Section 11.02 - Franchises. 
    The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, renew and extend all franchises of public utilities of every character operating within the city and for such purposes is granted full power. The term "public utility" as used herein is construed to mean any person, firm or corporation furnishing to the public any general public service, including, but not limited to heat, light, power, telephone service, community antenna or cable television service, sewer service and the treatment thereof, water, wrecker service, the carrying of passengers for hire or for any other purpose whereby a right to, in part, appropriate or use the streets, highways, or other property of the city as necessary or proper. All ordinances granting, renewing or extending franchises shall not take effect until at least thirty (30) days after its passage; and during such thirty (30) day period the full text of the ordinance shall be published at least twice in the official newspaper of the city, the expense of the publication being borne by the proponents of the franchise. 
Section 11.03 - Franchise value. 
    In valuing the property of the public utility to be acquired by the city through eminent domain proceedings, the measure of damages shall be the fair market value of the physical properties together with its franchise, if any, taken together as one system. 
    This power shall be in addition to and cumulative of any other powers of acquisition granted to or reserved by the city in a franchise ordinance. In fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the city, nothing shall be included as the value of any franchise granted by the city under this charter. 
Section 11.04 - Right to regulation. 
    All grants, renewals, or extensions of public utilities and franchises, whether it be so provided in the franchise ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(a)  To require compliance with the terms of the franchise. 
(b)  To require reasonable extensions of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and prevent unjust discrimination to service or rates. 
(d)  (1) 
To prescribe the form of accounts to be kept by each such utility provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, or their successors, such form of accounts shall be considered satisfactory. 
(2)  At any time require annual and other reports by each such public utility pertaining to sales and plants within the city. 
(e)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
(f)  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(g)  To forfeit by ordinance any franchise at any time upon the failure of the grantee to comply with any provisions of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after notice and hearing under the conditions hereinafter provided[; provided,] however, that action may be taken hereunder only after the city has given to the grantee written notice of the particular or particulars in which it is claimed that the grantee is in default, and the grantee shall have a reasonable time after receipt of such notice (not to exceed 30 days) to cure such alleged default or defaults. If after the expiration of said time period, said default or defaults are not cured, the city may by its option, and after a hearing, declare by ordinance the franchise forfeited. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98) 
Section 11.05 - Franchise records. 
    Within six months after this charter takes effect every owner of a public utility franchise shall file with the city secretary copies of all franchises owned or claimed. The city shall complete and maintain a public record of all public utility franchises. 
Section 11.06 - Regulations of rates and service. 
(a)  Power vested in council: The city council shall have full power to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges and fares of every public utility franchise holder operating in the city and of any other person, firm or corporation exercising any public privilege in the city. 
(b)  Hearing required: Every such utility or person, firm or corporation who shall request an increase in rates, charges or fares, shall have, at the hearing of the city council called to consider such a request, the burden of establishing by clear competent and convincing evidence, the value of investments properly allocable to service in the city, and the amount and character of its expenses and revenues connected with rendering such service. Such hearing of the council shall be held within thirty (30) days from the date of filing such a request. 
(c)  Adjournment; investigations: If, at the hearing, the council is not convinced of the sufficiency of evidence furnished, it shall have the option of adjourning the hearings for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days during which time the council may employ qualified rate consultants, auditors or attorneys to conduct investigations, present evidence or advise the council and conduct litigation on such requested rate increases. The council shall act upon the application of the grantee within sixty (60) days after the date of the first hearing. 
(d)  Legal action; prohibitions: No such utilty [utility], person, or corporation shall institute any legal action to contest the rates, charges or fares which have been fixed by the council, unless the council shall fail to make a determination of rates, charges, or fares within the sixty (60) day period herein specified. Any time or times prescribed herein may be extended by resolution of the council and written agreement with the applicant. 
(e)  Denial: Upon failure of the council to hold any hearings or make determination of rates, charges or fares by ordinance within the times or extended times as herein provided the request for increase shall be deemed denied. 
Section 11.07 - Utilities board of trustees. 
Editor's note- The text of section 11.07, dealing with the utilities board of trustees, has been deleted pursuant to an election of April 2, 1983, at which a proposal to abolish such board was passed. 
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 12.01 - Personal financial interest. 
    No officer of the city shall have any financial interest in any contract with the city or sale to the city of any land, or rights of interest in any land, materials, supplies or service as provided by State Law and any Attorney General Opinion. 
    No employee of the city shall have any financial interest in any contract with the city or sale to the city of any land, or rights of interest in any land, materials, supplies or service as provided by State Law, any Attorney General Opinion, or as provided by any ordinance properly adopted by City Council. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Res. No. 1850, § 2, 5-28-13) 
Section 12.02 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Activities prohibited: 
(1)  No person shall be appointed to or removed from or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office because of race, age, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, political or religious opinions or affiliations. 
(2)  No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or appointment under the personnel provisions of this charter or the rules and regulations made thereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such provision, rules and regulations. 
(3)  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(b)  Penalties: Any person who singularly or with others willfully violates any of the provisions of paragraphs one (1) through (3), or any other provision of this charter, shall receive a hearing by the City council and if found guilty of any such violation shall immediately forfeit their office or positions. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-9-09) 
Section 12.03 - Notice of claim. 
    The City shall not be held liable on account of any claim for the death of any person or injuries to any person or damage to any property unless the person making such complaint or claiming such damages shall, within one hundred-twenty (120) days after the time at which it is claimed such damages were inflicted upon such person or property, file with the City a written statement, under oath, stating the nature and character of such damages or injuries, the extent of the same, the place where same happened, the circumstances under which same happened and the condition causing same, with a detailed statement of each item of damages and the amount thereof, giving a list of any witnesses known by affiant to have seen the accident. 
(Ref. of 5-5-90; Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-9-09) 
Section 12.04 - City development-five year plan. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section that the city council establish comprehensive planning as a continuous and ongoing government function in order to promote and strengthen the existing role, processes and powers of the City of Live Oak to prepare, adopt and implement a City Development-Five Year Plan to guide, regulate, and manage the future development within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city to assure the most appropriate and beneficial use of land, water, and other natural resources, consistent with the public interest. 
(b)  A city development five year plan will be developed annually, presented to the city council for review and approval prior to the beginning of the fiscal year and implemented with the commencement of the new fiscal year. 
(Ref. of 5-2-98; Ref. of 5-13-06) 
Section 12.05 - Regulation of alcohol. 
    The sale of liquor is prohibited in all residential sections or areas of the City, as designated by any zoning ordinance or other duly enacted ordinance of the City. The City Council may enact any and all other regulations regarding the sale, consumption, distribution, etc. of alcoholic beverages, as permitted by law. 
(Ref. of 5-9-09; Ref. of 5-14-11) 
Editor's note- Measure No. 8 of the referendum of May 9, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 12.05 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Section 12.06 - Disaster clause. 
    In case of disaster when a legal quorum of the elected City Council cannot otherwise be assembled due to multiple deaths or injuries, the surviving persons of the City Council, or highest surviving City official, if no elected official remains, must, within twenty-four (24) hours of such disaster, request the highest surviving officers of the Bexar County Commissioners Court to appoint a commission to act during the emergency as the City Council. The newly appointed City Council shall call a City election within fifteen (15) days of their appointment, or as provided in the Texas Election Code, for election of a required quorum, if for good reasons it is known a quorum of the present City Council will never again meet. If it is determined that a quorum of the present City Council will meet again, the appointed Council Members shall serve in their position until such time as the present Council Members may begin serving. 
(Ref. of 5-14-11) 
ARTICLE XIII. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 1850, § 2, adopted May 28, 2013, repealed Art. XIII, §§ 13.01-13.06, which pertained to transitional provisions and derived from the original home rule charter and a referendum dated May 2, 1998. 

Sections 13.01-13.06 - Reserved. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLES 
    The original charter, sections 1.01 through 13.06, is set out as adopted on April 2, 1983. The following tables list the disposition of subsequent amendments thereto. 
Date of 
Referendum Disposition  5- 5-90 1.02(a), 1.03, 2.03, 4.05, 4.07(b)(2)-(6), 4.09, 5.02(i), 7.04, 9.01(a), (c), 9.02, 9.04, 9.05, 11.01, 12.02(b), 12.03       Rpld 2.06  5- 2-98 4.05, 4.06, 4.07(a), (b), 4.08(c), 4.10(a), 5.01, 6.03, 6.04, 6.05, 7.05, 7.10, 7.11, 9.02, 9.04, 10.01(a), 10.06(a), 11.04(e), 12.01, 12.02, 12.03, 13.01(b)       Added 12.04  5-13-06 2.04 4.10(d) 5.01(b) 5.02 6.03-6.05 10.06(d) 12.04(b)  5- 9-09 1.03 4.07 6.05 9.02 10.06 12.02, 12.03       Added 12.05  5-14-11 12.05       Added 12.06  
Resolution 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 1850  5-28-13 2 1.02 4.05 4.07, 4.08 4.10 5.01 5.03       Rpld 7.08       Rpld 8.01 9.01 10.07 12.01       Rpld 13.01-13.06  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited; formal parts of ordinances continued in effect. 
(a)  The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Live Oak, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Live Oak Code." 
(b)  This Code shall not be deemed to repeal any preamble, recital or finding of fact contained in any ordinance included herein, but all such matters shall be deemed incorporated in the sections herein derived from such respective ordinances. 
State Law reference- Municipality may adopt code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001. 
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction, generally. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules contained in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
    City. The terms "city," "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Live Oak, in Bexar County, Texas. 
    City secretary, chief of police or other city officers or departments. The words "city secretary," "chief of police" or words designating any other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Live Oak, Texas." 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding or step in a proceeding shall be had the day of the act, event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a legal holiday. 
    Council. The words "the council" or "the city council" shall mean the mayor and councilmen acting as the city council of Live Oak, Texas. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean Bexar County, Texas. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway," when used in this Code, shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month, except as otherwise specified in this Code. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean central standard time or central daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land, except as otherwise defined in this Code. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property, and "mixed" if the sense used so indicates. 
    Real property. The words "real property" include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall, may. "Shall" shall be generally construed to be mandatory. In determining whether the term "shall" shall be construed either as mandatory or directory, the entire legislative act should be considered, including the object and the nature of the act and also the consequences of either interpretation. If the provision is included in the legislative act simply to promote prompt, orderly and proper conduct, the word "shall" is generally construed not to be mandatory. If the provision is a very essence of a thing to be done, the word "shall" is mandatory. The term "may" ordinarily connotes discretion or permission, and it will not be treated as a word of command unless there is something in the context or subject matter of the legislative act to indicate that it was used in that sense. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, all or a part of which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Sidewalk area. The term "sidewalk area" shall mean the space between the lateral line of the roadway and the boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private property. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, culvert, underpass, overpass, tunnel, causeway or other public way in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    V.A.C.S., V.A.T.S., V.T.C.S., V.A.P.C., V.T.P.C., V.A.C.C.P., V.T.C.C.P. Such abbreviations shall mean and include Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Penal Code, Vernon's Texas Penal Code, Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, Vernon's Texas Code of Criminal Procedure and other portions of such codification of the Texas Statutes as indicated. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation, other than oral, of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor; 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  Making any appropriation; 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(12)  Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones, specific speed zones, parking meter zones, and specific stop or yield intersections; 
(13)  Establishing utility rates such as garbage, water and sewers, and providing procedures for the collection thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(14)  Providing for social security coverage for city officers and employees; 
(15)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(16)  Exhibits A through E of Ordinance No. 524; 
(17)  Any ordinance adopted after June 11, 1985; 
(18)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section in this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, when necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required, other than duties of city officers and employees, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city, that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation and not exceeding $200.00 in all other cases; provided, however, that, where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as fixed by state law. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense unless otherwise provided. 
Cross reference- Municipal court, Ch. 14; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15; police, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001; culpable mental state, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 12.23. 
Sec. 1-8. - Liability of corporate officers for penalty. 
    Whenever a corporation or association violates any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, manager or any agent or employee of such corporation or association shall be severally liable for the penalty prescribed for such violation; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to apply to officers or employees of this city in the manner of performing their duties as municipal officers and employees. 
Sec. 1-9. - Use in evidence of copies of Code provisions. 
    In any legal proceeding involving any provision of this Code, the Code or a copy of such provision, certified by the city secretary, may be admitted in evidence without further proof and shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and regular enactment of such provision, without the necessity of introducing in evidence the entire Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Burden of proving exception; excuse, etc., in prosecution for violation of Code. 
    In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Code, upon proof of the provision of the Code, it shall not be necessary to negate any exception, excuse, proviso or exemption contained in the Code and the burden of proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be upon the defendant. 
Sec. 1-11. - Injunction to enforce Code. 
    Any violation of this Code can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this Code or any other ordinance of the city. 
Sec. 1-12. - Relief from personal liability in enforcement of Code. 
    All of the regulations provided in this Code are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council or any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his said duties. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency management council, § 7-5; fire department, Ch. 8; administration and enforcement of flood damage prevention and protection regulations, § 9-21 et seq.; municipal court, Ch. 14; parks and recreation commission, § 16-16 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 17-16 et seq.; police, Ch. 19; taxation, Ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Notice of claim and rejection by council prerequisite to institution of suit for property damage, personal injury or death. 
(a)  The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or if the injury results in death, any person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death injury, shall within 90 days from the date the damage or injury was received give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(b)  No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(c)  All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following location: 8001 Shin Oak Drive, San Antonio, Texas 78233, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(d)  Neither the mayor, a city councilmember, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  The written notice required under this article shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required in this section, shall not render the notice defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 606, § 5, 11-27-84; Ord. No. 831, § 1, 6-27-89) 
State Law reference- Notice of claim against governmental unit, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101. 
Sec. 2-2. - Reimbursement of city for costs and expenses of extraordinary professional services. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or business entity filing a request with the city which involves the exercise of the city's police power in areas where it is authorized to regulate and control such activities, shall reimburse the city for any reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city in obtaining the services of independently retained persons to assist it in evaluating such request. 
(b)  The expenses which are subject to recoupment and reimbursement by the city include professional services rendered but not limited to its city attorney, city engineer and such other persons whose services may be reasonably necessary to give the members of the city's staff and the city council professional advice with respect to the propriety of such requests. 
(c)  Illustrative of the requests which are subject to reimbursement for such third party professional expenses are requests for variances from the city's zoning and subdivision regulations, sewer refund agreements, licenses and franchise agreements, without limitation of other requests as may be presented to the city staff from time to time. 
(d)  The recoupment by the city of such professional fees and expenses as may be provided by third party persons, firms or corporations is not to be construed as an effort to raise tax revenues for the purpose of supporting city government, but rather to place the business affairs of this city on an even keel basis towards the end that applicants who file such requests and engender the necessity for such professional services shall bear the expense therefor without a corresponding loss to the city's taxpayers. 
(e)  The city manager is directed to insure that all such reasonable, professional fees are collected by the city before it issues any license or variances or franchises or such other permits as may be granted by the city's staff and/or the city council. In those areas where such professional services were rendered but the request for relief is denied, the city manager shall certify the expense for such services to the applicants which shall be paid within a reasonable time and which may be collected by the city as any other debt. 
(f)  Any applicant who deems the statement for such professional services unreasonable may petition the city council for a hearing to determine the reasonableness for such charges and in such event the city council shall have the power to affirm or modify and adjust the statement for such services rendered. 
(g)  In the event the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council as ultimately made he shall have such legal redress to the courts as are afforded him by the Texas Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 707, §§ 1-7, 9-30-86) 
Sec. 2-3. - Records control schedule adopted. 
(a)  The records control schedule specifying which records are to be maintained by the city and for their stated retention periods is hereby approved. 
(b)  The city secretary as the designated records management officer is hereby authorized and directed to forward such records control schedule to the director and librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 
(Ord. No. 998, §§ 1, 2, 10-11-94) 
Sec. 2-4. - Possession of concealed weapons within city-owned property prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Building. Any structure or edifice which has been purchased or constructed through the use of city funds. 
(2)  Premises. Any area fenced having controlled access by city employees or its agents. 
(3)  Weapon shall include a firearm, handgun, club, illegal knife, and any prohibited weapon as listed in the Texas Penal Code Section 46.05(a) having the same meaning as said items which are defined in Section 46.01 of the Texas Penal Code. 
(b)  Provisions: 
(1)  It is the intent of the city council to prohibit any person other than licensed peace officers from carrying or possessing weapons including concealed handguns on city-owned premises, but excluding city-owned lots, city-owned or operated public parks, streets and sidewalks. 
(c)  Scope: 
(1)  Entry into any building belonging to the city while carrying a concealed handgun, any other type of firearms or any prohibited weapon is prohibited. This section will also apply to city employees and the possession of weapons in city-owned vehicles. 
(2)  Notice that weapons are prohibited shall be prominently posted at all public entrances of all municipal buildings/premises and in any other places the city manager deems appropriate. 
(3)  Any individual reasonably believed to be carrying a weapon in a city-owned building/premises may be asked to consent to a search by a city police officer or requested to leave the building/premises by said officer and/or agent. 
(4)  Disregarding the notice prohibiting weapons in municipal buildings may be prosecuted as criminal trespass under the provisions of Section 30.05 of the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1025, 2-27-96) 
Sec. 2-5. - Records management. 
(a)  Definition of city records. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(b)  Additional definitions. 
    Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records liaison officers mean the persons designed under subsection (j). 
    Records management committee means the committee established in subsection (f). 
    Records management officer means the person designed in subsection (e). 
    Records management plan means the plan developed under subsection (g). 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of creation actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(c)  City records declared public property. All city records as defined in subsection (a) are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(d)  Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(e)  Designation of records management officer. The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(f)  Establishment of records management committee; duties. A records management committee consisting of the city manager, city attorney, city treasurer and one council member to be designed by the city council is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(g)  Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(1)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this section effectively. 
(2)  Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed. 
(3)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this division and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(h)  Duties of records management officer. In addition to other duties assigned in this section, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this section. 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the city is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or store electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13); and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(i)  Duties and responsibilities of department heads. In addition to other duties assigned in this division, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this section; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this section. 
(j)  Designation of records liaison officers. Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officers for his or her department. 
(k)  Duties and responsibilities or records liaison officers. In addition to other duties assigned in this section, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the develop of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officers coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(l)  Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(1)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(2)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(3)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(4)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(m)  Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(1)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under subsection (g) shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(2)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the records is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(3)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officers from the records management committee. 
(n)  Destruction of unscheduled records. A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(o)  Records center. A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by subsection (g), shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer, policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under subsection (g). 
(p)  Micrographics. Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of the city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 895, §§ 1-16, 12-11-90) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 895, §§ 1-16, adopted December 11, 1990, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 2-5 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-6-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-16. - Conduct generally. 
    The city council will conduct itself in accordance with the general laws of Texas, the City Charter and as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1007, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-17. - Meeting place and time. 
    The city council will meet bi-monthly on the second and last Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the council chambers of the city's Municipal Building, the Live Oak Civic Center, Municipal Clubhouse or the Live Oak Justice Center Training Room as circumstances dictate and as determined by the city council by giving appropriate notice on the agenda for such meeting to be published as least 72 hours in a conspicuous public place advertising the subject matter of the council's agenda and the locale for such meeting. The meeting may be convened and adjourned whenever it is held. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1A, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 1009, § 1, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 1423, § 1, 2-23-10) 
Sec. 2-18. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings may be called by the mayor on his own motion or on the application of three council members in which event the mayor shall call a special meeting. The notice of the date, place and subject of each meeting shall be in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1B, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-19. - Quorum. 
    Three council members, excluding the mayor, shall constitute a quorum and no action shall be valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of three or more members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1C, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-20. - Agenda. 
    The mayor with the assistance of the city manager will prepare the agenda. Any councilmember and the city manager may enter items on the agenda provided that the mayor may defer items for later agendas if it is determined that items submitted would constitute an unmanageable work load for the council session concerned. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1D, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-21. - Call to order. 
    The meetings of the council shall be called to order by the mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, by the mayor pro-tem; in the absence of both the mayor and the mayor pro-tem, the meeting shall be called to order by the senior councilmember present. In the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro-tem and with a quorum being present, the members present may elect one of their members upon nominations for that purpose to serve as temporary presiding officer for the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1E, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-21.1. - Preservation of order. 
    The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, prevent personal references to council members or the impugning of other members' motives, and confine members' remarks to the question under discussion. No member shall address the council from any other than his or her own seat nor until after being recognized by the chair. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1F, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-21.2. - Points of order. 
    The person presiding shall determine all points of order, subject to the right of any member to appeal to the entire council. If an appeal is taken, the question shall be "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?" 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1G, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-21.3. - Question to be stated. 
    The chair shall state all questions submitted for a vote and announce the result. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1H, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-21.4. - Rules. 
    Robert's Rules of Order (latest revision) shall govern in all cases unless in conflict herewith. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 1I, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 2-21.5. - The following rules of courtesy are adopted for persons in attendance at all meetings of council. 
(1)  Any person wishing to address the council must sign the register which will be provided indicating the item on the agenda the person wishes to address. These persons may be heard only at the "citizens to be heard" portion of the meeting and shall be limited to five minutes unless otherwise specified by the chair, and there shall be a cumulative limit of 30 minutes for all those speaking for an item on the agenda, and a like limit for all those speaking against an item on the agenda. 
If a person wishes to speak on a matter which is not an item on the agenda, the person must sign the register indicating the subject and such person will be heard at the "citizens to be heard" portion of the meetings. These individuals shall be limited to five minutes each. No one group or organization shall be allowed more than three speakers on a matter which is not an item on the agenda, with a 15-minute time limit. 
A citizen intending to speak during "citizens to be heard" will, upon entering the council chamber, sign a register supplied by the city secretary for such purpose. Citizens wishing to address the city council will approach the lectern and give their name and address before speaking. 
Those signed up to speak under "citizens to be heard" shall be called upon in the order that they have registered. No personal attacks shall be allowed by any speaker. 
For officially called public hearings, each speaker shall be limited to five minutes (unless otherwise set by the chair) with a cumulative limit of 30 minutes for each side (those for a proposal and those against a proposal). Proponents shall speak first followed by opponents. At the end of the hearing the proponents shall be given an additional five minutes for rebuttal. 
Depending on time available, the urgency of an issue, the need for information by the council, or for other relevant reasons, the presiding officer may limit or extend the time for individual presentations from groups, provided said groups are speaking to a specific issue. 
(2)  Disturbances. No person attending any council meeting shall delay, interrupt or disrupt the proceedings or refuse to obey the orders of the chair. Persons attending shall remain seated except the person at the floor microphone with permission of the chair. 
(3)  General conduct. Persons in attendance shall refrain from smoking or eating or drinking while in the council chamber; however, council members and staff shall be allowed to drink beverages during council meetings. Persons in attendance shall not carry signs, placards or other items which block the view of those behind them. 
(4)  Fire safety. Citizens are welcome and invited to attend council meetings. However, the number admitted shall be limited to the fire safety capacity of the council chamber. 
(5)  Committees, boards and commissions. 
a.  The council may appoint standing or special committees of the council or of volunteer citizens to work toward the solution of the problems facing the city. Such committees will be appointed formally in writing. 
b.  Committees appointed by the council will conduct business generally in a manner conducive to good order and efficiency. Robert's Rules of Order or a modification thereof will be followed in all committee meetings. 
c.  Boards and commissions will be appointed by the council by resolution. All board or commission meetings will follow Robert's Rules of Order and will follow the guidelines in the preceding paragraph (5)b. 
d.  Boards, commissions and committees appointed by the council will conduct their meetings as "open meetings" after posting notice in the same manner as the city council. 
e.  Meetings of committees, boards or commissions may be conducted at selected areas upon agreement of all members of each of said bodies as circumstances dictate and require provided that all members thereof are in agreement and provided further that notice of the agenda for such meetings be published at least 72 hours in a conspicuous public place advertising the subject matter of the time, date, place and agenda of such committee, board or commission meetings. 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 2, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 6-10-97) 
Sec. 2-22. - Council members not to serve as volunteer firefighters, police reserve officers, etc. 
(a)  No member of the city council may serve as a volunteer firefighter, police reserve officer, or as an animal control volunteer nor be a member of any other auxiliary group of the city which has as its purpose and function the furtherance of the city governmental and proprietary functions. 
(b)  However, this section is not to be construed nor shall it serve to limit or abridge members of the city council from serving on any authorized committees of city to which they may be duly appointed by the city council acting collectively. 
(Ord. No. 922, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-91) 
Sec. 2-23. - Attorney/client privilege. 
(a)  No waiver of the attorney/client privilege between the city council and its city attorney or designated attorney representing the city shall occur or be effective unless and until: 
(1)  The issue of waiver of attorney/client privilege must first be a posted item on the city council agenda, in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act; 
(2)  The item must be fully voted upon by the council; and 
(3)  Said waiver of attorney/client privilege shall only be effective if the city council unanimously votes to agree to waive the privilege. Should any court find this provision to be invalid, either on its face or as applied, a unanimous vote of the entire council shall nonetheless be required. 
(b)  In no case shall any action by an individual councilmember constitute a waiver of the attorney/client privilege for the city council. The only recognized waiver of attorney/client privilege by the city council is the process delineated in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 1345, 10-30-07) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1345, adopted October 30, 2007, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 2-23 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-24-2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Electrical inspector, § 6-46 et seq.; director of emergency management, § 7-2; coordinator of emergency management, § 7-4; emergency management organization to consist of city officers and employees as designated by the director, § 7-6; administrator of flood control regulations, § 9-21; health inspector, § 11-17. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - Substance abuse. 
(a)  Policies and testing procedures adopted. The city council does hereby adopt comprehensive substance abuse policies and testing procedures therefor to assure as fully as possible to the citizens of Live Oak public servants who shall be free of such abusive practices. A copy of these policies is attached to Ordinance No. 954 as Exhibit I. 
(b)  Penalty for positive test. Any public servant including, but not limited to members of the city council, appointed city officers, members of boards and all employees, testing positive for unauthorized controlled substances and/or intoxicating beverages shall be subject to removal from such public service. 
(c)  Prospective employees, officers, etc. All prospective employees and appointed members of city positions, boards or commissions of the city shall be refused consideration for such employment or appointment if they also test positive from such screening. 
(Ord. No. 954, §§ 1, 2, 5-25-93) 
Editor's note- "Exhibit I" referred to in § 2-36(a) is not included herein, but is on file and available for reference in the office of the city secretary. 
Secs. 2-37-2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-46. - Applicability. 
(a)  On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing or hereafter established participate in the state municipal retirement system as provided in the Revised Civil Statutes, Title 110B, sections 61.001 through 65.605, as amended, and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the departments referred to in paragraph (a) of this section participate in such system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the state municipal retirement system as a condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(d)  In accordance with the provisions of the statute, the deposits to be made to the state municipal retirement system on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of seven percent of the earnings of each employee of departments, and in determining the deposits to be made on account of such service the maximum earnings of this city is full salary. 
(e)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by such board under the provisions of the Revised Civil Statutes, Title 110B, sections 61.001 through 65.605, as amended, and the city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of above-cited statutes, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 215, §§ 1-5, 6-27-72) 
Sec. 2-47. - Supplemental disability benefits fund. 
(a)  The city, by its city council, hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Disability Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Title 110B, sections 65.313 and 65.408 of the Revised Civil Statutes; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in such fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)  The city secretary is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above mentioned departments participate in the supplemental disability benefits fund of such system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in such fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the supplemental disability benefits fund of such system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund. 
(d)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the Supplemental Disability Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings off the abovementioned employees of the city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, provided that the rate of contribution to such fund shall not exceed one-fourth of one percent of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under such fund; and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe. 
(e)  Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the supplemental disability benefits fund shall be effective January 30, 1973. 
(Ord. No. 219, §§ 1-5, 1-30-73) 
Sec. 2-48. - Updated service credits-January 1, 1984. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the state municipal retirement system who has current service credit or prior service credit in such system in force and effect on January 1, 1984, by reason of service in the employment of the city and on such date has at least 36 months of credited service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed "Updated Service Credit" (as that term is defined in section 63.402(d) of such title) in an amount that is 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in section 63.402(c) of such title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of section 63.401(d) of Title 110B of the Revised Civil Statutes, the deposits required to be made to the state municipal retirement system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(c)  Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, the updated service credits granted hereby shall be and become effective on January 1, 1984. 
(d)  Pursuant to the provisions of sections 62.105 and 64.202 of Subtitle G of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the state municipal retirement system: 
(1)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department of this city and who is not already a member of the state municipal retirement system shall become a member of the system as a condition of employment, provided such person is then under 60 years of age; 
(2)  Any member, after one year from the effective date of his or her membership in the system, shall be eligible for service retirement if he or she has attained the age of 50 years and has completed 25 years of creditable service with one or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under section 64.202 of the TMRS Act or under section XX of former article 6243h, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, or if he or she has attained the age of 60 years and has completed at least ten years of creditable service with one or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under section 64.202 of the TMRS Act or under section XX of such former article 6243h; 
(3)  The membership of any person who has completed at least ten years of creditable service with participating municipalities that have authorized eligibility under section 64.202 of the TMRS Act (or under section XX of such former article 6243h) shall not terminate because of absence from service; and 
(4)  Any person who was an employee of a participating department of this municipality as of January 1, 1984, but who at the date of his or her employment was under 60 years of age but did not become a member of the state municipal retirement system because he or she was then above the maximum age then prescribed by law for initial membership in the system, shall become a member of the system as of January 1, 1984, unless he or she has already become a member under other provisions of the governing act, and shall be allowed prior service credit for each month of creditable service performed for this municipality subsequent to the date such person was precluded from membership and prior to the effective date of his or her membership. Such prior service credit shall be calculated using the same percentage of base prior service credit as was most recently used in calculating prior service credits or updated service credits in such system for current member employees of this city. 
(e)  The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force as of January 1, 1984 pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 549, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 2-48.1. - Same-January 1, 1992. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the City of Live Oak (hereinafter called the "city") and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member of January 1, 1992, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act.) 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1992, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. 
(f)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(g)  Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this section shall be and become effective on the first day of January, 1992. 
(Ord. No. 849, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-89; Ord. No. 918, §§ 1, 2, 10-8-91) 
Sec. 2-48.2. - Same-January 1996. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854.202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the City of Live Oak, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "system"): 
(1)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(2)  Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has: (1) prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and (2) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open meeting Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code. 
(3)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(b)  This section shall become effective January 1, 1996. 
(Ord. No. 1014, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-49. - Additional rights, credits and benefits. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of sections 64.202(f), 64.204, 64.405, 64.406 and 64.410 of Subtitle G of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended by the 70th Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular Session, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the "system"): 
(1)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 25 years of credited service in that system performed for one or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under section 64.202(f) of the TMRS Act. 
(2)  If a "vested member," as that term is defined in section 64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may, by written notice filed with the system, elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of such section 64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable and the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(3)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (2) applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(4)  The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(5)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a "standard occupational disability annuity" under section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an "optional occupational disability retirement annuity" under section 64.410 of the TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to the board of trustees: 
a.  That the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; 
b.  That the disability is likely to be permanent; and 
c.  That the member should be retired. 
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of section 64.409 of the TMRS Act. 
(6)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5) above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under sections 64.301 to 64.308 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 2-50. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any incorporated city or town in the United States or of any council of governments in this state for which the person has not otherwise received credit service in this system, including combined service credit under Chapter 803. The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length of service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(b)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this ordinance must take the action required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(c)  Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this section shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 984, 8-9-94) 
Sec. 2-51. - Credit for active service in the armed forces. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 853.502, Subchapter F of Chapter 853, Title 8, Government Code as amended, the City of Live Oak hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces services. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in Section 853.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the Employees Saving Fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The City of Live Oak agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(c)  This section shall become effective on the 1st day of January, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 985, §§ 1-3, 8-9-94) 
Sec. 2-52. - Increased prior and current service annuities. 
(a)  Increase in retirement annuities. 
(1)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 and 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(2)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of the increase under this section. 
(3)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(4)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(5)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(b)  Dates of increases. The initial increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1995, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, and provided further that, as to such subsequent year, the city has an ordinance in effect that provides for a simultaneous increase in updated service credits as that term is used in the TMRS Act. 
(c)  Effective date. Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this section shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 986, 8-9-94) 
Secs. 2-53-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY PLAN 

Sec. 2-61. - Established. 
    There is hereby established the City of Live Oak Officer and Employee Liability Plan. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 1, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
    City vehicle means a vehicle or mobile equipment either leased or owned by the city. 
    Loss means an amount which a plan member is legally obligated to pay resulting from an act or omission of the plan member which is covered under this plan. 
    Plan means the City of Live Oak Officer and Employee Liability Plan. 
    Plan member means a person who is: 
(1)  An employee of the city. 
(2)  A member of a city board, commission or committee created by ordinance or resolution of the city. 
(3)  A member of the city council or a retained professional, independent firm and/or person who renders professional services to the city. 
(4)  A volunteer who has been approved as a volunteer by a departmental volunteer coordinator and who is working under the direction of an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 2, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-63. - Coverage. 
(a)  The city shall indemnify and defend a plan member, in accordance with the terms of this plan, against a loss arising out of any claim, suit or judgment resulting from an act or omission of the plan member during the discharge of his duties and within the scope of his office, employment or assigned volunteer work with the city. 
(b)  A plan member whose position with the city terminates is entitled to coverage in accordance with this plan for any event that occurred while the person was a plan member. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 3, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-64. - Defense. 
(a)  The city will defend any suit against a plan member who is covered under this plan even if the suit is groundless or fraudulent. 
(b)  The city may investigate, negotiate and settle any claim or suit as it determines necessary. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 4, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-65. - Limits of coverage. 
(a)  The city will pay losses covered by this plan that a plan member is legally obligated to pay, except, that in cases arising from incidents or occurrences where the city's liability exists by virtue of the Texas Tort Claims Act (Article 6252-19, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), whether or not the city is a party defendant, the city will pay those losses covered by this plan that a plan member is legally obligated to pay up to, but not exceeding the limits of liability provided by that act, as amended, for units of local government. 
(b)  In addition to the coverage provided in paragraph (a) the city will pay: 
(1)  The city's expenses in investigating and defending the claim or lawsuit; 
(2)  Costs taxes against a plan member in a suit covered by this plan and interest that accrues after entry of judgment before the city has deposited payment with the court on that part of the judgment which does not exceed the limits of coverage; 
(3)  Reasonable expenses of the plan member incurred at the city's request; and 
(4)  Attorneys' fees ordered by the court to be paid by the plan member. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 5, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-66. - Notice of occurrence, claim, or suit; cooperation. 
    To be entitled to coverage under the plan, a plan member must: 
(1)  Notify the city attorney as soon as practicable upon receipt of written notice of a claim or lawsuit, but no later than five working days after receipt; 
(2)  Cooperate with the city attorney and/or counsel retained by the city's insurance carrier and, upon such counsel's request, assist in making settlements in the conduct of suits and in enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity against a person or organization who may be liable to the city because of injury or damage covered under the plan; 
(3)  Attend hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance of witnesses; and 
(4)  Not, except upon advice of the city attorney or other counsel, or when questioned by a police officer at the scene of an accident, give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a claim or lawsuit, except such as may be required by statute. 
(5)  Not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any expense with respect to a claim or lawsuit without the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 6, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-67. - Plan period. 
    This plan covers only acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred: 
(1)  While the plan is in effect; 
(2)  Before the plan was in effect and which are not barred by any statute of limitations; and 
(3)  If the plan is cancelled, while the plan is in effect and which are not barred by any statute of limitations. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 7, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-68. - Exclusions. 
    Coverage under this plan does not apply to a claim or lawsuit that is brought against a plan member: 
(1)  By the city; 
(2)  Arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of a penal statute or ordinance committed by or with the knowledge or consent of the plan member, or any claim arising out of acts of fraud committed by or at the direction of the plan member with intent to deceive or defraud; 
(3)  Arising either while the plan member is operating a city vehicle with no authority to operate the vehicle, or while the plan member is operating a city vehicle in the course of personal or private business; 
(4)  For liability assumed by the plan member under a contract, unless the contract is entered into at the request of the city; 
(5)  If the plan member joins or attempts to join with the suit against the plan member a claim against the city for benefits under this plan; or 
(6)  If the plan member fails to comply with section 2-63 of this plan. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 8, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-69. - Subrogation. 
    If payment or legal representation is provided under this plan, the city is subrogated to the plan member's rights of recovery against any person or organization to the extent of the city's liability and payments, and the plan member must execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are necessary to secure those rights. The plan member must not do anything after a loss to prejudice those rights. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 9, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-70. - Legal representation. 
(a)  The city will provide legal representation for a plan member in a claim or suit in which the plan member is covered under this plan if not otherwise provided by counsel for an insurance carrier, or in the event the claims should exceed the city's coverage, at the option of the plan member. 
(b)  If the city attorney determines that there is a conflict of interest for the city attorney in representing a plan member, and the plan member is otherwise entitled to coverage under this plan, the city will pay the reasonable fee of a private attorney to represent the plan member. The private attorney will be selected by mutual agreement of the plan member and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 10, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-71. - Determination of coverage. 
    If the city denies coverage to a plan member, the plan member may seek a determination of coverage by a court of proper jurisdiction in Bexar County, Texas. If the court rules in favor of the plan member, the city shall provide the plan member all benefits under the plan and shall reimburse the plan member for reasonable attorneys' fees, expenses and costs incurred in obtaining the determination of coverage. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 11, 2-14-88) 
Sec. 2-72. - No creation of cause of action. 
    Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as creating a right or cause of action against a plan member nor as giving a right to a third party to institute or maintain a suit which would not otherwise exist under law as a legal claim against a plan member. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 12, 2-14-88) 
Secs. 2-73-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ETHICS REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1377, §§ I, II, adopted July 29, 2008, repealed and reenacted division 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 4 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1266, adopted July 25, 2006. 

Sec. 2-81. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context requires otherwise or more specific definitions set forth elsewhere in this division apply: 
    Acceptance. "Acceptance" of an offer of subsequent employment or business opportunities includes legally binding contracts and all informal understandings that the parties expect to be carried out. 
    Affiliated. Business entities are "affiliated" if one is the parent or subsidiary of the other or if they are subsidiaries of the same parent business entity. 
    Affinity. Relationship by "affinity" (by marriage) is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 573.024 and 573.025. 
    Before the city. Representation or appearance "before the city" means before the city council; before a board, commission, or other city entity; or before a city official or employee. 
    Benefit. "Benefit" means anything reasonably regarded as pecuniary gain or pecuniary advantage, including a benefit to any other person in whose welfare the beneficiary has a direct and substantial interest. 
    Business entity. "Business entity" means a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, unincorporated association, or any other entity recognized by law. 
    City. "City" means the City of Live Oak. 
    City official. The term includes the following persons: The mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges and magistrates, the city attorney, the city manager, assistant city managers, department heads, executive secretaries, members of all boards, commissions, committees, and other bodies created by the city council pursuant to federal or state law or city ordinance, including entities that may be advisory only in nature; and board members of any entity who were appointed by the city council to such board membership. 
    Code of ethics. "Code of ethics," "ethics code," or "this code" means section 2-81 through 2-89 of this division. 
    Confidential government information. "Confidential government information" includes all information held by the city that is not available to the public under the Texas Open Records Act and any information from a meeting closed to the public pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act, regardless of whether disclosure violates the Act. 
    Consanguinity. Relationship by "consanguinity" (by blood) is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code, §§ 573.022 and 573.023. 
    Discretionary contract. "Discretionary contract" means any contract other than those which by law must be awarded on a low or high qualified bid basis. 
    Economic interest. "Economic interest" includes, but is not limited to, legal or equitable property interests in land, chattels, and intangibles, and contractual rights having more than de minimis value. Service by a city official or employee as an officer, director, advisor, or otherwise active participant in an educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, or civic organization does not create for that city official or employee an economic interest in the property of the organization. Ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or other assets is not an economic interest in such securities or other assets unless the person in question participates in the management of the fund. 
    Employee. Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this division, the term "employee" or "city employee" is any person listed on the city payroll as an employee, whether part-time or full-time. 
    Ethics law. "Ethics law" means any rule, regulation, ordinance, policy or statute whether local, state or federal in nature within the jurisdictional authority of the ethics review board as described in subsection 2-87(b). 
    Former city official or employee. A "former city official" or "former city employee" is a person whose city duties terminate after the passage of this division. 
    Gift. "Gift" means a voluntary transfer of property (including the payment of money) or the conferral of a benefit having pecuniary value (such as the rendition of services or the forbearance of collection on a debt), unless consideration of equal or greater value is received by the donor. 
    Indirect ownership. A person "indirectly owns" an equity interest in a business entity where the interest is held through a series of business entities, some of which own interests in others. 
    Knowingly. A person acts "knowingly," or with knowledge, with respect to the nature of his or her conduct or to circumstances surrounding his or her conduct when he or she is aware of the nature of his or her conduct or that the circumstances exist. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to a result of his or her conduct when he or she is aware that his or her conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result. 
    Officer or city officer. "Officer" or "city officer" includes: 
(1)  The mayor or any council member; 
(2)  A municipal judge or magistrate or the city attorney; 
(3)  A member of any board or commission which is more than advisory in function. 
    Official action. "Official action" includes: 
(1)  Any affirmative act (including the making of a recommendation) within the scope of, or in violation of, an official or employee's duties; and 
(2)  Any failure to act, if the city official or employee is under a duty to act and knows that inaction is likely to affect substantially an economic interest of the city official or employee or any person or entity listed in subsection 2-82(a)(1)b. through i. 
    Official information. "Official information" includes information gathered pursuant to the power or authority of city government. 
    Outside business associate. "Outside business associate" includes a person if both that person and the city official or employee own, with respect to the same business entity: 
(1)  Ten percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the business entity; or 
(2)  Ten percent or more of the fair market value of the business entity. 
    Outside client. "Outside client" includes business relationships of a highly personalized nature, but not ordinary business-customer relationships. 
    Ownership. Ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or other assets does not constitute direct or indirect ownership of such securities or other assets unless the person in question participates in the management of the fund. 
    Partner. "Partner" includes partners in general partnerships, limited partnerships, and joint ventures. 
    Personally and substantially participated. The requirement of having "personally and substantially participated" in a matter is met only if the individual in fact exercised discretion relating to the matter. The fact that the person had responsibility for a matter does not by itself establish that the person "personally and substantially participated" in the matter. 
    Representation. "Representation" encompasses all forms of communication and personal appearances in which a person, not acting in performance of official duties, formally or informally serves as an advocate for private interests. Lobbying, even on an informal basis, is a form of representation. "Representation" does not include appearance as a witness in litigation or other official proceedings. 
    Solicitation. "Solicitation" of subsequent employment or business opportunities includes all forms of proposals and negotiations relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Sec. 2-82. - General. 
(a)  Improper economic benefit. 
(1)  General rule. To avoid the appearance and risk of impropriety, a city official or employee shall not take any official action that he or she knows is likely to have an economic effect that is distinguishable from its economic effect on members of the public in general for: 
a.  The city official or employee; 
b.  His or her parent, child, spouse, or other family member within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity; 
c.  His or her outside client; 
d.  A member of his or her household; 
e.  The outside employer of the city official or employee or of his or her parent, child, or spouse; 
f.  A business entity in which the city official or employee knows that any of the persons listed in subsections a. or b. holds an economic interest; 
g.  A business entity which the city official or employee knows is an affiliated business or partner of a business entity in which any of the persons listed in subsections a. or b. holds an economic interest; 
h.  A business entity or nonprofit entity for which the city official or employee serves as an officer or director or in any other policy making position; or 
i.  A person or business entity: 
1.  From whom, within the past 12 months, the city official or employee, or his or her spouse, directly or indirectly has (i) solicited, (ii) received and not rejected, or (iii) accepted an offer of employment; or 
2.  With whom the city official or employee, or his or her spouse, directly or indirectly is engaged in negotiations pertaining to business opportunities. 
(b)  Unfair advancement of private interests. 
(1)  General rule. A city official or employee may not use his or her official position to unfairly advance or impede private interests, or to grant or secure, or attempt to grant or secure, for any person (including himself or herself) any form of special consideration, treatment, exemption, or advantage beyond that which is lawfully available to other persons. 
(2)  Special rules. The following special rules apply in addition to the general rule: 
Reciprocal favors. A city official or employee may not enter into an agreement or understanding, whether verbal or written, with any other person that official action by the city official or employee will be rewarded or reciprocated by the other person, directly or indirectly. 
(c)  Gifts. 
(1)  General rule. A city official or employee shall not solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit: 
That reasonably tends to influence or reward official conduct; or 
(2)  Special applications. Subsections (1)a. and b., do not include: 
a.  A gift to a city official or employee relating to a special occasion, such as a wedding, anniversary, graduation, birth, illness, death, or holiday, provided that the value of the gift is fairly commensurate with the occasion and the relationship between the donor and recipient; 
b.  Reimbursement of reasonable expenses for travel authorized in accordance with city policies; 
c.  A public award or reward for meritorious service or professional achievement provided that the award or reward is reasonable in light of the occasion; 
d.  A loan from a lending institution made in its regular course of business on the same terms generally available to the public; 
e.  A scholarship or fellowship awarded on the same terms and based on the same criteria that are applied to other applicants; or 
f.  Admission to an event in which the city official or employee is participating in connection with official duties. 
(3)  Campaign, contribution exception. The general rule stated in subsection (1) does not apply to a campaign contribution made pursuant to the Texas Election Code. 
(4)  Gifts to closely related persons. A city official or employee shall take reasonable steps to persuade: 
a.  A parent, spouse, child, or other relative within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity; or 
b.  An outside business associate not to solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit: 
1.  That reasonably tends to influence or reward the city official's or employee's official conduct; or 
2.  That the official or employee knows or should know might reasonably be perceived as tending to influence or reward the city official's or employee's discharge of official duties. 
    If a city official or employee required to file a financial disclosure report under section 2-87 knows that a gift or benefit meeting the requirements of subsections (4)b.1. or 2., has been accepted and retained by a person within subsections (4)a. or b., the official or employee shall promptly file a report with the city secretary's office disclosing the donor, the value of the gift or benefit, the recipient, and the recipient's relationship to the official employee filing the report. 
(d)  Confidential information. 
(1)  Improper access. A city official or employee shall not use his or her position to secure official information about any person or entity for any purpose other than the performance of official responsibilities. 
(2)  Improper disclosure or use. A city official or employee shall not intentionally or knowingly disclose any confidential information gained by reason of said official or employee's position concerning the property, operations, policies or affairs of the city. This rule does not prohibit: Any disclosure that is no longer confidential by law; or the confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to authorities designated by law. 
(e)  Representation of private interests. 
(1)  Representation by a member of the board. A city official or employee who is a member of a board or other city body shall not represent any person, group, or entity: 
a.  Before that board or body; 
b.  Before city staff having responsibility for making recommendations to, or taking any action on behalf of, that board or body, unless the board or body is only advisory in nature; or 
c.  Before a board or other city body which has appellate jurisdiction over the board or body of which the city official or employee is a member, if any issue relates to the official's or employee's duties. 
(2)  Representation before the city. 
a.  General rule. A city official or employee shall not represent for compensation any person, group, or entity, other than himself or herself, or his or her spouse or minor children, before the city. For purposes of this subsection, the term "compensation" means money or any other thing of value that is received, or is to be received, in return for or in connection with such representation. 
b.  Prestige of office and improper influence. In connection with the representation of private interests before the city, a city official or employee shall not: 
1.  Assert the prestige of the official's or employee's city position for the purpose of advancing private interests; or 
2.  State or imply that he or she is able to influence city action on any basis other than the merits. 
(f)  Public property and resources. A city official or employee shall not use, request, or permit the use of city facilities, personnel, equipment, or supplies for private purposes (including political purposes), except: 
(1)  Pursuant to duly adopted city policies; or 
(2)  To the extent and according to the terms that those resources are lawfully available to the public. 
(g)  Political activity. Limitations on the political activities of city officials and employees are imposed by state law, the City Charter, and city personnel rules. In addition, the following ethical restrictions apply: 
(1)  Influencing subordinates. A city official or employee shall not, directly or indirectly, induce or attempt to induce any city subordinate of the official or employee to: 
a.  Participate in an election campaign, contribute to a candidate or political committee, or engage in any other political activity relating to a particular party, candidate, or issue; or 
b.  Refrain from engaging in any lawful political activity. 
A general statement merely encouraging another person to vote does not violate this rule. 
(2)  Paid campaigning. A city official or employee shall not accept any thing of value, directly or indirectly, for political activity relating to an item pending on the ballot, if he or she participated in, or provided advice relating to, the exercise of discretionary authority by a city body that contributed to the development of the ballot item. Any thing of value does not include a meal or other item of nominal value the city official or employee receives in return for providing information on an item pending on the ballot. 
(3)  Official vehicles. A city official or employee shall not display or fail to remove campaign materials on any city vehicle under his or her control. 
(h)  Actions of others. 
(1)  Violations by other persons. A city official or employee shall not knowingly assist or induce, or attempt to assist or induce, any person to violate any provision in this division. 
(2)  Using others to engage in forbidden conduct. A city official or employee shall not violate the provisions of this division through the acts of another. 
(3)  All contracts for administrative services between a member of the city council and independent contractors shall contain a provision requiring the independent contractor to comply with all requirements imposed by this division on city employees. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Sec. 2-83. - Applicability of section 12.01 of the City Charter. 
(a)  An officer or employee has a "financial interest" in a contract with the city or in the sale to the city of land, materials, supplies, or service, if any of the following individuals or entities is a party to the contract or sale: 
(1)  The officer or employee; 
(2)  His or her parent, child, or spouse; 
(3)  A business entity in which the officer or employee, or his or her parent, child or spouse, directly or indirectly owns any stock, bond, or financial instrument providing a tangible financial interest; i.e., taxable income. 
(4)  A business entity of which any individual or entity listed in subsections (1), (2) or (3) is: 
a.  A subcontractor on a city contract; 
b.  A partner; or 
c.  A parent or subsidiary business entity. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of enforcing section 12.01 of the City Charter the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be as defined in section 2-81. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Sec. 2-84. - Former city officials and employees. 
(a)  Continuing confidentiality. A former city official or employee shall not use nor disclose confidential government information acquired during service as a city official or employee. This rule does not prohibit: 
(1)  Any disclosure that is no longer confidential by law; or 
(2)  The confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to authorities designated by law. 
(b)  Subsequent representation. 
(1)  Representation by a former board member. A person who was a member of a board or other city body shall not represent for compensation any person, group, or entity for a period of one year after the termination of his or her official duties: 
a.  Before that board or body; 
b.  Before city staff having responsibility for making recommendations to, or taking any action on behalf of, that board or body, unless the board or body is only advisory in nature; or 
c.  Before a board or other city body which has appellate jurisdiction over the board or body of which the former city official or employee was a member, if any issue relates to his or her former duties. 
(2)  Representation before the city. A former city official or employee shall not represent for compensation any person, group, or entity, other than himself or herself, or his or her spouse or minor children, before the city for a period of one year after termination of his or her official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Sec. 2-85. - Discretionary contracts. 
(a)  Impermissible interest in discretionary contract or sale. This subsection applies only to contracts or sales made on a discretionary basis, and not to contracts or sales made on a competitive bid basis. Within one year of the termination of official duties, a former city officer or employee shall not have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any discretionary contract with the city, and shall not be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies, or service. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, express or implied, of the individual or business entity contracting with the council shall render the contract involved voidable by the city manager or the council. A former city officer or employee has a prohibited "financial interest" in a discretionary contract with the city or in the sale to the city of land, materials, supplies, or service, if any of the following individuals or entities is a party to the contract or sale: 
(1)  The former officer or employee; 
(2)  His or her parent, child, or spouse; 
(3)  A business entity in which the former officer or employee, or his or her parent, child or spouse, directly or indirectly owns any stock, bond, or financial instrument providing a tangible financial interest, i.e., taxable income. 
(4)  A business entity of which any individual or entity listed in subsections (1), (2) or (3) is: 
a.  A subcontractor on a city contract; 
b.  A partner; or 
c.  A parent or subsidiary business entity. 
(b)  Prior participation in negotiation or awarding. A former city official or employee may not, within one year of the termination of official duties, perform work on a compensated basis relating to a discretionary contract, if he or she personally and substantially participated in the negotiation or awarding of the contract. A former city official or employee, within one year of termination of official duties must disclose to the city secretary immediately upon knowing that he or she will perform work on a compensated basis relating to a discretionary contract for which he or she did not personally and substantially participate in its negotiation, award or administration. This subsection does not apply to a person who was classified as a city official only because he or she was an appointed member for a board or other city body. 
(c)  Exception: prior employment or status. Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b), a former city official or employee may upon leaving official duties return to employment or other status enjoyed immediately prior to commencing official city duties. 
(d)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  A "former city employee" is any person who, prior to termination of employee status, was required to file a financial disclosure statement pursuant to section 2-87. 
(2)  A "former city officer" is any person who, immediately prior to termination of official duties, was: 
a.  The mayor or a member of city council; 
b.  A municipal judge or magistrate or the city attorney; 
c.  A member of any board or commission which is more than advisory in function. The term does not include members of the board of another governmental entity even if some or all of these members are appointed by the city. 
(3)  The term "contract" means any discretionary contract other than a contract for the personal services of the former city official or employee. 
(4)  The term "service" means any services other than the personal services of the former official or employee. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Sec. 2-86. - Employees subject to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 176. 
(a)  The requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 176.003 and 176.004 are hereby extended to and applicable to any employee of the city who has the authority to approve contracts on behalf of the city. 
(b)  A list of the employees subject to this section shall be maintained by the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Sec. 2-87. - Ethics review board. 
(a)  Structure of the ethics review board. 
(1)  Establishment. There is hereby established an ethics review board, which shall have the powers and duties specified in this division. 
(2)  Composition. The ethics review board shall consist of five members. Each member of the city council shall nominate one member of the board. Each nominee must be confirmed by a majority of city council members. Nomination and confirmation of board members shall be conducted at open meetings of the city council. 
(3)  Terms of office. Board members shall be appointed to two-year terms. Initial appointments shall be made so that terms are staggered. No member shall serve for more than three two-year terms. 
(4)  Qualifications. Members of the board shall have good moral character and shall be residents of the city. No member of the board shall be: 
a.  A salaried city official or employee; 
b.  An elected public official; 
c.  A candidate for elected public office; 
d.  An officer of a political party; or 
(5)  Removal. Members of the ethics review board may be removed from office for cause by a majority of the city council only after a public hearing at which the member was provided with the opportunity to be heard. Grounds for removal include: failure to satisfy, or to continue to satisfy, the qualifications set forth in subsection (4); substantial neglect of duty; gross misconduct in office; inability to discharge the powers or duties of office; or violation of any provision in this division. 
(6)  Vacancies. A vacancy shall be filled by a person who will serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The appointment shall be made by the member of city council who is entitled to make appointments to the seat that was vacated, and must be confirmed by a majority of the city council. 
(7)  Recusal. A member of the ethics review board shall recuse himself or herself from any case in which, because of familial relationship, employment, investments, or otherwise, his or her impartiality might reasonably be questioned. A board member may not participate in official action on any complaint: 
a.  That the member initiated; 
b.  That involves the member of city council who nominated him or her for a seat on the ethics review board; or 
c.  During the pendency of an indictment or information charging the member with an offense, or after a finding of guilt of such an offense. 
If the number of board members who are recused from a case is so large that an ethics panel cannot be constituted, as provided for in subsection (a), the city council shall nominate a sufficient number of ad hoc members so that the case can be heard. Ad hoc members of the ethics review board must be confirmed by a majority vote of the city council and serve only for the case in question. 
(8)  Chair and vice-chair. Each year, the board shall meet and elect a chair and a vice-chair from among its members, who will serve one-year terms and may be re-elected. The chair or a majority of the board may call a meeting of the board. The chair shall preside at meetings of the ethics review board and perform other administrative duties. The vice-chair shall assume the duties of the chair in the event of a vacancy in that position. 
(9)  Reimbursement. The members of the ethics review board shall not be compensated but shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  Jurisdiction and powers. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. The ethics review board shall have jurisdiction to investigate and make findings and recommendations concerning: 
a.  Any alleged violation of this division; 
b.  Any alleged violation of section 12.01 of the City Charter; 
c.  Any alleged violation of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171; 
d.  Any alleged violation of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 176; 
e.  Any alleged violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 36.02, 36.08, 39.02 and 39.06(a); and 
f.  Any alleged violations of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 553. 
The board shall not consider any alleged violation that occurred more than two years prior to the date of the filing of the complaint or more than two years after the complainant discovered or should have discovered the alleged violation. 
(2)  Termination of city official or employee's duties. The termination of a city official's or employee's duties does not affect the jurisdiction of the ethics review board with respect to alleged violations occurring prior to the termination of official duties. 
(3)  Powers. The ethics review board has power to: 
a.  Establish, amend, and rescind rules and procedures governing its own internal organization and operations, consistent with this division; 
b.  Meet as often as necessary to fulfill its responsibilities; 
c.  Designate ethics panels with the power to render decisions on complaints or issue advisory opinions on behalf of the board; 
d.  Request from the city manager through the city council the appointment of such staff as is necessary to carry out its duties; 
e.  Review, index, maintain on file, and dispose of sworn complaints; 
f.  Make notifications, extend deadlines, and conduct investigations; 
g.  Render, index, and maintain on file advisory opinions; 
h.  Provide assistance to the ethics compliance officer of the city in the training and education of city officials and employees with respect to their ethical responsibilities; 
i.  Prepare an annual report and recommend to the mayor and city council needed changes in ethical standards or procedures; and 
j.  Take such other action as is necessary to perform its duties under this division. 
(c)  Ethics compliance officer. 
(1)  City attorney's office. The city attorney or an attorney chosen by the city council shall serve as the ethics compliance officer for the city. The ethics compliance officer shall: 
a.  Receive and promptly transmit to the ethics review board complaints and responses filed with the city secretary; 
b.  Investigate, marshal, and present to the ethics review board the evidence bearing upon a complaint; 
c.  Act as legal counsel to the ethics review board; 
d.  Issue advisory opinions to city officials and employees about the requirements imposed by the ethics laws; and 
e.  Be responsible for the training and education of city officials and employees with respect to their ethical responsibilities. 
At least once each year, the ethics compliance officer shall cause to be distributed to each city official and employee a notice setting forth the duties of the ethics review board and the procedures for filing complaints. The ethics compliance officer shall also ensure that such notices are posted in prominent places in city facilities. 
(2)  Outside independent counsel. An independent outside attorney, who does not otherwise represent the city, shall be appointed by the city council at the recommendation of the city attorney, to serve as the ethics compliance officer for a particular case: 
a.  When a complaint is filed relating to an alleged violation of the ethics laws by: 
1.  The mayor or a member of the city council; or 
2.  A city employee who is a department head or of higher rank; 
b.  When the ethics review board, at the recommendation of the city attorney, requests such an appointment; or 
c.  When requested by the city attorney. 
(3)  Exculpatory evidence. The ethics compliance officer shall disclose to the ethics panel and provide to the person charged with violating the ethics laws evidence known to the ethics compliance officer tending to negate guilt or mitigate the seriousness of the offense. 
(4)  Notice of charges. The city attorney shall consider whether the facts of the case establish a violation of any provision in the ethics laws, regardless of which provisions, if any, were identified in the complaint as having been allegedly violated. However, before the city attorney may find that a violation of a particular rule [has occurred]; the person charged in the complaint must be on notice that compliance with that rule is in issue and must have an opportunity to respond. Notice is conclusively established: if the complaint alleged that the rule was violated; if compliance with the rule is raised by a member of the board or the ethics compliance officer as a disputed issue at a hearing before the ethics panel; or if the board or the ethics compliance officer provides the person charged in the complaint with written notice of the alleged violation and a seven-day period within which to respond in writing to the charge. 
(5)  Scheduling of a hearing. Regardless of whether the complainant or the person charged in the complaint requests a hearing, the ethics panel has discretion to decide whether to hold a hearing. 
(6)  Ex parte communications. It is a violation of this division: 
a.  For the complainant, the person charged in the complaint, or any person acting on their behalf to engage or attempt to engage, directly or indirectly, in ex parte communication about the subject matter of a complaint with a member of the ethics panel, any other member of the ethics review board, or any known witness to the complaint; or 
b.  For a member of an ethics panel or any other member of the ethics review board to: 
1.  Knowingly entertain an ex parte communication prohibited by subsection b.1. of this rule; or 
2.  Communicate directly or indirectly with any person, other than a member of the ethics review board, its staff, or the ethics compliance officer, about any issue of fact or law relating to the complaint. 
(7)  Duty to cooperate. All city officials and employees shall cooperate with the ethics review board and shall supply requested testimony or evidence to assist it in carrying out its charge. Failure to abide by the obligations imposed by this subsection is a violation of this section. 
(d)  Complaints. 
(1)  Filing. Any person (including a member of the ethics review board or its staff, acting personally or on behalf of the board) who believes that there has been a violation of the ethics laws may file a sworn complaint with the city secretary. The complaint shall: 
a.  Identify the person or persons who allegedly committed the violation; 
b.  Provide a statement of the facts on which the complaint is based; and 
c.  To the extent possible, identify the rule or rules allegedly violated. 
The complainant may also recommend other sources of evidence that the ethics review board should consider and may request a hearing. 
A complaint filed in good faith is qualifiedly privileged. A person who knowingly makes a false statement in a complaint, or in proceedings before the ethics review board, is subject to criminal prosecution for perjury or civil liability for the tort of abuse of process. 
(2)  Confidentiality. No city official or employee shall reveal information relating to the filing or processing of a complaint except as required for the performance of official duties. Ex parte communications by members of the ethics review board are prohibited by subsection (c)(6). All papers relating to a pending complaint are confidential. 
(3)  Notification. A copy of a complaint shall be promptly forwarded by the city secretary to the ethics compliance officer and to the person charged in the complaint. The person charged in the complaint shall also be provided with a copy of the ethics rules and shall be informed that: 
a.  Within 14 days of receipt of the complaint, he or she may file a sworn response with the city secretary; 
b.  Failure to file a response does not preclude the ethics review board from adjudicating the complaint; 
c.  A copy of any response filed by the person charged in the complaint will be provided by the city secretary to the complainant, who may within seven days respond by sworn writing filed with the city secretary, a copy of which shall be provided by the city secretary to the person charged in the complaint; 
d.  The person charged in the complaint may request a hearing; and 
e.  City officials and employees have a duty to cooperate with the ethics review board. 
(4)  Assistance. The city secretary shall provide information to persons who inquire about the process for filing a complaint. 
(e)  Hearings. At any hearing held by the ethics commission during the investigation or disposition of a complaint, the following rules apply: 
(1)  General rules. At least three members of the commission must be present for the hearing. Any member of the commission who is not present ceases to be a member of the commission and may not participate in the disposition of the case. All witnesses must be sworn and all questioning of witnesses shall be conducted by the members of the commission. The commission is not bound by the state rules of evidence and may establish time limits and other rules relating to the participation of any person in the hearing. No person may be held to have violated the ethics laws unless a majority of the commission so finds by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(2)  Person charged. The person charged in the complaint has the right to attend the hearing, the right to make a statement, the right to present witnesses, and the right to be accompanied by legal counsel or another advisor. The legal counsel or other advisor to the person charged in the complaint may advise that person during the course of the hearing, but may not speak on his or her behalf, except with the permission of the ethics panel. 
(3)  Complainant. The complainant has the right to attend the hearing, the right to make a statement, and the right to be accompanied by legal counsel or another advisor. The legal counsel or other advisor to the complainant may advise the complainant during the course of the hearing, but may not speak on behalf of the complainant, except with the permission of the ethics panel. Witnesses may not be presented by the complainant, except with the permission of the ethics panel. 
(f)  Disposition. 
(1)  Written opinion. The ethics commission shall make all reasonable efforts to issue a decision within 21 days after the filing of a complaint. The ethics panel shall state in a written opinion its findings of fact and conclusions of law. The written opinion shall either: 
a.  Dismiss the complaint; or 
b.  Upon finding that there has been a violation of the ethics laws: 
1.  Make a recommendation of further investigations to the city council, the city manager or the city attorney; or 
2.  State why no remedial action is recommended. 
If the ethics panel determines that a violation has occurred, the opinion shall identify in writing the particular rule or rules violated. If the complaint is dismissed, the grounds for the dismissal shall be set forth in the opinion. 
(2)  Notification. Copies of the opinion shall be forwarded to the complainant, the person charged in the complaint, the ethics compliance officer, and any member of the ethics review board who did not participate in the disposition of the case. A copy of the opinion shall also be forwarded to the city secretary, who shall make it available as authorized by law. 
(3)  Similar charges barred. If the complaint is dismissed because the evidence failed to establish a violation of the ethics laws, the ethics review board shall not entertain any other similar complaint based on substantially the same evidence. 
(4)  Factors relevant to sanctions. In deciding whether to recommend, in the case of a violation of the ethics law, criminal prosecution and/or civil remedies, the ethics panel shall take into account relevant considerations, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  The culpability of the person charged in the complaint; 
b.  The harm to public or private interests resulting from the violation; 
c.  The necessity of preserving public confidence in the conduct of local government; 
d.  Whether there is evidence of a pattern of disregard for ethical obligations; and 
e.  Whether remedial action has been taken that will mitigate the adverse effect of the ethical violation. 
(5)  Civil remedies. The following civil remedies may be recommended by an ethics panel which finds that the ethics laws have been violated: 
a.  Review of the case by the city manager, or his or her designate, for disciplinary action; 
b.  A suit by the city for damages or injunctive relief; 
c.  Disqualification from contracting; 
d.  Voiding of a contract; and 
e.  A fine. 
(g)  Petition for declaratory ruling. Any city official or employee against whom public allegations of ethics violations have been made in the media or elsewhere shall have the right to file a sworn statement with the city secretary affirming his or her innocence, and to request the ethics review board to investigate and make known its findings, and make any relevant recommendations concerning the issue. 
(h)  Advisory opinions. 
(1)  Opinions issued by the ethics review board. 
a.  Requests by persons other than city officials or employees. 
1.  By writing filed with the city secretary, any person other than a city official or employee may request an advisory opinion with respect to the interpretation of the ethics laws, but only with respect to whether proposed action by that person would violate the ethics laws. The city secretary shall promptly transmit all requests for advisory opinions to the ethics compliance officer (city attorney) and the chair of the ethics review board. (City officials and employees may request advisory opinions from the city attorney pursuant to subsection (2), below.) 
2.  Within 30 days of receipt by the chair of the ethics review board of a request for an advisory opinion, the board shall issue a written advisory opinion. During the preparation of the opinion, the board may consult with the ethics compliance officer of the city and other appropriate persons. An advisory opinion shall not reveal the name of the person who made the request, if that person requested anonymity, in which case the opinion shall be written in the form of a response to an anonymous, hypothetical fact situation. A copy of the opinion shall be indexed and kept by the ethics review board as part of its records for a period of not less than five years. In addition, copies of the opinion shall be forwarded by the chair of the ethics review board, or his or her designate, to the person who requested the opinion, to the ethics compliance officer, and to the city secretary. The city secretary shall make the opinion available as a public record in accordance with the Local Government Records Act. The ethics compliance officer shall promptly cause to be posted the opinion for a period of no less than five years on the Internet via the city's website. 
b.  Opinions initiated by the board. On its own initiative, the ethics review board, acting as the full board, may issue a written advisory opinion with respect to the interpretation of the ethics laws as they apply to persons other than city officials and employees if a majority of the board determines that an opinion would be in the public interest or in the interest of such person or persons subject to the provisions of the ethics laws. Such an opinion may not include the name of any individual who may be affected by the opinion. A copy of any such opinion shall be indexed and kept by the ethics review board as part of its records for a period of not less than five years. In addition, copies of the opinion shall be forwarded by the chair of the ethics review board, or his or her designate, to the ethics compliance officer and to the city secretary. The city secretary shall make the opinion available as a public record in accordance with the Local Government Records Act. The ethics compliance officer shall promptly cause to be posted the opinion for a period of no less than five years on the Internet via the city's website. 
c.  Reliance. If a person reasonably and in good faith acts in reliance on an advisory opinion issued by the ethics review board, that fact may be considered by an ethics panel in adjudicating a complaint filed against that person, but does not by itself bar the finding of a violation. 
(2)  Opinions issued by the ethics compliance officer. 
a.  Requests by city officials or employees. 
1.  By writing filed with the office of the city attorney, any city official or employee may request an advisory opinion with respect to whether proposed action by that person would violate the ethics laws. 
2.  Within 30 days of receipt of the request by the office of the city attorney, the ethics compliance officer shall issue a written advisory opinion. The advisory opinion shall not reveal the name of the person who made the request, if that person requested anonymity, in which case the opinion shall be written in the form of a response to an anonymous, hypothetical fact situation. Copies of the opinion shall be forwarded by the ethics compliance officer to the members of the ethics review board, to the person who requested the opinion, and to the city secretary, and promptly posted by the ethics compliance officer for a period of no less than five years on the Internet via the city's website. The city secretary shall make the opinion available as a public record in accordance with the Local Government Records Act. 
b.  Reliance. A person who reasonably and in good faith acts in accordance with an advisory opinion issued by the ethics compliance officer may not be found to have violated the ethics laws by engaging in conduct approved in the advisory opinion, provided that: 
1.  He or she requested the issuance of the opinion; 
2.  The request for an opinion fairly and accurately disclosed all relevant facts; and 
3.  Less than five years elapsed between the date the opinion was issued and the date of the conduct in question. 
(i)  Annual report. The ethics review board shall prepare and submit an annual report to the mayor and city council detailing the activities of the board during the prior year. The format for the report shall be designed to maximize public and private understanding of the board's operations, and shall include a summary of the content of ethics opinions issued by the board and a listing of current city lobbyists based on information gathered by the board from records on file with the city secretary. The report may recommend changes to the text or administration of this division. The ethics compliance officer of the city shall take reasonable steps to ensure wide dissemination and availability of the annual report of the ethics review board. 
(j)  Public records and open meetings. To the extent required, the ethics review board shall comply with the Texas Public Information Act and the Open Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Sec. 2-88. - Enforcement mechanisms. 
(a)  Disciplinary action. Other city officials and employees who engage in conduct that violates this division may be notified, warned, reprimanded, suspended, or removed from office or employment by the appointing authority, or by a person or body authorized by law to impose such remedies. Disciplinary action under this section may be imposed in addition to any other penalty or remedy contained in this division or any other law. 
(b)  Damages and injunctive relief. This division has been enacted not only to further the purposes stated in this division but to protect the city and any other person from any losses or increased costs incurred by the city or other person as a result of the violation of these provisions. It is the intent of the city that this legislative enactment can and should be recognized by a court as a proper basis for a civil cause of action for damages or injunctive relief based upon a violation of its provisions, and that such forms of redress should be available in addition to any other penalty or remedy contained in this division. 
(c)  Civil fine. Any person, whether or not an official or employee of the city, who violates any provision of this division is subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(d)  Prosecution for perjury. Any person who files a false sworn statement under provisions of this division requiring financial disclosures or pertaining to any proceeding before the ethics review board is subject to criminal prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(e)  Voiding or ratification of contract. If the ethics review board panel finds that there has been a violation of any provisions in this division that is related to the awarding of a contract, the city council must vote on whether to ratify or void the contract. Such action shall not affect the imposition of any penalty or remedy contained in this division or any other law. 
(f)  Disqualification from contracting. 
(1)  Any person (including business entities and nonprofit entities) who intentionally or knowingly violates any provision of this division relating to persons doing business with the city may be prohibited by the city council from entering into any contract with the city for a period not to exceed three years. 
(2)  It is a violation of this division: 
a.  For a person debarred from entering into a contract with the city to enter, or attempt to enter, into a contract with the city during the period of disqualification from contracting; or 
b.  For a city official or employee to knowingly assist a violation of this division. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person from receiving a service or benefit, or from using a facility, which is generally available to the public, according to the same terms. 
(4)  A business entity or nonprofit entity may be disqualified from contracting based on the conduct of an employee or agent, if the conduct occurred within the scope of the employment or agency. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Sec. 2-89. - Administrative provisions. 
(a)  Other obligations. This division is cumulative of and supplemental to applicable state and federal laws and regulations. Compliance with the provisions of this division shall not excuse or relieve any person from any obligation imposed by state or federal law regarding ethics, financial reporting, or any other issue addressed herein. 
    Even if a city official or employee is not prohibited from taking official action by this division, action may be prohibited by duly promulgated personnel rules, which may be more stringent. 
(b)  Distribution and training. 
(1)  The city attorney or designated ethics compliance officer shall provide information about this division to every official and employee of the city, and copies of this division shall be made readily available to city officials, employees, and the public. Within 30 days after entering upon the duties of his or her position, every new official or employee shall be furnished with information about this division. The failure of any person to receive a copy of this division shall have no effect on that person's duty to comply with this division or on the enforcement of its provisions. Upon appointment to a board or commission, such official shall be provided with a copy of the ethics ordinance. 
(2)  The city attorney or designated ethics compliance officer, in consultation with the ethics review board, shall develop educational materials and conduct educational programs for the officials and employees of the city on the provisions of this division, section 12.01 of the City Charter, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171. Such materials and programs shall be designed to maximize understanding of the obligations imposed by these ethics laws. 
(c)  Criminal sanctions. Any person violating any provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, if convicted in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. This provision shall not, however, be preclusive of any criminal prosecutions which may involve violations prosecutable only in either the district courts or county courts at law of Bexar County, Texas. 
    This division is cumulative of all other laws addressing conflicts of interest and the prohibitions and sanctions that may be imposed under other laws relating to the subjects covered hereunder. 
    No person shall intentionally or knowingly induce, attempt to induce, conspire with, aid or assist, or attempt to aid or assist another person to engage in conduct which violates this division. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § II(Exh. A), 7-29-08) 
Secs. 2-90-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER AGENCIES OF THE CITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-101-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 5; emergency preparedness, Ch. 7; fire prevention, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 9; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; planning,, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 21; zoning, App. A. 

Sec. 2-121. - Created. 
    There is hereby created an administrative department of the city under the general supervision of the city manager, which shall be known as the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 6-30-87) 
Sec. 2-122. - General powers and duties. 
    The department of planning shall have charge of administering the functions of the city's planning and zoning programs and efforts in such a manner as to comply with all applicable public laws, state statutes and local charter and ordinances, the administration and enforcement of the zoning and subdivision ordinances and coordination of the building permit process. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 6-30-87) 
Sec. 2-123. - Director of planning-Position created; appointment. 
    There is hereby established the position of director of planning who shall be appointed by and be responsible to the city manager and may be dismissed for cause by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 2, 6-30-87) 
Sec. 2-124. - Same-Powers and duties, generally. 
    The director on behalf of the department shall: 
(1)  Supervise and direct all employees of the department. 
(2)  Advise the city manager, the city council and planning and zoning commission on all matters affecting the physical growth and development of the city when requested or required to do so. 
(3)  Issue or delegate the responsibility to department employees to issue all permits, certificates, orders and notifications resulting from decisions on the ordinances administered by the department. 
(4)  Coordinate physical inspections made by the department. 
(5)  Recommend action on subdivision plats to the city manager, the city's planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(6)  Attend the meetings of the planning and zoning commission of the city and be the official custodian of its records. 
(7)  Attend the meetings of the board of adjustment of the city and be the official custodian of its records. 
(8)  Establish liaison and close working relationships with the administrative offices of the city and other local government agencies and institutions in order for plans of the area to be coordinated. 
(9)  Promote the realization of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Provide information to the public and business community on development standards. 
(11)  Testify at hearings before the city's planning and zoning commission, its board of adjustment and any other cases that may be brought before the courts. 
(12)  Undertake research studies and prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan, including the development of more detailed plans and programs based on the comprehensive plan for area renewal, conservation, rehabilitation or redevelopment. 
(13)  Review all annexation and disannexation proposals and submit written recommendations to the city manager. In the event that the recommendation is for approval of an annexation, the director shall review and submit his written comments to the city manager and the city council on the zoning classification for the annexed tract. 
(14)  Review and submit written comments to the city manager upon all proposals to amend the zoning ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, official map and standards ordinance, and such other ordinances as the city council or city manager may refer to the department. From time to time he shall make recommendations for the updating and revisions of the ordinances concerned or for the adoption of new ordinances related thereto. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 3, 6-30-87) 
Sec. 2-125. - Same-As chief administrative zoning officer. 
    As the city's chief administrative zoning officer he shall also: 
(1)  Administer and enforce the zoning ordinance and conduct inspections of all buildings, structures, signs, and uses of any premises to determine compliance and/noncompliance with the terms of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Maintain current the zoning district map. 
(3)  Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, official actions on all amendments, special uses, variations, appeals, and applications therefor. 
(4)  Administer the subdivision ordinance, and the official map and standards ordinances, including the coordination of review of all plats of subdivisions, and submit a written recommendation for approval or disapproval to the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 4, 6-30-87) 
Secs. 2-126-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 4; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 23. 

Sec. 2-141. - Created; composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created the department of public works, an executive department of the city. 
(b)  It shall consist of the director of public works, who shall be the head of the department and all officers and employees assigned thereto. All such officers and employees shall perform their duties subject to the supervision of the director. 
(Ord. No. 742, § 1, 6-30-87) 
Sec. 2-142. - General powers and responsibilities. 
(a)  The department of public works shall have charge of and supervision over the care, maintenance and construction of all streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways, the construction, operation and maintenance of all storm water and sanitary sewers, and all street gutters and drains and the appurtenances thereto. 
(b)  All physical properties of the city, including the water distribution, parks, playgrounds, and all municipal utilities not assigned to some other department or officer are hereby assigned to the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 742, §§ 2, 3, 6-30-87) 
Sec. 2-143. - Director-Appointment; dismissal. 
    The director of public works shall be appointed by the city manager and may be dismissed for cause by the city manager. He shall perform all of the duties reposed upon him hereinabove and any other duties as shall be assigned to him from time to time by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 742, § 6, 6-30-87) 
Sec. 2-144. - Same-Powers and duties. 
(a)  The director of public works shall be custodian of all vehicles, tools, equipment and other personal property belonging to the city and not assigned to the care of the city or any other public officer. He shall further have the care, custody and control of the city garage and the animal control facilities. 
(b)  The director of public works shall further have the power to manage the field operations and the employees conducting such work for the utility department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 742, §§ 4, 5, 6-30-87) 
Secs. 2-145-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UTILITIES DEPARTMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; utilities, Ch. 23. 

Sec. 2-161. - Established. 
    There is hereby established the department of utilities for the city. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 1, 6-30-87) 
Sec. 2-162. - Powers and duties. 
    This department shall have the responsibility of providing a continuous water supply for domestic and fire protection use and shall be responsible for ensuring that the city's water shall, at all times, be potable for human consumption. The utility department shall also be responsible for administrative duties including, but not limited to billing charges and posting payments to individual customer accounts to the city's consumers of water and sewage facilities. This department is further extended to provide service and information to citizens of matters of public concern as they may relate to any utilities used by the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 1, 6-30-87) 
Secs. 2-163-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-181. - Created. 
    There is hereby created an administrative department of the city under the general supervision of the city manager, which shall be known as the finance department. It shall consist of the director of finance, who shall be head of the department, a finance clerk and any other employees assigned thereto. The director of finance may also supervise other employees and functions at the direction of the city manager. All such employees shall perform their duties subject to the supervision of the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 8-27-96) 
Sec. 2-182. - Responsibilities. 
    The finance department shall be responsible for the administration of the city's financial affairs in accordance with generally accepted governmental accounting standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 8-27-96) 
Sec. 2-183. - Appointment and removal of director. 
    The director of finance shall be appointed and subject to removal by the city manager and shall perform all duties as assigned or directed in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 3, 8-27-96) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 11; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; municipal court, Ch. 14; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15; police, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36; local regulation of billboards and electric signs, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 108.55; local option elections, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.01 et seq. 

Sec. 3-1. - License fee. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of sections 11.38 and 61.36 of the state Alcoholic Beverage Code, an annual fee equal in amount as stated in the city's fee schedule, and as may be amended from time to time by the city council and in accordance with the state regulations up to one-half of that levied by the state, is hereby levied upon all package stores and upon all wine and beer retailers located within the corporate limits of the city, for the use and benefit of such city. The fee shall be and the same is hereby levied on package stores whether they sell all or any part of the classifications of intoxicating beverages, and upon beer and wine retailers upon the same basis, and whether holding a permit for sale of same for consumption on or off the premises. 
(b)  The city secretary is authorized and directed to report any person in default in the payment of any fees due hereunder to the commissioner or administrator of the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
(Ord. No. 567, §§ 1, 2, 2-28-84; Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, amended the title of Ch. 4 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4 was titled, "Animals and Fowl." 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1302, §§ 1-44, adopted March 13, 2007, amended chapter 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 4 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1251, §§ 1-46, adopted May 9, 2006.  Section 47 of Ord. No. 1302 states the following: Ordinance number 1251 passed and adopted by the Live Oak City Council May 9, 2006 is hereby repealed except that this Ordinance shall be in effect for offenses, any element of which occurred before the passage of this Ordinance and Ordinance 1251 is viable to that extent. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference- Health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; municipal authority to require restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033(a)(1); registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.031 et seq.; vaccination of dogs and cats required, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.016; vaccination requirement, 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 169.29; disposition of domestic animals exposed to rabies, 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 169.30; report of potential human exposure to rabies, 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 169.25; quarantine method and testing, 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 169.27; treatment of live birds, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.003; dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.101 et seq.; subchapter of state law does not preempt municipal regulation or prohibition of dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.116(b). 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
    Adult animal. "Adult animal" means any canine or feline that is six months of age. 
    At large or run at large. An animal "at large or run at large" is any animal not kept under restraint. 
    Cat. "Cat" shall mean any member of the feline family, Felis catus. 
    Currently vaccinated. "Currently vaccinated" means vaccinated and satisfying the following criteria: 
(1)  The animal must have been vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 
(2)  At least 30 days have elapsed since the initial vaccination. 
(3)  A booster vaccination must be administered within the 12-month interval following the initial vaccination. 
(4)  Every domestic dog or cat thereafter must be revaccinated against rabies at a minimum of at least once every three years. Provided the vaccination given was an approved triennial vaccine. 
(5)  A veterinarian or owner may select a more frequent rabies vaccination interval. 
    Dog. "Dog" shall mean any member of the canine family, Canis familiaris. 
    Dog or cat license. A "dog or cat license" is the printed or written permission issued by animal control for the holder to keep a dog or cat within the city. 
    Dog or cat license tag. A "dog or cat license tag" is a metal tag of a design prescribed by animal control and bearing the corresponding number of the dog or cat license. 
    Domestic ferret. "Domestic ferret" is any Mustela putorius furo. 
    Feral. A "feral" animal is an animal that has escaped from domestication and reverted to a wild state. 
    Fractious. A "fractious" animal is an animal with an unruly, and aggressive temperament. 
    Impound. "Impound" means to place an animal in the city's animal care and control facility; or the taking into custody of an animal for purposes of transportation to the city's animal care and control facility. 
    Isolation. "Isolation" is the separation of an animal exposed or potentially exposed to a contagion. 
    Licensed veterinarian. A "licensed veterinarian" is a practitioner of veterinary medicine who holds a valid license to practice his/her profession. 
    Livestock. "Livestock" is any or all of the following: bovines, equines, swine, goats, sheep, poultry; or any other animal or fowl, which may cause a health hazard within the meaning of this chapter. 
    Owner. The "owner" of an animal is a person who has, feeds, harbors or keeps, or causes, or permits to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his/her premises. 
    Quarantine. "Quarantine" is to detain and isolate on account of suspected contagion. 
    Prohibited animal. "Prohibited animal" means any animal not normally born and raised in captivity, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Class Reptilia. Family Helodermatidea (the venomous lizards) and all Varanidae (monitor); order Ophidia, family Boidoe (boas, phthons, anaconda); family Hydrophiidae (marine snakes); family Viperdae (rattlesnakes, pit vipers and true vipers); family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras and mambas); family Colubridae, Disholidus typus (boomslang), Cyclagras gigas (water cobra), Boiga dendrophila (mangrove snake) and Kirtlandii (twig snake) only; order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators and gavials); 
(2)  Class Aves. Order Falconiforms (such as hawks, eagles and vultures) and subdivision Rapitae (such as ostriches, rhea, cassowaries, and emus); 
(3)  Class Mammalia. Order Carnivora, (the family felidae) except cats; the family Canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes, coydogs and jackals, or any hybrid thereof), except dogs; the family Mustelidae (such as weasels, skunks, martins, mink, badgers), the family Procyonidae (raccoon); the family Ursidae (such as bears); and order Marsupalia (such as kangaroos, oppossums); order Chroptera (bats); order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos); order Proboscidea (elephants); order Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees and gorilla); order Rodentia (such as porcupines); and order Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison, and camels); 
(4)  Class Amphibia. Poisonous frogs. 
(5)  Livestock. Any or all of the following: bovines, equines, swine, goats, sheep, poultry; or any other animal or fowl, which may cause a health hazard within the meaning of this chapter. 
    "Prohibited animal" does not include normal household pets, such as a psittacine bird, canary, finch, cockatiel, hamster, gerbil, guinea pig, rabbit, domestic ferret, rat, mouse, sugar glider, hedgehog, fish, invertebrate, crustacean, or small nonpoisonous reptiles and amphibians. 
    Restraint. "Restraint" shall mean any animal kept securely caged or secured by a leash or lead, or under the immediate effective physical control, supervision, and attention of a responsible person, or within the confines of its owners home or yard which is fully enclosed by a good, secure, and substantial fence. 
    Unprovoked. "Unprovoked" with respect to an attack or attempt to attack by a dog means that the dog was not hit, kicked, or struck by a person with any object or part of the attacked person's body nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched, or squeezed, or in any other manner provoked by the person attacked. 
    Vaccination. "Vaccination" is a protective inoculation against rabies by inoculation with antirabic vaccine recognized an approved by the United States Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Animal Industry, given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity. 
    Vaccination certificate. A "vaccination certificate" is a certificate showing on it's face that the animal described thereon has received an inoculation of antirabic vaccine in an amount sufficient to produce an immunity an bearing the signature of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 1, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-2. - Reporting stray animals. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to report to animal control the presence and description of straying or lost animals, which appear at or take up at a person's premises. Said report shall be made within 24 hours after discovery of their presence. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 2, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-3. - Animal care and control facility; erection, maintenance, and care of animals therein. 
    There shall be erected and maintained, under the supervision of the animal control supervisor, a suitable building and kennels, to be known as the animal care and control facility, for the confinement of all animals found free of restraint and/or in violation of the provisions of this chapter. The animal care and control facility shall be kept in a sanitary condition and all animals taken up and impounded therein shall be properly fed and watered while confined in such building and kennels, and shall be treated in a humane manner while so confined. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-4. - Immunization required for dogs and cats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any dog or cat four months and older in the city unless such dog or cat is currently vaccinated against rabies by the injection of antirabic vaccine by a licensed veterinarian in an amount sufficient to produce an immunity. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 4, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-5. - Immunization certificate. 
(a)  Every person owning or keeping any dog or cat four months and older currently vaccinated against rabies, as provided in section 4-4, shall procure a written vaccination certificate, signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, giving an accurate description of the dog or cat, date of immunization, and the name and address of the owner of the dog or cat. 
(b)  Any authorized agent of animal control may request to see such vaccination certificate at any time, and the failure of the owner or person in possession of the dog or cat to exhibit such vaccination certificate upon request, shall constitute an offense under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 5, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-6. - Dog and cat license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner to have, harbor or keep, or to cause or permit to be harbored, kept, or to be free of restraint, any unlicensed dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 6, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-7. - License fees; vaccination certificate prerequisite to issuance of dog and cat license tags. 
(a)  Every owner of a dog or cat, upon presentation of a vaccination certificate, as provided for in subsection 4-5(a), to the animal control officer or his representative, showing that the dog or cat has been vaccinated with a one-year antirabic vaccine; and upon payment of a fee of $5.00 shall be issued a one-year license and a corresponding numbered license tag. Provided, however, the fee of $2.00 shall be a fee for a one-year license tag, in the case of an animal which has been spayed or neutered. The owner of any dog or cat, which has been spayed or neutered, shall present such proof as animal control may specify, in order to qualify for the $2.00 license. Provided, however, the license shall be free in the case of an animal which has been verified as spayed or neutered and additionally has an active implanted microchip and that microchip is verified by a veterinarian's receipt identifying the animal or that the microchip was verified by the scanning device maintained by animal control personnel. 
(b)  Licenses are valid concurrent with the date of rabies vaccination and expire on the date specified on the rabies vaccination certificate. 
(c)  All dogs and cats four months and older are required to be licensed. 
(d)  In the event the animal license tag is lost or damaged and unreadable, a duplicate must be obtained from animal control upon presentation of a valid vaccination certificate and the payment of $2.00. 
(e)  Dogs and cats must wear collars with the city license tag attached thereto at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, repealed the former § 4-7 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 4-7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1302, § 7, adopted March 13, 2007. 
Sec. 4-8. - Dogs and cats for which license not required. 
    The provisions of section 4-6 requiring a license for dogs and cats shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any dog or cat under three months of age, provided such animal is not permitted to run at large. 
(2)  Dogs and cats owned and accompanied by a nonresident owner whose stay in the city will not exceed 30 days, provided such nonresident owner keeps his animal confined at all times while in the city. 
(3)  Any dog or cat brought into the city and entered in any animal show or exhibition; provided, this exception shall not be operative longer than a period of time commencing not more than seven days before any such show or exhibition is held and ending not more than seven days after the animal's participation in such show or exhibition. 
(4)  Dogs and cats in veterinary hospitals, boarding kennels, or licensed breeding kennels, provided such animals are securely confined at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 8, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-9. - Use of dog and cat license tags issued for other animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attach to the collar of any dog or cat subject to licensing under this article, a license tag that has been issued for any other dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 9, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-10. - Animal restraint is required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring or in possession of any animal to permit it to be free of restraint either inside or outside such person's premises. 
(b)  Any animal permitted to be kept within the city shall not be chained, tied, fastened or otherwise tethered to any stationary or inanimate object as a means of confinement and restraint to property. First-time violators of this provision may be given one to two days' grace without penalty to correct a violation of this provision. Exception from penalty shall not be given in any case where the violation of this provision causes or contributes to the bodily injury of a person or animal. An animal chained, not having food, not having water, [or] not having shelter shall be considered separate offenses under this provision and each violation shall carry a separate penalty. 
(c)  All animals permitted to be kept within the city must he restrained at all times within the owner's premises by a secure fence or on a leash or lead. 
(d)  Any dogs confined within a fenced yard must have an adequate space for exercise based on a dimension of at least 100 square feet. Provided further that where dogs are kept or housed on property without a fenced yard, the owner of such dogs or persons having custody of such dogs shall provide an enclosure for such dogs meeting the 100 square feet dimension. Such enclosure shall be constructed of chain link or similar type materials with all four sides enclosed. The enclosure shall be of sufficient height to prevent the dog from escaping from such enclosure. The top of such enclosure shall be covered with materials to provide the dog with shade and protection from the elements. 
(e)  An animal shall not be considered enclosed by a fence or restrained when and if the animal can pass through, under or over the fence, or the gate of the fence is not securely latched. 
(f)  A dog that can snap or bite a person through a fence shall not be considered enclosed by the fence or restrained. 
(g)  An electronic fence shall not be considered to be a fence, and an electronic leash shall not be considered to be a leash. 
(h)  A dog will be considered to be leashed only when the leash is six feet or less in length or is a retractable leash, and is being grasped by an adult, provided that if the dog is less than 20 pounds then the leash may be grasped by a person who is competent to handle the dog and is over 12 years of age. 
(i)  Notwithstanding the prior section, in the event that a dog on a retractable leash causes injury or death to a person or animal, the owners and the person holding the retractable leash shall be presumed to be in violation of this chapter unless it is proved that the leash was retracted to no more than six feet at the time of the injury or damage. 
(j)  Prosecution of any owner or person in possession of any animal for the offense described herein may be instituted in the municipal court by any person filing a sworn complaint charging such owner or person in possession with such offense. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 10, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-11. - Dangerous dog-Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
    Dangerous dog. "Dangerous dog" means a dog that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another dog that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on it's own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
    Dog. "Dog" means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family. 
    Owner means a person who owns or has custody or control of the dog. 
    Secure enclosure means a fenced area that is: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog; 
(4)  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; 
(5)  Constructed with vertical boards six feet in length or higher if deemed appropriate by the animal control officer based upon the size of the dog to be kept in the fenced area and it's anticipated ability to escape; 
(6)  A structure or pen built upon a concrete slab with four sides and a top located in a fenced area at least five feet from the fence; or 
(7)  A residential dwelling with all doors and windows closed. 
    Unprovoked. "Unprovoked" with respect to an attack or attempt to attack by a dog means that the dog was not hit, kicked, or struck by a person with any object or part of the attacked person's body nor was any part of the body pulled, pinched, or squeezed or in any other manner provoked by the person attacked. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 11, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-12. - Requirements for owner of dangerous dog. 
(a)  Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall: 
(1)  Register the dangerous dog with animal control; 
(2)  Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure; 
(3)  Muzzle the dog when it is outside the secure enclosure; 
(4)  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person; and 
(5)  Have the dangerous dog spayed or neutered. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a person learns that he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog when: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack described in subsection 4-11(a)(1); or 
(2)  The owner is informed by animal control that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(c)  If a person reports an incident described by subsection 4-11(a), the animal control officer may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control officer determines the dog is a dangerous dog, he or she shall notify the owner of that fact. 
(d)  An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control officer to the municipal court. An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner for other civil cases. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 12, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-13. - Dangerous dog registration. 
(a)  Animal control shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner: 
(1)  Presents proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by subsection 4-12(a)(4), current rabies vaccination, proof of sterilization of the dangerous dog; and has a secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept that is inspected and approved by the animal control officer; and 
(2)  Pays an annual registration fee of $50.00. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The owner must place the tag on the dog's collar. The collar must be fluorescent yellow. 
(c)  If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control officer for the area in which the new address is located. On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and payment of a fee of $50.00, the animal control officer authority shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar. 
(d)  An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 13, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-14. - Attack by dangerous dog. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog destroyed by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian. 
(d)  In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for civil penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. The city attorney may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. The municipality shall retain penalties collected under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 14, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-15. - Dangerous dog violations. 
(a)  A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply with section 4-12. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor and any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $1.00, nor more than $1,000.00. 
(c)  An offense under this section is a class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the defendant has previously been convicted under this section. 
(d)  In a prosecution under this section it shall be unnecessary to allege and prove a culpable state of mind inasmuch as the ordinance from which this chapter derives is passed and adopted for the protection of the health and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 15, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-16. - Dangerous dog defense. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 4-14 or section 4-15 that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter; or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with that position. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 4-14 or section 4-15 that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 4-14 or section 4-15 that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under the Private Investigator and Private Security Agencies Act (Article 4413(29bb), Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes). 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 16, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-17. - Dog causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person-Definitions. 
    Animal control authority means the Live Oak Animal Care and Control Office. 
    Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonable prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 17, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-18. - Seizure of a dog causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person. 
(a)  A justice court, county court, or municipal court shall order the animal control authority to seize a dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure: 
(1)  On the sworn complaint of any person, including the county attorney, the city attorney, or a peace officer, that the dog has caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person; and 
(2)  On a showing of probable cause to believe that the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury to the person stated in the complaint. 
(b)  The animal control authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court order the disposition of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 18, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-19. - Dog causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person-Hearing. 
(a)  The court shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the warrant is issued. 
(b)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; and 
(2)  The person who made the complaint. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the county attorney or city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  The court shall order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the death of a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court shall order the dog released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom the dog was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of the dog. 
(e)  The court may order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court shall order the dog released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom the dog was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of the dog. 
(f)  The court may not order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person and: 
(1)  The dog was being used for the protection of a person or person's property, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and: 
a.  The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and provided notice of the presence of a dog; and 
b.  The injured person was at least eight years of age, and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; 
(2)  The dog was not being used for the protection of a person or person's property, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and the injured person was at least eight years of age and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; 
(3)  The attack, bite, or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action of a peace officer while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes; 
(4)  The dog was defending a person from an assault or person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or 
(5)  The injured person was younger than eight years of age, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and the enclosure was reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight years of age from entering. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 19, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-20. - Destruction of dog causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person. 
    The destruction of a dog under this section must be performed by: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian; 
(2)  Personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society who are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or 
(3)  Personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal control whom are trained in the humane destruction of animals. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 20, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-21. - Provocation or location of attack irrelevant. 
    Except as provided by subsection 4-19(f), this section applies to any dog that causes a person's death or serious bodily injury by attacking, biting, or mauling the person, regardless of whether the dog was provoked and regardless of where the incident resulting in the person's death or serious bodily injury occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 21, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-22. - Local rabies control authority. 
(a)  The animal control officer supervisor of the city is designated as the local rabies control authority to enforce the provisions of the Rabies Control Act of 1981, (Vernon's Texas Statutes and Codes Annotated, Health and Safety Code, Title 10. Health and Safety of Animals, Chapter 826, Rabies). 
(b)  The duties of the local rabies control authority shall include but are not limited to the enforcement of: 
(1)  The provisions of the Rabies Control Act of 1981, and the rules of the state board of health which comprise the minimum standards for rabies control; 
(2)  The ordinances and/or rules of the city in which he or she serves; and/or 
(3)  The rules adopted by the state board of health under the area quarantine provisions of Section 826.045, of said Act. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 22, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-23. - Animal bites-Procedure. 
(a)  Whenever any animal subject to having rabies bites a person, the owner of the biting animal or the person observing the incident shall immediately report the incident to the local rabies control authority, animal control office, or police department. The police department shall contact the animal control officer for such reports. The animal making the attack shall be placed under observation, at the owner's expense, for a period of ten days (240 hours), from the time of the bite, and held in the animal care and control facility or a veterinary hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian within the jurisdiction of the city, except: 
(1)  In cases where the animal bites a member of the immediate family of the owner and has been currently vaccinated for rabies and currently licensed by the city and the local rabies control authority has determined the owner has adequate facilities to prevent the animal's escape and that the animal will be isolated from contact from any other family pet. 
(2)  Any guard or police dog currently vaccinated and licensed; but only when the bite occurs in line of duty, and only if any lawful patrol or visitor of a business is not jeopardized by guard dog during the hours said business is open to the public. Any guard or police dog currently vaccinated and licensed that is involved in a bite incident while in the performance of its guard or police duties, shall be allowed to continue on duty under observation. Where an exception is granted, the owner of the animal shall be responsible for confining the animal so as to prevent further exposure to humans or other animals during the observation period. 
(b)  The owner of any animal confined due to an animal bite issue and is quarantined during the time of confinement as stated in section 4-23(a) shall be charged a quarantine fee in accordance with the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 23, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Sec. 4-24. - Seizure and impoundment of biting animal. 
    The violation of observation confinement of the biting animal shall be just cause for seizure and confinement of the animal in the animal care and control facility of the city. 
(1)  No biting animal shall be released from observation unless a licensed veterinarian or local rabies control authority certifies in writing that the animal is not showing any symptoms of rabies and that the animal is vaccinated against rabies upon redemption. Exemption from placing such animal in the animal care and control facility or in a veterinary hospital shall not exempt such owner from securing a proper release as provided above. 
(2)  Whenever any animal subject to having rabies bites a person and the owner or person in control of such animal fails, neglects or refuses to deliver such animal to the animal care and control facility or licensed veterinary clinic within the jurisdiction of the incident as provided by subsection 4-23(a) and such fact is made known to the judge of the municipal court upon affidavit of a credible person, it shall be the duty of such judge to issue a written order directed to the animal control officer ordering him or her to seize such animal and deliver it to the animal care and control facility instanter. 
(3)  Any person, who resists or interferes with the officer in the enforcement of such order, may be proceeded against under this chapter or the penal code of the state or by contempt proceedings in municipal court or all of these. 
(4)  The owner of any animal confined in the animal care and control facility under the provisions of this section shall pay boarding on such animal as stated in the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 24, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Sec. 4-25. - Animal bites-Duty of owner of animal bitten by rabid animal. 
    The animal control officer shall serve the notice in writing upon an owner of a dog, cat, or other animal known to have been bitten by an animal known or suspected of being infected with rabies, requiring such owner to have the dog or other animal examined and treated within 24 hours by a licensed veterinarian. In such cases that the biting animal is not captured and is high risk for rabies or is captured and tests positive for rabies the owner of the animal bitten shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies and placed into isolation for the period of time according to it's vaccination status at the time of the bite, as defined by the state board of health rule 169.30 (disposition of animals exposed to rabies), or be humanely killed. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 25, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-26. - Submission of rabies specimens. 
    The heads of animals that have died of rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be turned over to the animal control officer for dispatch to an authorized laboratory for fluorescent rabies antibody testing. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 26, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-27. - Duty of person knowing of animals exhibiting symptoms of rabies. 
    Whenever a dog, cat, or other animal is infected with rabies or suspected of being infected with rabies or has been bitten by an animal known or suspected of being infected with rabies, the owner of the animal or any person having knowledge thereof, shall immediately notify the animal control officer where the animal may be found. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 27, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-28. - Impounding-Authority of animal control officer. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall have authority to impound the following: 
(1)  Any dog or cat found free of restraint; 
(2)  Any dog or cat which has not been redeemed by its owners in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Any dog, cat, or other animal exhibiting symptoms of rabies; 
(4)  Any dog or cat not vaccinated for rabies or licensed with the city. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall have authority to immediately destroy humanely any impounded dog, cat or other animal whose retention because of feral or fractious behavior would be detrimental to the health and welfare of other animals in the city animal care and control facility or in the community. 
(c)  Animals that are sick or injured wearing no apparent identification through which ownership can be determined may be kept zero to 72 hours at the discretion of the animal control officer after consultation with the city veterinarian. The animal may be humanely destroyed within the written time advised by the city veterinarian. In emergency situations, where it would be inhumane to transport the animal due to the severity of injuries, the animal may be euthanized in the field. In this case, the animal must remain observed until the time that the animal control officer can attain the necessary chemicals to perform the euthanasia and return to the field location. 
(d)  The animal control officer will contact owners of tagged or licensed animals found sick or injured for their choice of treatment or euthanasia. In cases when identified owners can not be contacted the animal control officer will follow the written advice of the city veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 28, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-29. - Same-Redemption. 
(a)  All animals impounded under the provisions of section 4-10, or converted to impoundment status under section 4-12 shall be held at least three working days during which time the owner may reclaim and redeem such animal upon paying to the animal control officer the charges due. Dogs and cats shall be released upon evidence of vaccination or provisionally for vaccination in which case evidence of vaccination will be presented within three working days. Dogs and cats converted to impoundment status under section 4-12 must be vaccinated prior to release to the owner. 
(b)  For every animal reclaimed and redeemed from confinement in the animal care and control facility for which at the time of such redemption a valid current vaccination certificate and license has been issued, the fee due the animal control officer shall be $30.00 plus board of $8.00 per day. For a second offense the redemption fee will be $40.00 plus board of $8.00 per day. For a third offense the redemption fee of $50.00 plus board of $8.00 per day. In cases where the redeemed animal is unlicensed the prescribed licensing fee will be paid prior to release of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 29, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-30. - Animal cruelty or neglect. 
    For purposes of this chapter, animal control officers authority shall be to assist in educating the public, investigating complaints, gathering evidence, and obtaining warrants to seize cruelly treated animals. Enforcement measures involving class "A" misdemeanors and third degree felonies shall be the duty of a duly sworn peace officer. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person to intentionally or knowingly: 
a.  Torture an animal; 
b.  Fail unreasonably to provide necessary water, food, care or shelter for an animal in his custody; 
c.  Abandon unreasonably an animal in the person's custody; 
d.  Transport or confine an animal in a cruel manner; 
e.  Kill, injure, or administer poison to an animal (this does not apply to rodent control or pets brought to the animal facility or veterinarian for euthanasia); 
f.  Cause one animal to fight with another; 
g.  Use a live animal as a lure in dog race training or in dog coursing on a race track; 
h.  Trip a horse; 
i.  Injure an animal, other than cattle, horses, sheep, swine, or goats, belonging to another without legal authority or the owner's effective consent; or 
j.  Seriously overwork an animal. 
(2)  For purposes of this section: 
Abandon includes abandoning an animal in the person's custody without making reasonable arrangements for assumption of custody by another person. 
Animal means a domesticated living creature and wild living creature previously captured. "Animal" does not include an uncaptured wild creature or a wild creature whose capture was accomplished by conduct at issue under this section. 
Cruel manner includes a manner that causes or permits unjustified or unwarranted pain or suffering. 
Custody includes responsibility for the health, safety, and welfare of an animal subject to the person's care and control, regardless of ownership of the animal. 
Necessary water, food, care, or shelter includes water, food, care, or shelter provided to the extent required to maintain the animal in a state of good health. 
Trip means to use an object to cause a horse to fall or lose its balance. 
(3)  An offense under subsections (1)b., c., d., i., or j. is a class A misdemeanor, except that the offense is a state jail felony if the person has previously been convicted two times under this section. 
(4)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (1)e. that the animal was discovered on the person's property in the act of or immediately after injuring or killing the person's goats, sheep, cattle, horses, swine, or poultry and that the person killed or injured the animal at the time of the discovery. 
(5)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (1)h. that the actor tripped the horse for the purpose of identifying the ownership of the horse or giving veterinary care to the horse. 
(6)  An offense under subsections (1)a., e., f., or h. is a state jail felony, except that the offense is a felony of the third degree if the person has previously been convicted two times under this section. 
(7)  It is an exception to the application of this section that the conduct engaged in by the actor is a generally accepted and otherwise lawful use of an animal if that occurs solely for the purpose of: 
a.  Fishing, hunting, or trapping; 
b.  Wildlife control as regulated by state and federal law; or 
c.  Animal husbandry or farming practice involving livestock. 
(8)  It is a defense to prosecution for an offense under this section that the person had a reasonable fear of bodily injury to the person or to another by a dangerous wild animal as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.101. 
(9)  When the animal control officer or police officer has probable cause to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, he or she may apply for a warrant in a justice court to seize the animal. 
(10)  The officer executing the warrant shall cause the animal to be impounded in the city animal care and control facility or the facilities of the designated city veterinarian. The officer will also give notice to the owner of the animal of the date, time, and place of a hearing to determine the disposition of the animal. The hearing will be held on the first scheduled court date following the date of impoundment. If it is found that the animal was not cruelly treated, it will be returned to the owner without cost. If it is found that the animal was cruelly treated, the judge of the justice court shall award custody of the animal to the city animal care and control facility for disposition as prescribed in other sections of this chapter and the owner shall be responsible for all fees and charges incurred including the cost of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 30, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-31. - Animals riding in open beds of pick-up trucks. 
    It shall be unlawful for animals to ride in the open bed of pick up trucks, unless they are restrained in such a manner that they cannot jump or accidentally fall out of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 31, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-32. - Removing animal feces from public property. 
    Persons walking dogs on streets and in other public places shall be responsible for the immediate clean up of their animal's feces. Failure to comply will constitute an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 32, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-33. - Persons in possession of prohibited animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or be in possession of any live animal defined in section 4-1. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 33, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-34. - Number of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to maintain or keep in the aggregate, more than four dogs and/or cats on premises within the corporate limits of the city. Veterinarian facilities, pet shops, and the animal care and control facility are exempt from this requirement. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to maintain or keep on premises within the corporate limits of the city, more than the number of dogs and/or cats designated by the city council in the variance granted to such person or persons. 
(c)  Any number of dogs and/or cats kept on premises within the corporate limits of the city that are in excess of the number allowed under this section shall constitute a public nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 1531, § I , 5-10-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1531, § I , adopted May 10, 2016, amended § 4-34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 4-34 pertained to number of adult animals and derived from Ord. No. 1302, § 34, adopted March 13, 2007. 
Sec. 4-35. - Variance; maximum authorized, authority of city council to revoke. 
(a)  The city council upon application for variance to section 4-34 as hereinafter provided, may grant or deny, in whole or in part, an application for variance to section 4-34. 
(b)  The city council, upon granting a variance to section 4-34 shall designate the number of adult dogs and/or cats authorized to be maintained or kept by the variance granted, but in no event shall the number of adult dogs and/or cats authorized by the granting of the variance to section 4-34 exceed, in the aggregate, six adult dogs and/or cats. 
(c)  The city council after notice to the person or persons granted a variance to section 4-34, and after conducting a hearing thereon, may revoke the variance granted to such person or persons. 
(1)  The notice shall be: 
a.  In written form; 
b.  Addressed to the person or persons; 
c.  Specify the purpose of the notice; 
d.  Designate the time, date, and place or the hearing to consider revoking the variance granted to such person or persons. 
(2)  The notice shall be mailed to the address of the person or persons by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  The decision of the city council considering the revocation of the variance granted to the person or persons shall be attached to the person's or persons' application for variance to section 4-34 and be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary in accordance with the record keeping practices of that office. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 35, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-36. - Application for variance; procedure. 
(a)  Any persons desiring to maintain or keep in the aggregate more than four adult dogs and/or cats with in the corporate limits of the city, may file a written application with the city secretary, requesting the city council to grant his or her written application for variance to section 4-34. 
    The written application must contain the following information: 
(1)  The name(s) and address(es) of the person(s) making such application for variance; 
(2)  The applicant's reason(s) for requesting the variance; 
(3)  The names and addresses of all homeowners residing within a 200-foot radius of the applicant's property lines; 
(4)  The number of adult dogs and/or cats the applicant desires to maintain or keep in excess of the basic number of adult dogs and/or cats allowed by section 4-34; 
(5)  An animal care verification form completed and signed by a licensed veterinarian; 
(6)  Proof of sterilization of animals requested to be kept in excess of subsection 4-34(a); and 
(7)  The application must be signed and dated by the applicant. 
(b)  A fee of $10.00 must accompany each application to cover the expense of processing the application and notifying adjacent property owners of the applicant's request for variance to section 4-34. 
(c)  The city secretary, upon receipt of the application for variance and the application fee, shall then do the following: 
(1)  Place such application on the agenda of the regularly scheduled city council meeting following the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
(2)  Notify the applicant of the date such application will be considered by the city council. 
(3)  Notify by mail all homeowners with a 200-foot radius of the applicant's property lines of the application for variance to section 4-34 and the date that the city council will consider the application for variance. 
a.  All notices to said homeowners shall be a standardized form and contain a provision requesting that the homeowner indicate his/her consent or objection to the variance application and return such form to the city secretary on or before the date of the scheduled hearing on the application for variance. 
b.  All such returned forms shall be open for inspection at the office of the city secretary during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 36, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-37. - Hearing on application for variances. 
(a)  The city council shall hear all applications for variances to section 4-34 at a regularly scheduled council meeting. The council, in determining whether to grant or deny a variance application may consider the following factors: 
(1)  The size or breed of dogs and/or cats; 
(2)  The applicant's lot size; 
(3)  The number of runs or pens; 
(4)  The sterilization status of the dogs and/or cats; 
(5)  The applicant's fencing; 
(6)  The objections to the application from homeowners within a 200-foot radius of applicant's property lines; and 
(7)  All other matters deemed relevant by the council to the application for variance. 
(b)  The decision of the city council considering the application for variance to section 4-34 shall be noted on the application by the city secretary and thereafter, the application and any attending documents shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary in accordance with the record keeping practices of the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 37, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-38. - Spay/neuter program. 
(a)  Dogs and cats that are not reclaimed within three working days from the time that they were impounded may be euthanized or made available for adoption. A new owner adopting a dog or cat will pay the fee prescribed by the city at the time of selection of an animal available for adoption. The new owner shall complete the "Adopted To" section of the city animal care and control impound record. The new owner will be issued a receipt for adoption fee paid. The animal will then be transported by city animal care and control personnel to the city contract veterinarian for surgical sterilization. The fee paid shall cover examination of the animal, rabies vaccination, micro-chip implant, surgical sterilization, and booster vaccination for canine or feline disease, de-worming, heart-worm test, and an adoption kit. The animal will not be released to the new owner until after completion of sterilization. In the event the adopted animal may not be surgically sterilized due to a compromising health condition: the contract veterinarian or other licensed veterinarian shall submit an affidavit to city animal care and control personnel. The adopter in this case will be allowed to receive a refund for a fee paid or select another animal to adopt. 
(b)  Adopters that elect to utilize the services of a veterinarian other that the city contract veterinarian shall pay the fee prescribed by the city. City animal care and control personnel will transport the animal to their veterinarian within a ten-mile radius of the city. The adopter shall be responsible for the costs of surgical sterilization and rabies vaccination at the veterinarian of their choice within this radius. The amount of $35.00 of the collected fee shall be an administrative charge by the city for transportation of the animal. 
(c)  Unclaimed animals that are not adopted may be humanely put to death. All animals shall be euthanized by a lethal injection unless the safety of city animal care and control personnel and/or animals is at risk. These animals may then be euthanized by other methods approved by the state department of state health service and the American Veterinary Medical Association. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 38, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-39. - Rights and duties of animal control officer. 
(a)  For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and to enforce its provisions, an animal control officer or his authorized representative is hereby empowered to enter upon any private property for the purpose of ascertaining whether an animal present, kept or harbored thereon is afflicted with rabies; or whether or not a vaccination license certificate and tag has been secured for any dog or cat; or to ascertain if compliance under any other section of this chapter has been performed. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to administer and enforce all state laws and city ordinances which regulate animals. 
(c)  An animal control officer is authorized to apprehend any and all dogs, cats, livestock, or wildlife whether or not confined within a fenced enclosure, house, garage or other structure, or whether on or off a leash or chain if the officer identifies that the presence, keeping, harboring and possessing of animals is in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  An animal control officer is authorized to seize any animal and impound any animal that the officer finds to be kept, harbored, maintained or possessed in any manner that is in violation of this chapter. 
(e)  An animal control officer may apply for warrants to be issued by the municipal court for the search and inspection of any property or premises in the city and for the seizure of any animal that is found to be in violation of this chapter or any animal not kept by the owner or person in possession or control of an animal in conformity with this chapter or state law. 
( Ord. No. 1531, § I , 5-10-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1531, § I , adopted May 10, 2016, amended § 4-39 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 4-34 pertained to right of entry of animal control officer and derived from Ord. No. 1302, § 39, adopted March 13, 2007. 
Sec. 4-40. - Interference with discharge of duties by animal control officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control officer or his assistants in execution or performance of his duty under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 40, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-41. - Rescuing or turning loose impounded animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to rescue or turn loose impounded animals from a pick-up vehicle, live animal traps or the animal control facility. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 41, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-42. - Interfering with wildlife/feral cat colonies prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place food or water at any location for purpose of attracting and or sustaining wild mammals as defined in section 4-1 or feral cats. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 42, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-43. - Citations for violations of chapter. 
    For the purpose of enforcing this chapter the animal control officer or his authorized representative shall be empowered to issue citations upon an owner, as defined in section 4-1, who is found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter setting forth the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 43, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-44. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to violate any of the provisions of this chapter and such person shall, upon conviction be punished by fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $1,000.00. Each day a violation of any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
    In a prosecution under this section it shall further be unnecessary to allege and prove a culpable state of mind and the same is hereby dispensed with. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 44, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-45. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees in this chapter, and any others for implementation of this chapter and if not stated in this chapter are hereby authorized, shall be charged in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the city council and amended from time to time as necessary. 
(b)  The city may charge fees for adoptions, microchipping and other associated miscellaneous fees for services in animal control in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the city council and amended from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; aboveground fires in multifamily housing units, § 8-5; flood damage prevention and protection, Ch. 9; rat control in business buildings, § 11-81 et seq.; planning, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning regulations, App. A. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; International Residential Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.212; International Building Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.216; municipal authority concerning swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.101; home rule municipality may require buildings to comply with energy conservation standards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.901; time for issuance of municipal building permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.904. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Outdoor lighting. 
(a)  Lighting facilities used on private properties for security or decorative reasons or to illuminate outdoor recreational areas such as, but not limited to, tennis courts and swimming pools, shall be shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any adjoining property. 
(b)  Lighting used to illuminate signs, parking areas, or for other purposes shall be so arranged so as to direct or shield the light away from the adjoining premises and shall not interfere with traffic. 
(Ord. No. 613, § 2, 2-26-85) 
Sec. 5-2. - Codes adopted. 
    The following codes and all subsequent amendments thereto are hereby adopted by reference as though they were fully copied herein: 
International Building Code, 2018 Edition with amendments 
International Residential Code, 2018 Edition with amendments 
International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition with amendments 
International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition with amendments 
International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition with amendments 
International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition 
International Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities, 2018 Edition 
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, Current Edition 
National Electrical Code NFPA 70 Current State Adopted Edition without Article 80 
Virginia Graeme Baker Pool & Spa Safety Act 
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 edition 
(Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 1439, § II, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1218, § 1, adopted February 8, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 5-2 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 The exhibit referred to in this section is not printed in this volume, but is on file in the city building department. 
Sec. 5-3. - Effect upon existing permits, agreements and rights. 
    This section is not intended to abrogate or annul any rights in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, the "Vested Rights Statute." 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Secs. 5-4-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Electrical code, § 6-4; fire prevention code, § 8-1; life safety code adopted, § 8-2; plumbing code, § 18-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-16. - International Building Code adopted. 
    The International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference as the building code which shall control construction in the city except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1559 , § I, adopted March 27, 2018, repealed the former § 5-16 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 5-16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 419, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 1979; Ord. No. 641, § 1, adopted July 23, 1985; Ord. No. 656, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 1985; Ord. No. 799, § 1, adopted June 28, 1988; Ord. No. 907, § 1, adopted June 11, 1991; Ord. No. 1058, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 1998; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2005; Ord. No. 1439, § III, adopted Sep. 28, 2010; Ord. No. 1466, § I, adopted June 12, 2012; and Ord. No. 1509, § I , adopted Jan. 27, 2015. 
Sec. 5-17. - Amendments. 
    The Code adopted by this Article is hereby amended as set out in this section: 
Add: [A] 101.4.8 
All commercial businesses shall have a mailbox delivery being accessible to the mail service 24 hours, 7 days a week. 
SECTION 109 FEES 
Replace paragraph 109.4 to read: Work commencing before permit issuance. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, fire systems or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee of double the original permit fee established by the permit fee schedule. 
Add: paragraph 803.1.1. All residential minimum roof sheathing requirements shall be at least 7/16" OSB or Plywood. 
Section 905 para R905.2.1 Add new sentence at end of paragraph to read 3/8" sheathing does not meet the solid decking requirements. 
Section R908 para R908.3 add at end of sentence: Roof decking must comply with paragraph 803.1.1 
SECTION 110 INSPECTIONS 
110.7 Add: 
The building official, with the approval of the city manager, may appoint such number of officers, inspectors, assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. 
SECTION 113 
Delete: Board of Appeals 
Replace with: 
Appeals. 
(a)  A board of appeals is hereby created in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations by the building or code official relative to the application and interpretation of any code adopted under this chapter, unless another board is designated to handle such matters by this Code or state law. 
(b)  The city council may act as the board of appeals or may appoint members to serve on the board. If positions on the board are appointed, then the board shall consist of five members each of whom shall serve staggered and overlapping terms for two-year periods, or until a successor has been appointed. Employees of the city will not be eligible for appointment to the board. The appointed board members shall serve and hold office at the will and pleasure of the city council. The building or code official shall be an ex officio member of the board, but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. 
(c)  The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, hear appeals regarding all technical code violations and variances, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building or code official. 
Delete: Appendix B 
Section 114 
114.4. Should read: Violations; penalty. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Code adopted by this article, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved there under, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine not to be less than $500.00 and not more than $2000.00. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. 
Section 1807 Retaining Walls 
Paragraph 1807.2.1 General; 
Add: A new retaining wall exceeding 3 (three) foot in height, shall be erected in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer, the plans and specifications shall have been approved by the cities engineer before a permit will be issued on abutting land. 
Inspections: the director of public works shall inspect or cause to bed inspected periodically all retaining walls on land abutting a public highway, street, road, sidewalk or other public place of said retaining walls are located so as to create a possible dangerous and unsafe condition imperiling life, safety, or property of anyone using the public highway, street, road, sidewalk or other public place. 
Section 3304 Add: paragraph 3304.1.5 to read, All construction site shall have access roadways to handle a max weight of 80,000lbs and be no less than 16 feet in width. This roadway shall have access to all construction on the site. 
Add after last sentence on 1507.2.1. 3/8" decking does not comply with solid sheathing and must be changed out to a min. of 7/16" OSB or Plywood. Roofs shall not have double sheathing. 
Chapter 19 
Section 1901.1 add; end of paragraph to read, no load will be placed on any foundation slab Residential or Commercial property for a time period not to be less than seven (7) days after initial pour. 
Section 3410 
Section 3410.1 MOVING OF BUILDINGS: Add paragraphs 
Paragraph 3410.1 Moving of buildings by persons other than licensed house movers restricted. 
No person except a licensed house mover shall move any building or structure over, across or along any street, public way or public place within the city except as specifically provided in this article. 
Add paragraph 3410.2 House mover's license-Required; application. 
Every person before engaging in moving a building or structure shall have previously made application to the city's building inspector and the city secretary for a house mover's license and such license must have been approved and issued for the current year. 
Add paragraph 3410.3 Same-Bond prerequisite to issuance. 
Before a house mover's license is issued, the applicant shall file with the city secretary a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the faithful performance of any obligations undertaken pursuant to this article. Such bond shall contain a provision for a ten (10) day written notice to the city of cancellation by the surety. 
Add paragraph 3410.4 Same-Insurance prerequisite to issuance. 
Before a house mover's license is issued, the applicant shall file with the city secretary a public liability property damage insurance policy certificate naming the applicant as the insured and providing for the payment of any liability imposed by law upon applicant to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person or bodily injury, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage liability of each accident. 
Add paragraph 3410.5 Same-Inspection of applicant's equipment and facilities; issuance. 
Upon execution of the bond and certificate of insurance required in sections 5-118 and 5-119, and their approval by the city secretary, the building inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected, the equipment and facilities to be used by the house moving contractor and shall determine that the size, design and safety factors of any vehicle and other equipment in the moving of any building or structure are such that their operation on public property shall not cause damage to the pavement or other public improvements. Upon approval of such vehicle and other equipment, and the payment of the license fee, the license shall be issued to the person applying therefore, and he shall thereafter be known as a licensed house moving contractor. 
Add paragraph 3410.6 Same-Unlawful to lend, rent or transfer to another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent or transfer his license issued under this article, or any rights therein contained, to any person or for any person to make use of any such rights which are not actually his own, without the approval of the building inspector. 
Add paragraph 3410.7 Same-Exceptions to requirement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall require a license or bond for the movement of oversized equipment, or buildings or structures of a temporary nature, when such equipment, building, or structures are within the legal road limit as required by the state statutes; nor shall any bond and license be required of one passing through the city enroute between two (2) other incorporated cities, unless those cities are in this county. 
Add paragraph 3410.9 Same-Notices and clearances prerequisite to application. 
(a)  Before application for a moving permit is made, the house mover shall notify all public utilities concerned, and other persons whose facilities are involved in such movement. 
(b)  Before application for a moving permit is made, the house mover shall notify the police department, fire department, and other appropriate city offices as may be required, and shall obtain proper clearance from each of these departments or divisions in writing. This clearance shall specify the day of the week, and hour of day when such moving is to take place. The route to be taken shall be at the discretion of the chief of the police department. 
Add paragraph 3410.10 Same-Application. 
The licensed house mover shall, in each case, before moving or preparing to move any building or structure, apply to the building inspector by written application for a moving permit to do so, and pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in which application the building or structure to be moved shall be described, with the extreme dimensions of its width, length, height, present location, the place to which it is proposed to be moved, and the location on the lot to which it is proposed to be moved. 
Add paragraph 3410.11 Restrictions relative to leaving buildings on public property. 
(a)  If it becomes temporarily necessary to leave the building on public property, there shall be placed around the building or structure, and all equipment, red lanterns, flares or other warning devices. No building or structure under any condition shall be allowed to remain in or on public places for more than twenty-four (24) hours except by special permission of the city council and under no circumstances shall such house mover stop, park or stand on public streets while moving any buildings or structures within the city's corporate limits. Any building or structure which occupies or moves along or across any portion of public property after sundown shall have sufficient lights and flares continually burning for the protection of the public. 
(b)  No person shall move a building or structure across or along any street, public way or public place within the city's corporate limits unless accompanied or escorted by either an on-or off-duty city police officer assigned to this duty by the chief of police. 
Add paragraph 3410.12 Relocation permit. 
(a)  Required; application; fee. Any person desiring to relocate a building or structure on a lot or tract of land located within the city shall submit an application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and obtain a relocation permit from the building department authorizing such move. 
(b)  Required information. Applicant shall present to the building department in support of his application in writing, a complete description of the structure or building to be moved, its extreme dimensions of width, length, height, present location, the lot to which it is desired to move the same, and a specific location thereon to which it will be moved. In determining whether it should grant such application the building department, with approval from the City Manager, should be governed, among other things, by the following criteria: 
(1)  Every fact or condition bearing on the application as it is related to the health, peace of mind, convenience, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the vicinity to be affected thereby and within a two hundred (200) foot radius of the lot to which such structure or building is to be moved; 
(2)  What effect, if any, the granting of a particular relocation permit may have on property values in the vicinity with reference to uses presently made or in the future to be made of the property; 
(3)  What effect, if any, the granting of the particular relocation permit may have on nearby churches and schools, or on traffic conditions; and, 
(4)  Whether the placing of such building or structure would tend to contravene the general architectural standards of other buildings or structures within two hundred (200) feet of the lot to which such building or structure is to be moved; 
(5)  Whether such structure as placed on such lot would be consistent with the general character of the neighborhood affected thereby; and, 
(6)  Whether such structure as placed on such lot would best protect the health and property and promote the safety, peace, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
Add paragraph 3410.14 Performance bond required; exception; cumulative nature. 
(a)  Any person applying for a relocation permit to relocate a building or structure to another lot within the city's corporate limits shall additionally file a performance bond in such amount as may be determined and set by the building inspector in an amount not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) but not more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), based on the inspector's estimate of the cost of repairs necessary to comply with city codes and ordinances and any added requirements imposed by the city council. In the event that the owner of the building being moved provides an executed repair contract with an independent building contractor, the amount of the performance bond shall be the amount set forth in the cost for such improvements, but in no event less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The performance bond may be in the form of a deposit of cash or of United States Treasury "bearer" bonds or a surety bond payable to the city. If a surety bond is submitted by the applicant, it shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, issued by a company authorized to do business in the state, and shall name an agent in the county to receive notices and upon whom service may be had concerning matters with respect to such bond. Such bond shall be furnished conditioned upon the completion of all work upon such relocated building necessary to bring it into compliance with the applicable codes and ordinances of the city within 60 days of issuance of the permit provided for in section 5-127 of this article. However, the building inspector may grant such applicants an additional 30-day period to complete such repairs if proper justification for such extension is shown. 
(b)  The performance bond provided for herein shall not be required whenever a building is moved to a location outside of the city's corporate limits or is being relocated upon the same plat or tract of land. 
(c)  The provisions in this section for a performance bond and its forfeiture shall be cumulative and not instead of any other remedy, penal or otherwise, which the city may have to enforce compliance with pertinent codes and ordinances. 
Add paragraph 3410.15 Provision of utilities to moved buildings restricted. 
No utilities shall be provided to a moved building or structure except those necessary for repairs or construction and in no event shall such utilities be provided for a period in excess of 60 days unless the building inspector shall have first previously granted an extension of not more than 30 days for the completion of repairs on such building. 
Add paragraph 3410.16 Certificate of occupancy prerequisite to occupancy or use of moved building. 
No moved building or structure may be occupied or used in any manner until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city building department. 
Add paragraph 3410.17 Inspections. 
The city building inspector shall make periodic inspections to the relocated building or structure to determine whether such building has been brought to compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. If all of such repairs are completed within the time prescribed in the relocation permit or any extensions thereof, and in a satisfactory manner, the building inspector shall release the performance bond required hereby. If such work is not completed within 60 days after the permit is granted, it may be extended for 30 days at the discretion of the council. The director shall so notify the permitted and the surety, if any, by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
Add paragraph 3410.18 Procedure upon failure to perform move in conformity to article. 
The building inspector shall notify the city attorney whenever any person shall have failed to perform the necessary work upon a building or structure relocated pursuant to the provisions of this article. Thereupon the city attorney shall prepare an appropriate ordinance or resolution for submission to the city council to declare forfeited the performance bond previously furnished by such applicant. 
Add paragraph 3410.19 Conformity with other ordinances required. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit nonresidential use of residential or any relocation of buildings in violation of the zoning ordinance, the fire protection code, or other codes or ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 6-9-81; Ord. No. 936, §§ 1-3, 6-30-92; Ord. No. 1439, § III, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-18. - Building official; appointment, term and removal. 
    The building official shall be appointed by the city manager. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific charges before city manager. 
(Ord. No. 587, § 1, 7-12-84) 
Sec. 5-19. - Inspectors. 
    The building official, with the approval of the city manager, may appoint such number of officers, inspectors, assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 587, § 1, 7-12-84) 
Sec. 5-20. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the Code adopted by this article, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 275, 7-29-75; Ord. No. 544, § 1, 9-13-83; Ord. No. 1466 , 6-12-12) 
Sec. 5-21. - Automatic sprinkler systems. 
(a)  Henceforth automatic sprinkler systems must be installed throughout all levels of all new Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies as defined in the International Building Code (IBC) of more than 500 square feet and throughout all R-3 occupancies as defined in said International Building Code of more than 5,000 square feet. The calculated area shall include all habitable space as well as the area of attached garages or storage facilities. Such systems shall be in accordance with Section 903 of the International Building Code as well as National Fire Protection Association Standards 13D and 13R, 2002 edition, for single-family dwellings. 
(b)  The following exceptions are hereby established: 
(1)  Detached gazebos and ramadas for residential and public use. Independent buildings such as restrooms or snack shops 400 square feet or less without cooking or heating appliances that are associated with golf courses, parks and similar uses. 
(2)  Detached noncombustible carports or shade canopies. 
(3)  Guardhouses that are less than 300 square feet in size and used to control access to or within residential and/or commercial developments. 
(4)  Detached equipment or storage buildings for commercial use not exceeding 250 square feet. 
(5)  Detached residential storage buildings or garages that are noninhabitable and not exceeding 1,000 square feet. 
(6)  Barns and agricultural buildings for private, residential, noncommercial use, and not exceeding 3,000 square feet. 
(7)  Detached noncombustible canopies used exclusively for automotive, motor-fuel dispensing stations for private passenger vehicles and not exceeding 5,000 square feet. 
(8)  Manufactured (mobile) homes built in a permanent chassis designed and built as a dwelling unit and recreational vehicles that were not site-built and are portable in nature. 
(c)  Retrofit. 
(1)  Building additions that equal 50 percent or more of the existing building floor area, or building additions that exceed 10,000 square feet regardless of percentage increase. 
(2)  Two or more building permits, related to area increase, are issued over any three consecutive years. 
(3)  One or more additions are made to an R-3 occupancy and the new total area of the building exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
(4)  Building remodels that require structural changes affecting the primary structural system of the existing building. 
(Ord. No. 1219, §§ 1-3, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 4-26-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1219, §§ 1-3, adopted February 8, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 5-21 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 5-22-5-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SECURITY REQUIREMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 19. 

Sec. 5-31. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the provisions of this division is to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public and the protection of persons and property by providing minimum requirements to safeguard property against burglary and other unlawful trespasses. These minimum requirements will achieve this purpose by regulating and controlling the design, construction and quality of materials and equipment as they relate to the security of all buildings and structures hereafter constructed, remodeled, or repaired within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-32. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all new construction and, except as otherwise provided herein, to existing buildings and structures in the single-family, multi-family and business classes as defined in the city's building code and/or these provisions to which additions, alterations, or repairs are made except as specifically provided herein. When additions, alterations or repairs within any twelve (12) month period exceed fifty (50) percent of the replacement value of any existing building or structure, such building or structure shall be made to conform to the security requirements for new construction. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-33. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are in addition to those set forth in the city's building code. 
    Activate. To engage a locking device to make it effective in preventing unauthorized entry through a door, window, or other access point to which the device is attached. 
    Access point. Any opening in the exterior of a building or structure which has a clear cross-section of ninety-six (96) square inches or more and which has as its smallest dimension a span in excess of six (6) inches, and which includes, but is not limited to, doors and windows. 
    Accessible. Any access point within eighteen (18) feet of the ground or within eighteen (18) feet of the roof of any adjoining building or structure; or within fourteen (14) feet from directly or diagonally opposite windows, fire escapes, ledges or roofs; or within three (3) feet of another access point, fire escape, or ledge which projects from the same or an adjacent wall and which leads to another building or structure. 
    Roof. Any surface of a building or structure which provides a horizontal supporting surface of six (6) feet or more in width. 
    Diagonally opposite. "Diagonally opposite" means that the angle measured from the horizontal planes of the access points or surfaces in question is not greater than forty-five (45) degrees. 
    Building official. The building official of the city or his designated representative. 
    Business establishment. An establishment which uses or occupies any building or structure or portion thereof for the purpose of manufacture, storage, warehousing, transfer, sale, display or purchase of goods, wares, merchandise or services. 
    Combination deadlatch and deadlock. A device combining a deadlatch operable by knobs from inside and outside with a deadlock operable from inside by a thumbturn or key and from outside by a key, both of which can be retracted from inside by turning the knob and from outside by a key. 
    Control device. A key or similar mechanical implement that is normally used by authorized persons to activate or deactivate a locking device. 
    Flush blot. A deadlock normally used on inactive door(s) that is attached to the top and bottom and/or side of the door and engages in the frame and/or base of the door. 
    Cylinder. The part of lockset that has an entrance for the key used to activate the locking mechanism. 
    Dead-locking latch. A latch equipped with a locking device which, when in a closed position, causes the latch to resist being retracted by pressure applied to it (also called spring-bolt with anti-shim device). 
    Deadlock. A locking device with a bolt that has no automatic spring action and, therefore, must be operated manually by a key cylinder, thumbturn, or lever, and is positively held fast when in the projected position. 
    Deadlock, double cylinder. A deadlock that can be activated only by a key from the inside and the outside. 
    Deadlock, single cylinder. A deadlock that is activated from the outside by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumbturn, lever, or similar mechanism. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A building, including hotels, motels and apartments, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by more than one family living independently of other families. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A building, including duplexes, semi-detached dwellings and townhouses, designed exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
    Exterior. That portion of a building or structure that provides access from outside the building or structure. This shall include, but is not limited, to those portions of individual business establishments housed in a common building or structure which are accessible to the public, e.g., as in a shopping center, mall, hotel, motel, or apartment complex. This definition also includes doors leading from garage areas into single-family dwellings. 
    Hardened steel. Heat-tempered steel. The steel is heated to a predetermined temperature and then quenched in oil or water for rapid cooling. 
    Locking device. A mechanical implement or combination of mechanical implements attached to a door, window, or other access points of a building or structure, and which is designed to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the building or structure through the door, window, or other access point on which the locking device is activated. 
    Throwbolt. A manually-operated deadlock for an inactive leaf, which is normally placed on the inside portion of a door (e.g., flush bolt). 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 5-34. - Responsibility for enforcement and compliance. 
(a)  The provisions and compliance shall be administered and enforced by the building official of the city. 
(b)  The owner of record or his designated agent shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-35. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever necessary, and with the consent of the owner, his agent, the tenant, or person in charge, the building official may make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions set forth herein. Such entry may be made at any reasonable hour. The building official shall present credentials which establish and provide evidence of his identity and authority. If the building official is refused entry, he may take action to gain access in accordance with and as provided by the laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-36. - Methods of enforcement, appeals and variances. 
    Methods for the enforcement, appeal and the grant of variances under the provisions of this division shall be those set forth in the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-37. - Alternate security provisions. 
    The provisions of this division are not intended to prevent the use of any other security devices, materials or methods of construction. The burden of proving to the building official that the requirements of these provisions have been met or surpassed shall be on the person responsible for compliance. Such other security devices, materials or methods of construction may only be used upon the approval of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-38. - Testing. 
(a)  Whenever there is insufficient evidence that any security device, material, or any method of construction does not conform to the requirements set forth in this division or in order to substantiate claims for alternate security devices, materials, or methods of construction, the building official may require the person responsible for compliance to submit any such alternate to such tests as the building official deems necessary and proper to determine if it is at least equivalent to that prescribed in this division in quality, strength, effectiveness, burglary resistance, durability and safety. 
(b)  Such tests shall be conducted by the state building materials and systems testing laboratory (BMSTL) or such other testing laboratory as may be approved by the state and/or BMSTL. All tests shall be conducted at the expense of the person responsible for complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-39. - Life safety factor. 
    None of the provisions set forth in this division shall supersede any local, state, or federal laws, regulations, or codes dealing with the life safety factor. Enforcement of these provisions shall be in cooperation with the local fire authority to avoid conflict with fire laws. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-40. - Security advisory committee. 
(a)  There is hereby created an ad hoc security advisory committee. The committee shall assist with the administration of the provisions set forth in this division, provide counsel to interested parties as to such provisions, and periodically review such provisions to insure that they remain responsive to local needs and conditions. 
(b)  The committee shall be comprised of officials representing the following departments: Building; fire; police; and legal department. Members of the committee shall have a knowledge of the provisions and of this division and understand the purpose and intent of the city's crime prevention program. The committee shall report to the chief administrative officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-41. - General minimum specifications and standards. 
    The following minimum specifications shall be applicable to all building classes referenced in the provisions of this division: 
(1)  Exterior single-swinging door systems performance specifications. Door assemblies of exterior single-swinging doors shall be capable of withstanding the energy imparted on the door by an impacter weighing one hundred eighty (180) pounds with a velocity no less than ninety (90) in. × sec. 4 at the moment of impact. The response of the door to the dynamic force shall indicate a rise time of not less than ±.01 seconds from zero to full load. The point of impact on the door shall be twelve (12) inches from the lock-fastening point with the strike on a line to the center hinge. Alternatively, the door assembly shall withstand a static force no less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds applied twelve (12) inches from the lock fastening point with the strike on a line to the center of the middle hinge. In addition, door assembly jambs shall resist a static load of no less than two thousand (2,000) pounds applied between the jambs in a spreading action at mid-height from top to bottom. Under this loading, the maximum deflection at the latch shall be less than the throw of the bolt to be used in order to prevent its disengagement from the striker plate when the door is closed and its locking device is activated. Hinges or pivots on all doors opening outward shall be secured in such a manner that the hinge or pivot cannot be removed when the door is closed. 
(2)  Lock assembly specifications for exterior single-swinging door. In addition to being equipped with a deadlatch with a half-inch minimum throw, each exterior single-swinging door shall be secured by a deadlock with one-inch minimum throw having hardened steel inserts; alternately the deadlock will be of a design which otherwise prevents a spreading threat. When activated, the lock must resist an impact load applied to the end of the bolt, parallel to its center line, of no less than two hundred (200) inch pounds. Firmly secured metal striker plates are required on the door jambs of all doors and are to be located at the point where the required lock engages the jamb. The locking device also shall be so constructed and installed that when the door is closed the device cannot be made inactive through the removal of mounting screws or bolts. Locking devices and parts of locking devices shall not be used if they bear any numbers or letters which would reveal a combination from which a key or similar control device could be fashioned or selected and used to deactivate the locking device. Cylinders shall be so designed or protected so they cannot be gripped by pliers or other wrenching devices. When a padlock-type locking device is used, it shall not be capable of being deactivated through hammering or other shock techniques. The slide bolt or hasp-and-shackle to which the padlock is attached shall be constructed of hardened steel and shall be installed so that it cannot be removed when the door is closed and the padlock is activated. 
(3)  Exterior window specification. Each exterior window shall be so constructed that when the window is locked, it cannot be lifted from the mounting frame. In addition, hinges or pivots on windows opening outward shall be so constructed and installed that they cannot be removed when the window is closed. Each window shall have a secondary locking or securing device consisting of a track lock, inside removable pins or locks. 
(4)  Exterior sliding-type doors at ground level or which are otherwise accessible from the outside. Each exterior sliding-type door at ground level or which is otherwise accessible from the outside shall be so constructed that the movable section shall slide inside the fixed portion of the door. Alternately, the door may be so protected that when it is locked, the sliding portion cannot be lifted from the track. Each sliding panel shall have a secondary locking or securing device consisting of a track lock, inside removable pins or locks. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-42. - Additional specifications and standards-Single-family structures. 
    The following specifications and standards shall be applicable to single-family structures and shall be complied with in addition to, or as appropriate, in lieu of section 5-41 of this division: 
(1)  Garage doors. Each metal, wooden or composition garage door, whether overhead, roller-type, swinging or sliding, shall be so equipped that it is capable of being locked. Specific locking devices to be employed shall be of one (1) or more of the following types; throwbolt or flushbolt; cylinder-type lock; padlock and hasp; or an electronic power-operated mechanism with automatic locking capabilities. All such devices shall meet section 5-41 of this division or such other standards as may be approved by the state and/or BMSTL. 
(2)  Lighting. The street address of each single-family structure shall be illuminated by a light bulb of at least sixty (60) watts, and shall be easily visible from the street. The bulb(s) shall be protected by a weather-and-vandalism-resistant globe or cover. 
(3)  Door viewers. Door viewers shall be installed on all front entrance doors and shall cover 180 degrees of viewing. Such viewer is to be installed with the securing portion on the inside and nonremovable from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-43. - Same-Multi-family structures. 
    The following specifications and standards shall be applicable to multi-family structures, and shall be complied with in addition to, or, as appropriate, in lieu of section 5-41 of this division: 
(1)  Exterior single-swinging door systems specifications. Exterior single-swinging doors including doors leading to and from garage areas into buildings, shall be equipped with self-closing devices, if not already required by other regulations, ordinances or codes. 
(2)  Lock assembly specifications for exterior doors. Entrance doors to individual units shall not be master keyed to exterior doors (i.e. garage, stairwell, lobby, etc.) located elsewhere on the premises of multi-family structures. Single swinging doors shall be equipped with a combination deadlatch and deadlock. Pairs of swinging doors shall be secured at the top and bottom of one leaf with vertical throwbolts, and secured at the center with the type of locking device required for single-swinging doors in this subsection. Swinging doors which do not permit a center lock, including but not limited to tempered glass doors, shall be secured at the top and bottom with locking devices meeting the requirements of this subsection for single swinging doors. Entrance doors(s) other than a door at the location of vehicle ingress and egress, to a garage, a lobby or stairwell, shall be equipped with a keyed, self-locking deadlatch. 
(3)  Lighting. The address on the exterior door of all dwelling units shall each be illuminated, at a minimum, by a sixty (60) watt bulb(s). The bulb shall be protected by a weather- and vandalism-resistant globe or cover. So as to be easily visible at all times, such light shall not be switched except by a timer or a light sensing device. 
(4)  Numbering. There shall be positioned at each dwelling complex, so as to be easily read from the street by responding emergency units, an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex which lists and locates each unit by address. 
(5)  Door viewers. Door viewers shall be installed on all front entrance doors and shall cover one hundred eighty (180) degrees of viewing. Such viewer is to be installed with the securing portion on the inside and nonremovable from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-44. - Same-Business structures. 
    The following specifications and standards shall be applicable to business structures, and shall be complied with in addition to, or, as appropriate, in lieu of section 5-41 of this division: 
(1)  Lock assembly specifications for exterior doors. Single-swinging exterior doors shall be equipped with a double cylinder deadlock that can be deactivated, from the inside and outside, only with a key or similar control device, or with a single cylinder deadlock that cannot be deactivated from the inside, and that can be deactivated from the outside only with a key or similar control device. Pairs of swinging doors shall be secured at the top and bottom of one leaf with vertical throwbolts and secured at the center with the type of locking device required for single swinging doors of this subsection. Swinging doors which do not permit a center lock, including, but not limited to, tempered glass doors, shall be secured at the top and bottom with locking devices meeting the requirements of this subsection for single swinging doors. Where a door is locked by electric power operation, the circuit controlling the door shall be locked by an electrical disconnect switch or by a signal locking device. 
(2)  Chain- and crank-operated garage-type doors: Rolling, solid, swinging sliding or accordion. All chain- and crank-operated garage doors, regardless of their method of opening, when not controlled by electric power operation with automatic locking capabilities, shall be specifically secured. Chain-operated doors shall be equipped with a locking device for securing the chain. Crank-operated doors shall be equipped with a locking device for securing the operating shaft. If such garage door or a hand-operated type is the only entrance to a building or structure, the door shall be secured by a locking device meeting the requirements of this section for single-swinging doors. Where a door is automatically locked by electrical power operations, the circuit controlling the door shall be locked by an electrical disconnect switch or by a signal locking device. 
(3)  Metal accordion, grate and grill-type doors. Metal accordion, grate and grill-type doors shall be equipped with a metal guide track at the top and bottom. Such doors shall be so constructed and installed so they may not be lifted from the track when the door is closed. Such doors shall be secured with a single or double cylinder deadlock which may be activated only with a key, which is constructed with hardened steel inserts, and which has a bolt with a minimum one-inch throw. Alternatively, a padlock and hasp or other locking device that resists a spreading threat (e.g. interlocking bolt) may be used. 
(4)  Accessible exterior sliding doors. Accessible exterior single-sliding doors shall be so constructed that the movable section shall slide inside the fixed portion of the door. Such doors shall be so constructed and installed that the movable portion of the door cannot be lifted from its track when the door is closed. The movable portion of such doors shall be secured by vertical throw-bolts at the top and bottom and with a center locking device as required for single-swinging doors of this section. The bolt of the locking device shall engage the strike to sufficiently prevent its being disengaged by any possible movement of the door within the clearances provided when the door is closed and the locking device is activated. Double sliding doors shall be secured by vertical bolts at the top and bottom of each door, and shall meet all other requirements set forth for single sliding doors for business structures. 
(5)  Roof opening. Hatchways, doors to elevator shafts, roof doors, and skylights that can be opened shall be so designed that they can be locked from the inside. Hinges or pivots on such openings that open outward shall be so constructed and installed that they cannot be removed when the opening is closed. Where mechanical equipment is roof-mounted, it shall be fixed to the roof so it cannot be readily removed to allow access through a resulting opening. Additionally, such equipment shall be so designed that entry to a building or structure cannot be accomplished through the equipment. 
(6)  Accessible access points not covered by other provisions. All accessible access points not covered within the provisions of this section or section 5-41 of this division, including, but not limited to, air ducts and/or vent openings, shall be secured as follows: by steel bars of at least one-half (1/2) inch diameter which are not spaced more than four (4) inches apart, and have dividers of at least one-fourth (1/4) inch flat steel bars spaced not more than eighteen (18) inches apart, placed on the inside of the opening; or, by an iron or steel grill of at least one-eighth-inch diameter material of not more than two-inch mesh placed on the inside of the opening. 
(7)  Lighting. The address and the exterior door of all buildings and structures shall each be illuminated at a minimum by a sixty (60) watt bulb so as to be easily visible at all times. The bulb shall be protected by a weather- and vandalism-resistant globe or cover. Such light shall not be switched except by a timer or a light sensing device. 
(8)  Safes. If the net weight of the safe is less than one thousand (1,000) pounds, or if it rests upon wheels or dollies, it shall also be securely fastened to the floor. It is recommended that, where possible, the safe be placed where visible from the street and be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-45. - Supplemental specifications for exterior swinging single door systems. 
(a)  Framing. Standard wooden framing as depicted in the figure which follows, including the special nailing schedule with studs and joint facing fastened together by nailing exterior plywood over the basic structure, shall be required. Fire struts shall be placed adjacent to the lock area and shall be well fitted. 
(b)  Doors; business structures; exterior doors. Solid core one-and-three-fourth (1 3/4) inch wooden doors shall be required on all buildings and structures. Core assemblies of hollow core flush wooden doors shall include, on the outside face, in addition to compliance with PS-51 (Commercial Standards and Product Standard, National Bureau of Standards, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.), a single layer of carbon steel expanded metal. The minimum requirement of this material is one-fourth (1/4) inch opening, twenty (20) gauge metal, eighty-three hundredths (0.83) pounds per square foot. This material is equivalent to one thousand ten (1,010) steel which meets MIL-M-17194C steel specifications. Solid metal doors having at least equal strength are also acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Sec. 5-46. - Single and multi-family structures; exterior doors. 
(a)  Generally. Doors on all single family and multi-family structures shall be the same as required on business structures except they must have a minimum thickness of one-and-three-eighths (1 3/8) inches. 
(b)  Fasteners. Three (3) steel hinges using No. 9 screws, three-fourths (3/4) inch long, on each leaf of each hinge shall be required. 
(c)  Lock system. A lock system as described elsewhere in the building code equipped with a striker plate or plates mounted on the frame jamb facing, also shall be required. The materials for the frame, doors, and siding shall comply with the city's building code. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-31-76) 
Secs. 5-47-5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FENCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Fencing requirements for junkyards, § 10-53; erection of fences in subdivision easements, § 21-64(c). 

Sec. 5-61. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated in this section: 
    Fence. A barrier or screening device constructed of metal, wood, brick, stone, block, or other materials, singly or in combination. 
    Utility easement. An interest in land granted to the city for installing and maintaining utilities across, over and under private land together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and other vehicles necessary for the maintenance of such utilities. 
(Ord. No. 188, §§ 1, 5, 10-12-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 5-62. - Permit required. 
    No fence shall hereafter be erected within the city unless the person erecting such fence shall first obtain from the city planning department a permit for the construction of such fence. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 2, 10-12-71; Ord. No. 617, 2-26-85; Ord. No. 1466 , 6-12-12) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-63. - Dimensions. 
    No fence hereafter erected within the city shall exceed six (6) feet in height along a side or rear property line or three (3) feet in height in a required front yard, in the R1, R2, R3, and B1 districts, or more than eight (8) feet in height along a side or rear property line or four (4) feet in height in a required front yard in the B2 and B3 districts, or more than eight (8) feet in the I1 district. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 3, 10-12-71) 
Sec. 5-64. - Building fence or placing any obstacle in drain or drainage easement prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or place any fence of any kind, or any other structure or physical obstacle in, on or across any drainage easement, or any natural or artificial drain, or any stream, creek or channel in the city, or any part thereof, without special permit, evidenced by an ordinance duly passed, and then only in strict accord with the terms of such permit, if any. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 4, 10-12-71) 
Sec. 5-65. - Fencing across easement restrictions. 
(a)  If the owner of the property upon which the utility easement is located desires to use it for lawn purposes, fencing across the easement shall be permitted but gates along the side lot lines must be provided. The gates shall be fifteen (15) feet wide (seven-and-one-half (7 1/2) foot gates) and shall be capable of being opened and closed at all times. These gates shall be secured in the center by a drop rod or some similar device which does not obstruct free passage over the easement. The drop rod may be lowered into a drop rod keeper, installed so as to be flush with the ground level. No permanent-type center pole for the gates may be erected on the easement. 
(b)  The gates provided for in this section shall remain unlocked at all times. Post and chain gates as specified herein shall be installed at the ends of the utility easements and shall be capable of being opened, closed and locked at all times. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 6, 10-12-71) 
Sec. 5-66. - Maintenance. 
    Maintenance of the easement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which it is located. It shall be the duty of the property owner to keep the area across, over or under this easement clear of any structure, debris, vegetation, trees, shrubs or landscaping whatsoever except that lawn grass which shall be regularly mowed and controlled may be grown thereon. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 7, 10-12-71) 
Secs. 5-67-5-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Electrical code, § 6-4; fire prevention code, § 8-1; life safety code adopted, § 8-2; plumbing code, § 18-1. 

Sec. 5-81. - Adopted and fees. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, is hereby adopted as the city's gas code, which shall control all gas work within the city, except as otherwise provided by this article or other ordinances of the city. The city may collect fees for permits and inspections for this Code as necessary pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the city council and as amended from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, amended § 5-81 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5-81 pertained to Gas Code adopted and derived from Ord. No. 419, adopted Nov. 27, 1979; Ord. No. 641, § 1, adopted July 23, 1985; Ord. No. 656, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 1985; Ord. No. 799, § 1, adopted June 28, 1988; Ord. No. 907, § 1, adopted June 11, 1991; Ord. No. 1058, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 1998; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2005; Ord. No. 1466, § I, adopted June 12, 2012; and Ord. No. 1509, § I , adopted Jan. 27, 2015. 
Sec. 5-82. - Amendments.[6] 
    Sections 109.2, 109.2.1, 109.2.2 and 109.2.3 are hereby repealed and amended as follows: 
Delete: Board of Appeals 
Add: Means of Appeal 
Amend to read as follows: Requirements for appeal per the amendments in Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 6-12-84; Ord. No. 584, § 1, 6-26-84; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Editor's note- The attachment referred to in this section is not printed in this volume, but is on file in the city secretary's offices. 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- It should be noted that § 5-82 was not amended by Ord. No. 799 which adopted the 1988 edition of the Standard Gas Code in lieu of the 1985 edition formerly adopted in § 5-81. 

Sec. 5-83. - References to officials. 
    When reference is made in the code adopted by this article to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 419, § 3, 11-27-79) 
Sec. 5-84. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or the code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any detailed statement of plan submitted and approved under the article or the code adopted by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article or the code adopted by this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 419, § 4, 11-27-79; Ord. No. 748, 8-25-87; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 3-29-88) 
Secs. 5-85-5-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Electrical code, § 6-4; fire prevention code, § 8-1; life safety code adopted, § 8-2; plumbing code, § 18-1. 

Sec. 5-96. - Adopted. 
    The city does hereby adopt the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition as its building code which shall control construction in the city except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 419, 11-27-79; Ord. No. 641, § 1, 7-23-85; Ord. No. 656, § 1, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 799, § 1, 6-28-88; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 6-11-91; Ord. No. 1058, § 1, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 1439, § IV, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-97. - Amendments.[8] 
    The code adopted by this article is hereby amended as set out in this section: 
    Replace Section 106 para 106.1 with 
106.1 Required. 
Any Homestead (HS) owner or owner's authorized agent or contractor (must be licensed through Texas Department of Licensing and Registration (TDLR) who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
    Section 109 
Means of Appeal 
Amend to read as follows: Requirements for appeal per the amendments in Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
    Section 303 
Paragraph 303.4 Protection from damage 
Add after approved barriers add: to be determined by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 616, 2-26-85; Ord. No. 1439, § IV, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- It should be noted that § 5-97 was not amended by Ord. No. 799 which adopted the 1988 edition of the Standard Mechanical Code in lieu of the 1985 edition formerly adopted in § 5-96. 

Sec. 5-98. - References to officials. 
    When reference is made in the code adopted by this article to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 419, § 3, 11-27-79) 
Sec. 5-99. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or the code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any detailed statement of plan submitted and approved under this article or the code adopted by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article or the code adopted by this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or person employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 419, § 4, 11-27-79; Ord. No. 748, 8-25-87; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 3-29-88) 
Secs. 5-100-5-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 5-116. - Moving of buildings by persons other than licensed house movers restricted. 
    No person except a licensed house mover, shall move any building or structure over, across or along any street, public way or public place within the city except as specifically provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-117. - House mover's license-Required; application. 
    Every person before engaging in moving a building or structure, shall have previously made application to the city's building inspector and the city secretary for a house movers license and such license must have been approved and issued for the current year. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 2, 6-12-79) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-118. - Same-Bond prerequisite to issuance. 
    Before a house mover's license is issued, the applicant shall file with the city secretary a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the faithful performance of any obligations undertaken pursuant to this article. Such bond shall contain a provision for a ten (10) day written notice to the city of cancellation by the surety. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 3, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-119. - Same-Insurance prerequisite to issuance. 
    Before a house mover's license is issued, the applicant shall file with the city secretary a public liability property damage insurance policy certificate naming the applicant as the insured and providing for the payment of any liability imposed by law upon applicant to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person or bodily injury, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage liability of each accident. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 4, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-120. - Same-Inspection of applicant's equipment and facilities; issuance. 
    Upon execution of the bond and certificate of insurance required in sections 5-118 and 5-119, and their approval by the city secretary, the building inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected, the equipment and facilities to be used by the house moving contractor and shall determine that the size, design and safety factors of any vehicle and other equipment in the moving of any building or structure are such that their operation on public property shall not cause damage to the pavement or other public improvements. Upon approval of such vehicle and other equipment, and the payment of the license fee, the license shall be issued to the person applying therefor, and he shall thereafter be known as a licensed house moving contractor. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 5, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-121. - Same-Unlawful to lend, rent or transfer to another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent or transfer his license issued under this article, or any rights therein contained, to any person or for any person to make use of any such rights which are not actually his own, without the approval of the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 6, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-122. - Same-Exceptions to requirement. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall require a license or bond for the movement of oversized equipment, or buildings or structures of a temporary nature, when such equipment, building, or structures are within the legal road limit as required by the state statutes; nor shall any bond and license be required of one passing through the city enroute between two (2) other incorporated cities, unless those cities are in this county. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 7, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-123. - Moving permit-Required; fee. 
    No person shall move any building or structure over, across, or along any street, public way or public place within the corporate limits of the city until a moving permit for such work has been issued as provided in this article. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be required for such permit. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 8, 6-12-79) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-124. - Same-Notices and clearances prerequisite to application. 
(a)  Before application for a moving permit is made, the house mover shall notify all public utilities concerned, and other persons whose facilities are involved in such movement. 
(b)  Before application for a moving permit is made, the house mover shall notify the police department, fire department, and other appropriate city offices as may be required, and shall obtain proper clearance from each of these departments or divisions in writing. This clearance shall specify the day of the week, and hour of day when such moving is to take place. The route to be taken shall be at the discretion of the chief of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 396, §§ 10, 11, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-125. - Same-Application. 
    The licensed house mover shall, in each case, before moving or preparing to move any building or structure, apply to the building inspector by written application for a moving permit to do so, and pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in which application the building or structure to be moved shall be described, with the extreme dimensions of its width, length, height, present location, the place to which it is proposed to be moved, and the location on the lot to which it is proposed to be moved. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 9, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-126. - Restrictions relative to leaving buildings on public property. 
(a)  If it becomes temporarily necessary to leave the building on public property, there shall be placed around the building or structure, and all equipment, red lanterns, flares or other warning devices. No building or structure under any condition shall be allowed to remain in or on public places for more than twenty-four (24) hours except by special permission of the city council and under no circumstances shall such house mover stop, park or stand on public streets while moving any buildings or structures within the city's corporate limits. Any building or structure which occupies or moves along or across any portion of public property after sundown shall have sufficient lights and flares continually burning for the protection of the public. 
(b)  No person shall move a building or structure across or along any street, public way or public place within the city's corporate limits unless accompanied or escorted by either an on-or off-duty city police officer assigned to this duty by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 396, §§ 12, 13, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-127. - Relocation permit. 
(a)  Required; application; fee. Any person desiring to relocate a building or structure on a lot or tract of land located within the city shall submit an application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and obtain a relocation permit from the city council authorizing such move. 
(b)  Required information. Applicant shall present to the city council in support of his application in writing, a complete description of the structure or building to be moved, its extreme dimensions of width, length, height, present location, the lot to which it is desired to move the same, and a specific location thereon to which it will be moved. In determining whether it should grant such application the city council should be governed, among other things, by the following criteria: 
(1)  Every fact or condition bearing on the application as it is related to the health, peace of mind, convenience, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the vicinity to be affected thereby and within a two hundred (200) foot radius of the lot to which such structure or building is to be moved; 
(2)  What effect, if any, the granting of a particular relocation permit may have on property values in the vicinity with reference to uses presently made or in the future to be made of the property; 
(3)  What effect, if any, the granting of the particular relocation permit may have on nearby churches and schools, or on traffic conditions; and, 
(4)  Whether the placing of such building or structure would tend to contravene the general architectural standards of other buildings or structures within two hundred (200) feet of the lot to which such building or structure is to be moved; 
(5)  Whether such structure as placed on such lot would be consistent with the general character of the neighborhood affected thereby; and, 
(6)  Whether such structure as placed on such lot would best protect the health and property and promote the safety, peace, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 14, 6-12-79) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-128. - Performance bond required; exception; cumulative nature. 
(a)  Any person applying for a relocation permit to relocate a building or structure to another lot within the city's corporate limits shall additionally file a performance bond in such amount as may be determined and set by the building inspector in an amount not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) but not more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), based on the inspector's estimate of the cost of repairs necessary to comply with city codes and ordinances and any added requirements imposed by the city council. In the event that the owner of the building being moved provides an executed repair contract with an independent building contractor, the amount of the performance bond shall be the amount set forth in the cost for such improvements, but in no event less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The performance bond may be in the form of a deposit of cash or of United States Treasury "bearer" bonds or a surety bond payable to the city. If a surety bond is submitted by the applicant, it shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, issued by a company authorized to do business in the state, and shall name an agent in the county to receive notices and upon whom service may be had concerning matters with respect to such bond. Such bond shall be furnished conditioned upon the completion of all work upon such relocated building necessary to bring it into compliance with the applicable codes and ordinances of the city within 60 days of issuance of the permit provided for in section 5-127 of this article. However, the building inspector may grant such applicants an additional 30-day period to complete such repairs if proper justification for such extension is shown. 
(b)  The performance bond provided for herein, shall not be required whenever a building is moved to a location outside of the city's corporate limits or is being relocated upon the same plat or tract of land. 
(c)  The provisions in this section for a performance bond and its forfeiture shall be cumulative and not instead of any other remedy, penal or otherwise, which the city may have to enforce compliance with pertinent codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 396, §§ 15, 20, 22, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-129. - Provision of utilities to moved buildings restricted. 
    No utilities shall be provided to a moved building or structure except those necessary for repairs or construction and in no event shall such utilities be provided for a period in excess of 60 days unless the building inspector shall have first previously granted an extension of not more than 30 days for the completion of repairs on such building. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 16, 6-12-79) 
Cross reference- Utilities generally, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 5-130. - Certificate of occupancy prerequisite to occupancy or use of moved building. 
    No moved building or structure may be occupied or used in any manner until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 17, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-131. - Inspections. 
    The city building inspector shall make periodic inspections to the relocated building or structure to determine whether such building has been brought to compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. If all of such repairs are completed within the time prescribed in the relocation permit or any extensions thereof, and in a satisfactory manner, the building inspector shall release the performance bond required hereby. If such work is not completed within 60 days after the permit is granted, it may be extended for 30 days at the discretion of the council. The director shall so notify the permittee and the surety, if any, by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 18, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-132. - Procedure upon failure to perform move in conformity to article. 
    The building inspector shall notify the city attorney whenever any person shall have failed to perform the necessary work upon a building or structure relocated pursuant to the provisions of this article. Thereupon the city attorney shall prepare an appropriate ordinance or resolution for submission to the city council to declare forfeited the performance bond previously furnished by such applicant. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 19, 6-12-79) 
Sec. 5-133. - Conformity with other ordinances required. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit nonresidential use of residential or any relocation of buildings in violation of the zoning ordinance, the fire protection code, or other codes or ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 21, 6-12-79) 
Secs. 5-134-5-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1218, § 2, adopted February 8, 2005, repealed article VII, § 5-151 in its entirety, which pertained to swimming pools, and derived from Ord. No. 656, § 1, adopted November 12, 1985; Ord. No. 907, § 1, adopted June 11, 1991, and Ord. No. 1058, § 1, adopted January 27, 1998. 

Secs. 5-151-5-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 5-161. - Standard Amusement Device Code adopted. 
    The 1985 edition of the Standard Amusement Device Code is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein fully, except section 108. 
Any aggrieved person who desires to appeal the decision of a city official affecting his business enterprise shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city's board of adjustment which shall, upon notice to such person, hear and consider the appeal and whose decision shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 867, § 1, 5-8-90) 
Sec. 5-162. - Conflicting provisions. 
    All ordinances and parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed except as to inspection fees and permit fees for various services provided hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 867, § 2, 5-8-90) 
Sec. 5-163. - Reference to officials. 
    When reference is made in the code to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 867, § 3, 5-8-90) 
Sec. 5-164. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or use in violation of any detailed statement of plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this section shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 867, § 4, 5-8-90) 
Secs. 5-165-5-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND DISTRESSED PROPERTIES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1120, §§ I-XV, adopted October 10, 2000, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article IX, §§ 5-181-5-195 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5-181. - Definitions. 
    Dangerous building means any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare, provided that such conditions or defects of dilapidation, substandardness, or unfitness for human habitation, pose a threat or potential threat to life, health, property, or human safety. 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings or similar structure purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purposes, or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion, member, or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building, any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 
b.  Faulty construction; 
c.  The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary to support such building; 
d.  The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
e.  Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(8)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(9)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fail inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(10)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(11)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated or neglected as to become a harbor for vagrants or criminals. 
(12)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of the city's minimum housing standards or technical building codes, to the extent violation poses a threat or potential threat to life, health, safety, or property. 
(13)  Whenever a building or structure is used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, arrangement, inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities, is determined by the health director to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(14)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections, or heating apparatus, or other mechanical, structural, or social cause, is determined by the fire chief to be a fire hazard. 
(15)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(16)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains for any period of time on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, unless such structure has been approved for partial demolition by the DSDB or the department of building inspections in its permitting process. 
(17)  Whenever any building or structure, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered by children. 
(18)  Whenever any building or structure is secured by a means inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use in the manner described in subsection (17). 
    DSDB dangerous structure determination board is constituted as prescribed by the Texas Local Government Code. Composition and authority of the DSDB is described below in section 5-183. 
    Distressed property means a property or premises on which there is located a building or structure believed, by an appropriate city official, to suffer from one or more of the conditions or defects described in this section and to be deserving of consideration by the DSDB. 
    TRO means a temporary restraining order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § I, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-182. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    Any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects described above in section 5-181, where such condition or conditions pose a threat or potential threat to life, health, property, or human safety, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, is prohibited as unlawful, and shall be abated according to provisions of section 5-185. 
    It is an offense for an owner or occupant or other person having control of the building or structure to fail to abate such public nuisance. 
    Failure to abate any of such conditions may also be prosecuted as a criminal misdemeanor offense. It is a further offense and unlawful for any person to cause, permit, or allow a dangerous building to stand after the 30th day after the date on which the dangerous structure determination board finds a condition of nuisance and orders abatement, or after such extended date as may be lawfully permitted by the dangerous structure determination board. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § II, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-183. - Dangerous structure determination board established; composition; public hearing authority; alternative repairs; quorum. 
(a)  The dangerous structure determination board (DSDB) is hereby established, and shall consist of appointees and alternates designated by the city manager from offices of the fire chief, the police chief, the director of building inspections, the director of planning, and the director of public works. 
(b)  The DSDB shall act as authorized under this article and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 214, subch. A., § 214.001, et. seq., dangerous structures. The DSDB shall carry out the hearing duties and procedures prescribed herein, and as those duties and procedures may, from time to time, be modified by applicable law. 
    The DSDB duties shall include review of the procedures for each case brought before the board to confirm notice requirements have been satisfied; conduct of the public hearing required by this article to determine whether or not a building is a public nuisance, as defined in section 5-182, or to determine whether or not a building qualifies for required demolition under section 5-184, as allowed by state law; make remediation and demolition orders or exercise city repair options, as provided in this article. 
    In hearing cases pertaining to distressed buildings and structures, the DSDB shall regard potential for curing title and to advise, when appropriate, property owners of programs which may be available to assist in preserving buildings as affordable housing. 
(c)  In addition to the city's authority under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 214.001(m)(n) to perform public nuisance abatement of dangerous buildings or structures and secure its costs with a lien, whenever remediation is not accomplished within the allotted time, the city shall further exercise its authority, under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0015, additional authority, to allow the DSDB to elect to have the city perform limited repairs, as described below. Assessment for repairs, notice, and recovery of the assessment shall be performed by the city in the same manner as required for the fixing, filing, and foreclosure of liens arising from city services rendered to remediate other premises violations. 
(d)  A building may be repaired by the city under this section, only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with minimum standards, and only if the building is a non-homestead residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units. 
(e)  The lien, however, may be imposed against any nonhomestead real property to secure payment of qualified repair, removal, or demolition expenses. 
(f)  DSDB action shall require a quorum for binding decisions. A quorum shall require presence of 50 percent of the board's membership, plus one. Lacking a quorum, the DSDB may deliberate, but may make no orders. 
(g)  DSDB actions shall require supporting votes for motions as follows: 
(1)  Deliberation and discussion of any matter within the board's jurisdiction upon a motion and a second; 
(2)  Orders to secure, and/or vacate, by a simple majority; 
(3)  Orders for a responsible party to repair, by a simple majority; 
(4)  Recommendations to effect city repair of qualifying properties, by a simple majority, provided resources are available to properly perform repair and duly fix the lien for charges; 
(5)  All other orders or actions within the board's jurisdiction, by a simple majority. 
(h)  Under guidance of and subject to applicable statutes and laws, the DSDB shall devise its administrative procedures, review and adjust such procedures annually and make available to any interested person, a copy of such procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § III, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-184. - Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition; DSDB review of demolition settlement. 
(a)  The following standards shall guide the code compliance officer in his discretion in ordering a hearing to repair, vacate, secure, and/or demolish a dangerous building and these standards shall be observed and applied by the hearing officers who comprise the dangerous structures determination board: 
(1)  If the alleged dangerous building can be feasibly repaired or the condition remedied so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall first be ordered remedied or repaired by the hearing officers. Demolition shall be regarded as a remedy of last resort. 
(2)  If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health of safety of its occupants, it shall be ordered by the hearing officers to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent or more damaged or decayed or deteriorated in its structure, or 50 percent or more diminished in its value due to damage, decay, or deterioration, a presumption shall arise that the building cannot be repaired. Such presumption may be appropriately rebutted by the weight of the evidence. 
(4)  Principals of sound engineering practices shall be respected. 
(5)  In all cases of settlement in which a responsible party enters into a voluntary demolition agreement to accept city serviced demolition, all settlement agreements shall be reviewed by the DSDB prior to execution by a duly authorized city official possessing settlement authority. 
(b)  Additional state authority. Under authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001, subchapter A, dangerous structures, upon hearing, a building or structure shall be ordered demolished, vacated, secured, or repaired, and, if possible, its occupants relocated if found to be: 
(1)  Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare; or 
(2)  Regardless of its structural condition, but having been subject to repeated criminal enforcement efforts, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees, the building is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
(c)  Inspection of buildings, schools, churches, etc. The code compliance officer may inspect or cause to be inspected periodically, all public buildings, schools, halls churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial buildings, manufacturing buildings, or loft buildings, flea markets, and tents for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render any such place a dangerous building or structure within this article. The officer may also inspect buildings under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any premises, building, wall, or structure about which complaints are filed by any persons alleging that any premises or a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article; 
(2)  Any premises, building, wall, or structure, as provided for in this article, alleged by the health, fire, or police departments of this city to be in violation of the terms of this article. Good faith shall be sufficient to support the officer's inspection effort. 
(3)  Any premises, building, wall, or structure which the officer in good faith has reason to believe may be in violation of this article. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. 
(1)  When the code compliance officer has probable cause to believe a building or structure to be dangerous, the code compliance officer shall order a public hearing before the DSDB and make a diligent effort to discover and notify in writing the owner and each lienholder or mortgage, before the public hearing. The director must make a reasonable search of the instruments on file in the office of the county clerk to find the owner. Reliance on the real property lien and tax records of Bexar County, Texas, shall be sufficient to identify mortgagees and lienholders. 
(2)  The pre-hearing notice to the owner shall be: 
a.  Personally to the owner in writing; or 
b.  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; 
c.  If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown: 
1.  By publication at least twice within ten consecutive days; and 
2.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates. 
(3)  The pre-hearing notice to lienholders/mortgagees shall be directed to them at addresses provided by the real property tax records of Bexar County, Texas, and deposit of the notice with the United States Postal Service, first class, shall be deemed sufficient for delivery. 
(4)  The notice shall state: 
a.  The observations of the code compliance officer: Identifying conditions enumerated above in section 5-181 of alleged dilapidation, substandard conditions, unfitness for human habitation, and hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare; or in the alternative, regardless of structural condition, a building or structure is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and unsecured to the extent it could be, or has been, entered by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children, and that the building has been subject to repeated criminal enforcement efforts; and 
b.  Identification of the building and the property upon which the building is located (this identification is not required to be a legal description); and 
c.  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee shall be required at the hearing to present proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will reasonably take to perform the work; and 
d.  A statement that the lienholder/mortgagee, as well as the owner, is entitled to attend the hearing and shall be afforded opportunity to comment. 
(5)  If the city files a notice in the official public records of real property for Bexar County, Texas, pertaining to the hearing, as set forth above, the notice shall bind all subsequent holders of interest in the property, according to state law. 
(6)  The city is not required to finish any further notice to a mortgagee or lienholder, other than a copy of the dangerous structures determination board's order when the city has followed the notice requirements set forth herein. 
(7)  The order, in regard to mortgagees and lienholders, shall notify them, as set forth below at section 5-185, of the owner's obligations and shall allow an additional reasonable time for the mortgagee/lienholder to perform the order if the owner fails to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § IV, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-185. - Notice of dangerous structures determination board--Findings and order; statutory limits on demolition time. 
(a)  After the hearing, the DSDB shall promptly notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner and any mortgagee or lienholders, of the board's order, setting forth a description of the building or structure found unsafe, a statement of the particulars which made the building or structure a dangerous building, a reasonable time for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, and the occupants relocated, if any, and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days as is reasonable. 
    Within ten days after the date the order is issued, the city shall also file a copy of the order in the city clerk's office and publish once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of: 
(1)  Street address or legal description of the property; 
(2)  Date of the hearing; 
(3)  Brief statement of results of the hearing; and 
(4)  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(b)  As prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001(h), in conducting a hearing authorized under this article and upon a finding that the building is dangerous, the DSDB shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to within 30 days: 
(1)  Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or 
(2)  Repair, remove, or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. 
(c)  If the DSDB allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the DSDB shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the DSDB. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of dangerous structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001(l) et seq. 
(d)  The DSDB may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee: 
(1)  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
(2)  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of dangerous structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001(i) et seq. 
(e)  If the DSDB allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the DSDB shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the DSDB to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the DSDB or the code compliance officer to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of dangerous structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001(k) et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § V, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-186. - Burden of proof. 
    In any public hearing before the DSDB to determine whether a building is in violation of the conditions set forth in this article, which may result in a finding of public nuisance and an abatement order, the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to abate the nuisance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. This burden is imposed under authority of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001(1). 
(Ord. No. 1120, § VI, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-187. - Responsible party's failure to abate; costs. 
(a)  If the building or structure, subject of the DSDB order, is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. 
(b)  If the city incurs expenses under subsection (a), the city may assess its costs and secure same by a lien. 
(c)  In the event of city serviced demolition, following review and approval by the DSDB, to abate the public nuisance, the owner shall be charged and billed for the expense of demolition of the structure or building, to prepare the premises for demolition, collapse the structure, remove and dispose of all debris to a legal disposal facility, plus any handling, transportation and disposal fees incurred, including any and all costs necessary to address special or hazardous wastes, and a ten percent administration expense charge. 
(d)  Any case referred to the DSDB for consideration shall also have attached as costs all expenses incurred by the city to research ownership and mortgagee/lienholder interests, as such research is required by state law to fix enforceable orders and liens. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § VII, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-188. - Hearing proceedings. 
(a)  The code compliance officer or his/her designee shall prepare a notice to the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder, if any, having an interest in such alleged dangerous building notifying such persons that a hearing on the matter will be heard by the dangerous structures determination board at a certain time on a certain day, not less than five days and not more than 30 days after receipt thereof, at a city facility appropriate to public hearings. 
(b)  The notice shall be served by verified personal delivery to such persons or by U.S. mail, certified return receipt requested. Where any such person is a corporation, service upon an officer thereof or designated agent shall be deemed sufficient. Where such entity's or person's principal place of business is located outside of the county, service upon the person in charge of the local office shall be deemed sufficient. Such notice shall be published one time in the city's official publication in the event any person having an interest in such premises, or their heirs, cannot be located after reasonable efforts. 
(c)  The code compliance officer or his/her designee shall present at such hearing facts bearing on the condition of the premises, and reports may be made by personnel of the departments of fire, building inspections, planning, other city departments, or other appropriate agencies. 
(d)  Any person having an interest in the property or who may be affected by conditions of the property shall be allowed to present evidence at such hearing, in person or by attorney, regarding condition of the premises and to hear the reports of any city personnel or of any other persons who may be present. The city shall have only those obligations to notify persons or entities as prescribed by statute. 
(e)  The DSDB may require the posting of a performance bond not to exceed $10,000.00 to ensure performance of any formal agreement that may be reached between the city and a person having an interest in the property to accomplish the remediation contract. 
(f)  The remedy of this section shall be available to the city in addition to any penal or other civil remedy which the city, state or other person may have to remedy public nuisance conditions. 
(g)  Expedited cases before the DSDB. In cases where the code compliance officer determines that there is sufficient danger to the life, safety, or property of any person unless a dangerous building or structure, as defined in this article, is immediately repaired or demolished, or in cases where a dangerous building or structure, as defined in this article, is located within 1,000 feet of a public or private elementary school, middle school, high school, or a state recognized day care center, the code compliance officer shall commence procedures to expedite vacation and/or repair or demolition of such dangerous building or structure. The officer may, at his/her option, cause immediate remediation by requesting the city attorney to file in the district court a request for a TRO authorizing emergency abatement. In a request for a TRO, made pursuant to this section, the city attorney may seek any and all relief necessary to abate the emergency except demolition of the structure. Demolition may be sought pursuant to this section, at the request and concurrence of the code compliance officer by action for injunctive relief if such action is deemed necessary by the city attorney. (The above notwithstanding, the city attorney may seek any and all remedies available at law or equity as necessary for abatement under section 5-191(k).) Or, in the alternative, the code lienholders/mortgagees of said dangerous building according to statutory requirements set forth in this article. The board may then hear the matter at its next scheduled meeting. The board may order expedited abatement to vacate, repair, or demolish such dangerous building according to the notice requirements of this article. In all cases of expedited hearings before the DSDB, orders shall be made in comportment with section 5-185, and other applicable provisions of this article. An expedited abatement schedule, under such circumstances, shall be deemed reasonable. Any and all costs associated with asbestos and special or hazardous waste removal, transport and disposal, as required by regulation or city discretion in the interest of safety, or expedited repair vacation, or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § VIII, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-189. - Placarding. 
(a)  In emergency cases the code compliance officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such dangerous building a notice to read: DO NOT ENTER. THIS STRUCTURE TO BE DEMOLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF CODE COMPLIANCE, CITY OF LIVE OAK. Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the code compliance officer, and no unauthorized person shall enter the building for any purpose. It shall be unlawful for any person who enters such premises to remove the posted notice without written permission from the code compliance officer. 
(b)  Buildings or structures subject to DSDB hearings shall be appropriately placarded at discretion of the code compliance officer with warning of dangers for which the officer has probable cause for concern. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § IX, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-190. - Administrative liability. 
(a)  No officer, attorney, agent, or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons to property as a result of any act required or permitted and performed in good faith in the discharge of his or her duties under this article so long as such officer, agent, or employee is acting within the scope of his or her official capacity. Any suit brought against any attorney, officer, agent, or employee of the city acting within his or her official capacity and scope, as a result of any act required or permitted and performed in good faith in the discharge of duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(b)  Reports of suspected dangerous buildings. The heads of the fire, police, and other city departments shall make prompt reports in writing to the code compliance officer of all buildings or structures which are, or may be suspected to be dangerous buildings or structures within the terms of this article. 
(c)  Disconnecting public utilities. The code compliance officer may request that public utilities be disconnected in order that demolition or other nuisance abatement actions may be accomplished without delay in those cases where the structure is open, vacant, dilapidated, or subject to any of the conditions defining public nuisance in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § X, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-191. - State authority for summarily securing unoccupied buildings. 
(a)  Purpose; no emergency required. An owner or person in control of an unoccupied building shall ensure that the building is in such condition that an unauthorized person cannot enter into it through missing or unlocked doors or windows, or through other openings into the building. The city may secure unoccupied, unsecured structures after the owner(s) fail to do so after reasonable notice, or, in the base of an unsecured, unoccupied building located within 1,000 feet or a public or private elementary school, middle school, or high school, or a state recognized day care center, at the discretion of the code compliance officer, the city may secure without prior notice, as prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0011. Subsequent notice of discretionary, summary abatement shall be provided as set forth in subsection (k)(2). A lien may be filed on non-homestead residential structures to assure recovery of the cost of securing. 
(b)  Definition. An unsecured, unoccupied building is hereby defined to be any structure that currently has no legitimate occupant or tenant, or is occupied by persons who have no right to possession, and which has missing or unlocked doors or windows, or other unsecured openings into the building through which an unauthorized person, including a child, could enter. Any unoccupied, unsecured building is hereby declared to be a danger to the public health and safety and a public nuisance. 
(c)  Notice. Whenever it is found that an unoccupied building is in such condition that an unauthorized person or child could enter it through missing or unlocked doors or windows or other openings, the code compliance officer or the fire marshal shall cause a written "Notice To Secure" to be given to the owner of the property or to any person having control over the property. Such notice shall inform the addressee that the building is a public nuisance, and must be secured in compliance with this section within ten days of the receipt of the notice, or that the city has already secured the structure. The notice shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery of the notice to the addressee by a code compliance investigator, fireman, peace officer, or other persons authorized by the code compliance officer. When the city has already secured the structure, notice shall be given no later than the 11th day after the date the structure is secured. If the personal or certified mail notice attempt is not successful, notice may be accomplished by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation, on two occasions approximately one week apart, or by posting notice on or near the front door of the building. 
(d)  Appeal. Any property owner who believes that the code compliance department or the fire marshal has erroneously identified his or her structure as an unsecured, unoccupied structure, shall have the opportunity to appear before a hearing of the DSDB, in person or by attorney, to present any relevant facts as to the condition of the premises upon submitting a written request for such hearing within 30 days after the structure is secured. A hearing shall be held within 20 days after the date a request is filed. Details concerning the right to appeal shall appear on the notice to secure or notice of accomplished securement. The DSDB may require the posting of a performance bond not to exceed $1,000.00 to ensure performance of any agreement that may be reached with the owner of the property in question and which results in the postponement of a pending civil order to secure and/or clean. 
(e)  Offense. It is unlawful for any building owner or person having control of any premises to cause, permit, or allow a public nuisance as defined in this article or to fail to timely comply with a notice to secure ordered by the code compliance officer or fire chief, given pursuant to this section. Violation shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day's failure to comply after the expiration of the notice period shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  City may secure structures. If the owner fails to comply with the notice to secure, the code compliance officer or fire marshal may order the boarding up of all openings to the building so as to prevent entry, or the securing of the structure in any other reasonable fashion. 
(g)  Method of securing. The securing of windows, doors, or any other opening allowing access to an unsecured, unoccupied structure shall be done with such materials and technique to effectively bar entrance to the structure. Such materials include, but are not limited to, plywood, lumber, steel, replacement glass, nails, screws, and bolts. The use of cardboard, tar paper, window and door screens, or any other material that will not effectively prevent entrance shall not be sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. Upon receipt of a notice to secure, each and every accessible means of entry must be secured. 
(h)  Method of cleaning. The cleaning of an unoccupied building shall include maintenance of said structure and its lot free and clear of garbage, trash, debris, rubbish, waste, wood and metal scrap, inoperative or abandoned appliances and furniture. All weed and grass cuttings shall be removed from the premises. 
(i)  Collections and liens. If the city secures a structure pursuant to authority granted by the Texas Local Government Code and in accordance with this section, the city shall proceed to secure payment for said actual costs of securing the property plus an administrative fee of $100.00 by the following: 
(1)  Residential property of ten dwelling units or less. If after 30 days from billing for the securing of a structure, payment in full has not been made, the city may proceed to collect the amount due including the costs of securing, plus all associated costs and fees by filing a lien to be recorded in the real estate records of Bexar County, Texas, pursuant to authority granted by law. 
(2)  All other structures. If after 30 days from billing for the securing of a structure, payment in full has not been made, the city shall bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount due including the cost of securing plus all associated costs and fees. The city attorney is hereby further authorized to make use of whatever legal or equitable remedies are available to collect said monies due, including filing and foreclosure of liens as appropriate. 
(j)  Fee and cost payable date. The cost of securing, plus the attendant administrative cost of $100.00, shall attach and become an account receivable on the date completion of the boarding-up, fencing, or other method of securing any structure. 
(k)  Other remedies available. The remedies provided in this section shall be available in addition to others provided by law or equity. The issuance of a notice to secure or imposition of a fine pursuant to another section of this code shall not be required as a prerequisite to the initiation of abatement action, nor shall the issuance of a notice to secure or imposition of a fine under this section preclude any other or additional abatement remedies. 
(l)  Danger posed by unsecured structure. 
(1)  Where the code compliance officer finds that an unsecured building, regardless of the date of its construction, poses such a danger to public, health, safety, and welfare that in his/her judgment summary abatement is necessary, or where an unsecured building is located within 1,000 feet of a public or private grammar school, middle school, or high school, or a state recognized day care center, he/she shall cause the structure to be secured and cleaned. 
(2)  Notice to the owner(s) shall be provided before the 11th day, after the structure is secured, by personal service, or notice by first class U.S. Mail at the owner's post office address. If personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown, notice may be performed by either publishing the notice twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is located, or posting the notice on or near the front door of the building. The notice shall contain the information required by applicable state law, and as such law may from time to time be amended, at least: (i) a description of the building and the property on which it is located (need not be legal description); (ii) description of the violation; (iii) statement of owner's need to secure or that city has secured, as the case may be; and (iv) explanation of owner's right to request a hearing on the matter, if within 30 days of securing, owner files written request for hearing. The DSDB must hear the matter within 20 days after the date request is filed. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such premises or remove the posted notice without written permission from the code compliance officer. 
(4)  The city's costs may be recovered and a lien filed in the same manner as to secure city expenses incurred to remediate other premises violations. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § XI, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-192. - Enforcement; appeal to district court under substantial evidence rule; lien priority. 
(a)  Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record, aggrieved by an order of the DSDB under section 5-188 may file in district court a verified petition setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed within 30 calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the final decision of the DSDB is mailed to them by first class mail, certified return receipt requested, or such decision shall become final as to each of them upon expiration of each such 30 calendar-day period. 
(b)  In any judicial contest challenging the city's rights under this article, the city shall pursue recovery of its attorney's fees as allowed by the Texas Local Government Code. 
(c)  An aggrieved party's appeal from an order of the DSDB, when made to the district court, shall be limited, according to law, to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule, but the court may reverse or affirm, in whole or part, the DSDB's decision. Accordingly, costs may not be allowed against the city. 
(d)  The lien securing payment of civil penalties or the costs of repairs, removal, or demolition, as the case may be, is inferior only to any previously and duly recorded bona fide mortgage liens, as prescribed by state law. The city's lien is superior to all other previously recorded judgment liens, and shall accrue interest at the rate of ten percent a year, or as allowed by law, from the date of assessment until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § XII, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-193. - Other remedies; V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 54 and 214. 
    Nothing in this article shall preclude the city's pursuit of any and all other remedies allowed under the civil and criminal statutes, and in equity, to address conditions which are treated in this article, under the theory of public nuisance and abatement of dangerous structures or buildings. Neither shall the city be required, nor prohibited, to issue criminal citations before, after, or during any proceeding prescribed in this article. 
    Specifically, in addition to provisions of this article and remedies afforded under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214, municipal regulation of structures, the city further asserts full authority to exercise its right to remedy under all provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, including, but not limited to, ch. 54, subch. B, municipal health and safety ordinances, in prosecution of civil suits for enforcement, injunctive relief, and civil penalties to remedy conditions of public concern described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § XIII, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-194. - Emergency cases; summary abatement by city officials. 
(a)  In cases where it appears to the code compliance officer, the fire chief, or the director of building inspections, that due to one or more structural conditions threatening the structural integrity of a building or structure, there is clear and imminent danger to the life, safety or property of any person unless a dangerous building or structure, as defined in this article, is immediately repaired or demolished, especially in cases where such a very dangerous building or structure, is located within 1,000 feet of a public or private elementary school, middle school, high school, or a state recognized day care center, any one of those officials (the official) shall execute the immediate vacation and or repair or demolition of such very dangerous building or structure, regardless of the date of its construction. Such summary action shall require concurrence from at least one other of the aforesaid officials. In the case of summary demolition, concurrence of the director of building inspections shall be required. Such concurrence shall include a determination that under the circumstances no other abatement procedure is reasonably available except demolition. The official taking action shall thereafter immediately provide notice to the DSDB, of the accomplished abatement; and to the owner and lienholders/mortgagees of said dangerous building. All costs, including asbestos and special or hazardous waste removal/disposal, of such emergency summary repair, vacation, or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  The foregoing emergency abatement action shall be executed not later than 72 weekday hours, exclusive of weekends and holidays, after the official views the subject building or structure. 
(c)  The foregoing emergency abatement action is hereby acknowledged as being outside state statutory prescriptions. The authority for this section is asserted under the City Charter, as police power of a home-rule city, so provided by the constitution of the state. 
(d)  Upon ordering and executing emergency abatement by demolition, the city official responsible shall make an appropriate affidavit evidencing his/her actions. Copies of the affidavit shall be maintained among the official records of the respective official's department and in the minutes records of the DSDB for two years. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § XIV, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 5-195. - Retaining walls. 
(a)  The regulations established in this article have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the protection of the life, safety and property of members of the public. They have been designed to regulate the location, construction, maintenance, repair and demolition of retaining walls and the use of ground which depends upon a retaining wall for lateral support when such retaining walls are located so as to possibly endanger the life, safety or property of the public. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the following meaning: 
    Abutting land shall mean any land which lies touching a public highway or other public place. 
    Director of public works shall mean the person who is performing the duties of the director of public works of the city including the duties of city engineer. The term shall include his authorized representative when not inconsistent with the context. 
    Impact load shall mean extra load caused by extra weight being moved unto the surface. 
    Premises subject to this article shall mean all premises: 
(1)  Which are located upon abutting land whereby filling the level of the abutting land has been or will be raised above the level of the adjoining public street or other public place, or 
(2)  Which are located upon lands which the members of the public are invited to enter upon or to place their personal property upon, and which has land depending upon a retaining wall for its support in order to keep the life, person or property of the public from being endangered. 
    Retaining wall shall mean any wall used in whole or in part to resist the lateral displacement of any material. 
    Supported land shall mean any land depending upon a retaining wall in whole or in part for lateral support. 
    Surcharge load shall mean extra load above the safe load. 
(c)  Construction on city property; consent required; use for private purposes prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place upon, or maintain for private purposes any retaining wall or part of same upon any real estate owned or controlled by the city, except by contract with or permission given by ordinance of the city council. 
(2)  If any person has constructed or hereafter shall construct a retaining wall which is situated in whole or in part upon real estate owned or controlled by the city, nothing contained in this article is to be construed to grant to or to recognize in anyone any right, permit, franchise or easement to use any public real estate of the city for private purposes. 
(d)  Filling abutting land, spilling of soil. The abutting land owner as well as any person using the abutting land shall in any case where, by filling, the level of the abutting land has been raised above the level of the adjoining public street or other public place, keep soil used in so raising the level of the abutting land off the adjoining public street or other public place. The soil may be kept off the adjoining public street or other public place by a retaining wall built and maintained on the abutting land or by sloping the abutting land so as to accomplish the same purpose. 
(e)  Removal of walls. The abutting land owner as well as any person using the abutting land shall in any case where the owner and/or user desires to remove a retaining wall in whole or in part on the abutting land, which has been used to keep soil off the public street or other public place, immediately slope the abutting land in such a manner as to keep the soil from the abutting land off the public street or other public place. 
(f)  Repairs to existing walls. The abutting land owner as well as any person using the abutting land shall when making repairs to an existing retaining wall, make structurally sound repairs as needed and make the repairs in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer; the plans and specifications shall have been approved by the director of public works before a building permit will be issued on abutting land. 
(g)  Overloads. It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or user of any supported land which the members of the public are invited to enter upon or to place their personal property upon, to use or permit the use of the supported land in any manner which shall cause a surcharge load to be placed thereon. Impact load, if any, shall be considered in determining whether a surcharge load is being placed upon the supported land. 
(h)  Design, construction and maintenance of retaining walls. 
(1)  All retaining walls subject to the provision of this article shall be designed, constructed and maintained to resist the maximum lateral pressure of the retained material, in accordance with accepted engineering practice, when the supported land is being subject to the maximum load which can be put upon it during its present or intended use, whichever is the greater. 
(2)  A new retaining wall, shall be erected with a structurally sound wall in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer the plans and specifications shall have been approved by the director of public works before a building permit will be issued on abutting land. 
(i)  Inspections. The director of public works shall inspect or cause to be inspected periodically all retaining walls on land abutting a public highway, street, road, sidewalk or other public place if said retaining walls are located so as to create a possible dangerous and unsafe condition imperiling life, safety, or property of anyone using the public highway, street, road, sidewalk or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § XV, 10-10-00) 
Secs. 5-196-5-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESIDENTIAL CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1158, §§ 1, 3, 4, adopted September 24, 2002, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article X, §§ 5-211-5-213 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5-211. - Adopted. 
    The city does hereby adopt the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition as its building code which shall control construction in the city except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 1, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 1439, § V, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-212. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted by this article is hereby amended as set out in this section: 
R101.1 Title. 
These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of Live Oak, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. 
Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Delete items 1, 2,,3, 10 replace with the following: 
Building: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures, provided that the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and NOT on a permeant foundation 
2.  Replacement of a current Fence(s) 6' in height or less with the same. Any new foot print for fencing MUST be permitted. 
3.  Retaining walls that are not over 3 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge. 
10.  Decks not exceeding 100 square feet in area, that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4. 
Section R112 
Delete: Board of Appeals 
Add: Means of Appeal 
Amend to read as follows: Requirements for appeal per the amendments in Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
Section R319 
At the end of paragraph R319.1 
Add: The street address of each single-family structure shall be illuminated by a light bulb of at least sixty (60) watts, and shall be easily visible from the street. The bulb(s) shall be protected by a weather-and-vandalism-resistant globe or cover. 
Lighting facilities used on private properties for security or decorative reasons or to illuminate outdoor recreational areas such as, but not limited to, tennis courts and swimming pools, shall be shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any adjoining property. 
Section R311.2 Type of lock or latch 
Add: In addition to being equipped with a dead latch with a half-inch minimum throw, each exterior single swing door shall be secured by a deadlock with one-inch (1") minimum throw having hardened steel inserts; alternately the deadlock will be of a design which otherwise prevents a spreading threat. Any alternate locking devices shall be approved by the Building Official prior to being installed. 
Section R311.3 Doors 
Add at end of paragraph R311.3 
Door Viewers shall be installed on all solid front entrance doors and shall cover 180 degrees of viewing. Such viewer is to be installed with the securing portion on the inside and non removable from the outside. 
Chapter 9 
Delete Section R905.7 thru 905.8 
Section 905.7 should read as follows: 
Wooden Roofs Prohibited. 
Regardless of any provisions of the applicable Standard Building Code or of any other provisions of this Code, all wooden roofs whatever (to include wooden shingle or wooden shake roofs) is henceforth absolutely prohibited. All roofing materials shall be certified noncombustible in accordance with the highest prevailing current standard in the building materials markets. 
"No existing wooden or wooden shingle or shake roof can hereafter be replaced but all such roofs, when reroofed, shall be reroofed in strict accord with the provisions hereof. Only minor repairs to existing wood roofs can be made with wooden shingles or shakes. If more than 50 percent of the roof's surface needs to be replaced with new materials, it shall be completed reroofed with approved incombustible materials." 
R908.3 add at end of sentence: Decking MUST comply with section 803 paragraph 803.1.1 of the 2018 International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1439, § V, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1439, § V, adopted September 28, 2010, renumbered the former §§ 5-212 and 5-213 as §§ 5-213 and 5-214 and enacted a new § 5-212 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Sec. 5-213. - Reference to duties of certain officials. 
    When reference is made in said code to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 3, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 1439, § V, 9-28-10) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 5-212. 
Sec. 5-214. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any residential building or use in violation of any detailed statement of plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine or not more than $1,000.00 and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 4, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 1439, § V, 9-28-10) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 5-212. 
Secs. 5-215-5-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1483 , § 3, adopted August 13, 2013, repealed Art. XI, §§ 5-221-5-229, which pertained to property maintenance and derived from Ord. No. 1242, §§ 1-4, adopted December 13, 2005. 

Secs. 5-221-5-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 5-250. - Adopted. 
    The city does hereby adopt the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition as its building code which shall control construction in the city except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 1439, § VI, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-251. - Amendments. 
    The Code adopted by this Article is hereby amended as set out in this section: 
Section 606 
Para 606.1 
Item 2 delete and add the following: 
2.  On the water distribution supply pipe within 3 feet from entering into the structure. 
Section 502 
Delete paragraph 502.3 
Add new paragraph 502.3 to read: Water heaters shall be prohibited from being installed/replaced in any residential attic space. If installed on second story and above (excluding attic space) extra support must be placed to support 3 times the weight of filled water heater. 
Section 109 
Delete: Paragraphs 109.2, 109.2.1, 109.2.2, 109.2.3 
Delete: Board of Appeals 
Add: Means of Appeal 
Amend to read as follows: Requirements for appeal per the amendments in Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
Section 306 
Paragraph 306.1 
Add at end of sentence: rebar or such material shall not be used as piping bedding support. The Building Official can approve other support material if needed. 
Add to Section 1003 
Para 1003.10 
G.  Customer (Generator) Responsibilities: 
It is the responsibility of the customer (waste generator) to insure compliance with the City of Live Oak's discharge limitations. 
Hazardous wastes, such as acids, strong cleaners, pesticides, herbicides, paint, solvents, or gasoline shall not be disposed of where they would go through grease interceptors or grit traps. Care must be taken in system design when commercial dishwashers are discharged through a grease interceptor. Dishwashers use detergents and elevated water temperatures that will melt grease. If the interceptor is either too small or too close to the commercial dishwasher, grease may pass through the interceptor and into the collection system. 
Generators are responsible for maintaining grease interceptors in continuous proper working condition, by removing the oil and grease buildup in the interceptor. Further, generators are responsible for inspecting, repairing, replacing, or installing apparatus and equipment as necessary to ensure proper operation and function of grease interceptors and compliance with discharge limitations at all times. 
The City Of Live Oak and TCEQ require grease trap/interceptor maintenance records be maintained on site for three (3) years. 
The City Of Live Oak discourages the use of enzymes, solvents, and emulsifiers as this will only change the form of grease, allowing it to be carried out of the trap/interceptor with the wastewater and deposited in the collection system. 
Add to Section 1003 
Para 1003.6 after Exceptions 
A.  Commercial Laundries 
Commercial Laundries, Laundromats, and dry-cleaners shall be equipped with an interceptor in order to reduce the quantity of lint and silt that enter the collection system. The system must be of adequate size and design to allow for cool-down of wastewater so that separation can be more readily achieved. The interceptor must be installed with a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning that prevents passage into the drainage system of solids larger than 1/4 inch in any dimension, string, rags, buttons or other materials detrimental to the public sewerage system. 
Sizing must be in accordance with guidance found in the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), Appendix H, which uses the following formula: 
(TGC) x (CPH) x (RT) x (ST) = Size of 
Lint Interceptor (gallons) 
Where: TGC = Total Gallons per Cycle CPH = Cycles per hour RT = Retention time 
2.5 for Institutional Laundry 
2.0 for Standard Commercial Laundry 
1.5 Light Commercial Laundry ST = Storage Factor, based on hours of operation; 
1.0 for 8 hours of operation 
1.5 for 12 or more hours 
(Ord. No. 1439, § VI, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1466, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 1509, § I , 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1559 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Secs. 5-252-5-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted April 30, 2019, amended Art. XIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XIII, §§ 5-271-5-288, pertained to construction site storm water runoff control and derived from Ord. No. 1433, Arts. I-XVII, adopted Aug. 10, 2010. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-271. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Applicant. A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed a storm water management plan. 
    Best management practices (BMP). Methods and techniques to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants, including schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, structural controls, local ordinances, and other management practices. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control runoff, spills or leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage areas. 
    Buffer . A natural or vegetated area through which storm water runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of pollutants. 
    City. The City of Live Oak, Texas, or the City Council of Live Oak, Texas. 
    City manager or his designee. The person appointed to the position of city manager or his designee by the city council of the City of Live Oak, Texas, and authorized to act on behalf of the city and/or city council, or his/her duly authorized representative, including but not limited to a city building official (building official) or city engineer as designated by the city or city manager or his designee 
    Commencement of construction. The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, demolition, grading, excavating, filling, stockpiling, erection of forms, or any other construction-related activity. Also referred to as "start of construction." 
    Common plan of development. A construction activity that is completed in separate stages, separate phases, or in combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development (also known as a "common plan of development or sale") is identified by the documentation for the construction project that identifies the scope of the project, and may include plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or other similar documentation and activities. A common plan of development does not necessarily include all construction projects within the jurisdiction of the city. Construction of roads or buildings in different parts of the jurisdiction would be considered separate "common plans," with only the interconnected parts of a project being considered part of a "common plan" (e.g., a building and its associated parking lot and driveways, airport runway and associated taxiways, a building complex, etc.). Where discrete construction projects occur within a larger common plan of development or sale but are located one-fourth mile or more apart, and the area between the projects is not being disturbed, each individual project can be treated as a separate plan of development or sale, provided that any interconnecting road, pipeline or utility project that is part of the same "common plan" is not included in the area to be disturbed. 
    Conveyance. Curbs, gutters, man-made channels and ditches, drains, pipes, and other constructed features designed or used for drainage, flood control, or the transport of storm water runoff. 
    Development. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; or any change in use, or alteration or extension of the use, of land. 
    Discharge. The drainage, release, or disposal of storm water and other surface runoff from locations of soil-disturbing activities (e.g., clearing, grading, excavating, stockpiling, and demolishing), construction materials, equipment storage or maintenance operations (e.g., fill piles, borrow areas, concrete truck washout areas, and fueling); Discharge also includes the drainage, release, or disposal of industrial storm water directly related to the construction process (e.g., concrete or asphalt batch plants). 
    Disturbance. Any activity, including but not limited to excavation, clearing, and grading, which disturbs the natural or improved vegetative ground cover or topography of the land by any person, entity and applicable city projects. Land disturbing activity does not include any vegetative cutting and mulching. All installations and maintenance of franchise utilities such as telephone, gas, electric, etc., shall be considered land disturbing activities. 
    Drought. A period of dry weather, usually lengthy, that is injurious to crops, as determined by the city in accordance with established standards. 
    Erosion control. A structure or measure that limits erosion. 
    Facility or activity. A construction site or construction support activity that is regulated under TCEQ TPDES General Permit Number TXR150000 relating to storm water discharges associated with construction activities, including all contiguous land and fixtures (e.g., ponds and materials stockpiles), structures, or appurtenances used at a construction site or industrial site described by this article and/or the TCEQ general construction permit. 
    Final stabilization. 
(1)  The status of a construction site when all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and the disturbed soil has been covered with: 
a.  A uniform (i.e., evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 70 percent; 
b.  Permanent structures such as buildings; and/or 
c.  Permanent stabilization measures such as pavement, riprap, or gabions. 
(2)  For individual lots in a residential construction site, final stabilization may be achieved only by the homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g. pipelines across crop or range land), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. 
(4)  For construction activities on land that was not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface water and areas that are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use, final stabilization can be achieved only by meeting the conditions of (a) above. 
(5)  For the event of drought, final stabilization can be achieved only when all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and both of the following criteria have been met: 
a.  Temporary erosion control measures (e.g., degradable rolled erosion control mats) are selected, designed, and installed with an appropriate seed base to provide erosion control for at least three years without active maintenance by the operator, and 
b.  The temporary erosion control measures are selected, designed, and installed to achieve 70 percent vegetative coverage within three years. 
    General permit. TPDES General Permit No. TXR150000 for the discharge of wastes provides a means for construction sites and other sources of soil disturbance to lawfully discharge storm water to surface water in the state in compliance with Section 402 of the Clean Water Act and V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 26. The provisions of the general permit are promulgated and enforced by the TCEQ. 
    Grading. Shaping, excavating or filling of clay, sand, rock and/or other types of soil material. 
    Hyperchlorination of waterlines. Treatment of potable water lines or tanks with chlorine for disinfection purposes, typically following repair or partial replacement of the waterline or tank, and subsequently flushing the contents. 
    Large construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in land disturbance measuring five acres of land or more. Large construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than five acres of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb areas measuring five acres of land or more. Large construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the site (e.g., the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing rights-of-way, and similar maintenance activities.) 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). A separate storm sewer system owned or operated by the United States, a state, city, town, county, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over the disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water, and/or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, that discharges to surface water in the state. 
    Non-structural BMP. Preventative actions that involve management and source controls such as: policies and ordinances that provide requirements and standards to direct growth to identified areas, protect sensitive areas such as wetlands and riparian areas, maintain and/or increase open space (including a dedicated funding source for open space acquisition), provide buffers along sensitive water bodies, minimize impervious surfaces, and minimize disturbance of soils and vegetation; policies or ordinances that encourage infill development in higher density urban areas, and areas with existing infrastructure; education programs for developers and the public about project designs that minimize water quality impacts; and measures such as minimization of percent impervious area after development and minimization of directly connected impervious areas. 
    Notice of change (NOC). Written notification to the executive director of the TCEQ, which is also to be copied to the city manager or his designee, from a discharger authorized under TPDES General Permit TXR150000, providing changes to information that was previously provided to the agency in a notice of intent form. 
    Notice of intent (NOI). A written submission to the executive director of the TCEQ, which is also to be copied to the city manager or his designee, from an applicant requesting coverage under TPDES General Permit TXR150000. 
    Notice of Termination (NOT). A written submission to the executive director of the TCEQ, which is also to be copied to the city manager or his designee, from a discharger authorized under a TPDES General Permit TXR 150000 requesting termination of coverage. 
    Operator. The person or persons associated with a large or small construction activity that is either a primary or secondary operator as defined below: 
(1)  Primary operator. The person or persons associated with a large or small construction activity that meets either of the following two criteria: (a) the person or persons have operational control over construction plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) the person or persons have day-to-day operational control of those activities at a construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) for the site or other permit conditions (e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the SWP3 or comply with other permit conditions). 
(2)  Secondary operator. The person whose operational control is limited to the employment of other operators or to the ability to approve or disapprove changes to plans and specifications. A secondary operator is also defined as a primary operator and must comply with the permit requirements for primary operators if there are no other operators at the construction site. 
    Outfall. A point source where storm water runoff associated with construction activity discharges to surface water in the state and does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels, or other conveyances that connect segments of the same stream or other water of the U.S. and are used to convey waters of the U.S. 
    Owner. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to a fee owner, mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long-term or commercial lessee, or any other person or entity holding proprietary rights in the property or having legal power of management and control of the property. A secured lender not in possession of the property does not constitute and owner, unless the secured lender is included within the meaning of "owner" under another description in this definition, such as management entity. 
    Perimeter control. A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
    Permit. A site development permit issued by the city for construction or the alteration of ground. 
    Permittee. An operator authorized under the city Code and this article to commence construction that involves disturbing the soil. The authorization may be gained by applying for a building permit and submitting a NOI. 
    Person(s). Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or the legal representatives, agents, or assigns thereof. 
    Phasing. Clearing a parcel of land in separate, distinct steps, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
    Point source. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are, or may be, discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural storm water runoff. 
    Pollutant. Sediment, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, filter backwash, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into any surface water in the state. The term "pollutant" does not include tailwater, irrigation runoff, or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pastureland, and farmland. 
    Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any surface water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property or to public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
    PCSWQ . Post-construction storm water quality. 
    Redevelopment. Any construction, alteration or improvement where existing land is altered of previously developed land. 
    Responsible party . Any person or legal entity, individual or corporate, including an owner, operator, contractor, or subcontractor, any or all of whom may be engaged in, consent to, or actually perform a construction project or construction activity. 
    Review fee. The cost charged to the applicant for the review of an application submittal, including a proposed SWP3. This fee will initially be $200.00 plus $100.00 per acre or portion of an acre of proposed disturbed area (e.g. the review fee for the proposed disturbance of one acre or less would be: $200.00 + $100.00 = $300.00; for a two-acre disturbance $200.00 + $200.00 = $400.00; for a 21/2-acre disturbance $200.00 + $300.00 = $500.00; etc.). This fee may be increased or decreased by amendment to this article. 
    Sediment control. A structure or measure that prevents eroded sediment from leaving the situs. 
    Separate storm sewer system (S4). A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains), designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; that is not a combined sewer, and that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
    Site. A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where construction and/or grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
    Site development. Any construction project that involves the disturbing of soil. 
    Small construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in land disturbance measuring one acre or more and less than five acres. Small construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb areas of land measuring one acre or more and less than five acres. Small construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the site (e.g., the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing rights-of-way, and similar maintenance activities.) 
    Stabilization. Practices and measures that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    State. The State of Texas. 
    Storm water, stormwater, storm water runoff, or stormwater runoff. Surface runoff and drainage resulting from precipitation. 
    Storm water associated with construction activity. Storm water runoff from a construction site where soil disturbance is of a size large enough to be regulated by this article. 
    Storm water control guidelines for construction sites . A manual containing all approved methods and design criteria for drainage and storm water control. 
    Storm water management. The use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat. 
    Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3 or SW3P). A set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer proposing specific best management practices, including erosion controls, sediment controls, and sequencing schedules for limiting the amount of sediment that is discharged to drainage easements, public rights-of-way, the storm drain system, waterways, and watercourses. Separate plans may be required to address conditions during and after construction. 
    Structural BMP . Any storage practices such as wet ponds and extended-detention outlet structures; filtration practices such as grassed swales, sand filters and filter strips; and infiltration practices such as infiltration basins and infiltration trenches. 
    Structural control (or practice). A pollution prevention practice that requires the construction of a device, or the use of a device, to capture or to limit pollution in storm water runoff. Structural controls and practices may include but are not limited to: silt fences, earthen dikes, drainage swales, sediment traps, check dams, subsurface drains, storm drain inlet protection, outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent sediment basins. 
    Surface water in the state . Lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state (from the mean high-water mark (MHWM) out 10.36 miles into the Gulf), and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or subject to the jurisdiction of the state; except that waters in treatment systems which are authorized by state or federal law, regulation, or permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste treatment are not considered to be water in the state. 
    TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
    Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System . A program to issue authorizations to discharge pollutants into waters of the state if certain conditions are met. 
    Temporary stabilization. A condition where exposed soils or disturbed areas are provided a protective cover or other structural control to prevent the migration of pollutants. Temporary stabilization may include temporary seeding, geotextiles, mulches, and other techniques to reduce or eliminate erosion until permanent stabilization can be achieved or until further construction activities take place. 
    Watercourse. Any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the City of Live Oak, Texas on its storm water map. 
    Waterway. A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
    Waters of the United States. Waters of the United States or waters of the U.S. means: (a) all waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; (b) all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; (c) all other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds that the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: (1) which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; (2) from which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or (3) which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; (d) all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; (e) tributaries of waters identified in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this definition; (f) the territorial sea; and (g) wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in paragraphs (a) through (f) of this definition. Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of CWA (other than cooling ponds as defined in 40 CFR 423.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United States. This exclusion applies only to manmade bodies of water which neither were originally created in waters of the United States (such as disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from the impoundment of waters of the United States. Waters of the United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area's status as prior converted cropland by any other federal agency, for the purposes of the Clean Water Act, the final authority regarding Clean Water Act jurisdiction remains with the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION SITE STORM WATER RUNOFF CONTROL 

Sec. 5-272. - Introduction; purpose; intent. 
    During the construction process, soil may become vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil may have chemical and/or biological properties that reduce water quality in streams and lakes, thereby threatening drinking water resources and wildlife habitats. Eroded soil may also cause maintenance problems by settling out (sedimentation) in storm sewers, ditches, creeks, and other parts of the storm system, which then require maintenance and repair. The provisions and requirements contained in this article shall operate in conjunction with and in addition to the city's previously existing building code, building permitting, and building code enforcement procedures. 
    The purpose of this article is to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the environment in the City of Live Oak, Texas. This article will also promote the public health, safety and general welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other construction activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the construction process to reduce erosion by wind and water during construction. 
(2)  To reduce the degradation of water quality and the siltation of aquatic habitats for fish and other desirable species. 
(3)  To reduce the necessity for repair of storm sewers and ditches and the dredging of lakes as a result of soil erosion resulting from construction activities. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-273. - Permits. 
(a)  Applicability and coverage. 
(1)  Discharges eligible for authorization. 
a.  Storm water associated with construction activity. Discharges of storm water runoff from small and large construction activities may be authorized under this article. 
b.  Discharges of storm water associated with construction support activities. Examples of construction support activities include, but are not limited to, concrete batch plants, rock cruisers, asphalt batch plants, equipment staging areas, material storage yards, material borrow areas, and excavated material disposal areas. Discharges of storm water runoff from construction support activities may be authorized under this article, provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The activities are located within the same city, located within one mile from the boundary of the permitted construction site, and directly support the construction activity; 
2.  A storm water pollution prevention plan is developed according to the provisions of this article which includes appropriate controls and measures to reduce erosion and discharge of pollutants in storm water runoff from the construction support activities; and 
3.  The construction support activities either do not operate beyond the completion date of the construction activity or are authorized under separate authorization. Separate authorization may include the TPDES Multi Sector General Permit, TXR050000 (related to storm water discharges associated with industrial activity), separate authorization under this article if applicable, coverage under an alternative ordinance if available, or authorization under an individual water quality permit issued by the state. 
c.  Non-storm water discharges. The following non-storm water discharges are not prohibited under this article: 
1.  Discharges from firefighting activities (firefighting activities do not include washing of trucks, run-off water from training activities, test water from fire suppression systems, and similar activities); 
2.  Uncontaminated fire hydrant flushings (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect aquatic life), which include flushings from systems that utilize potable water, surface water, or groundwater that does not contain additional pollutants (uncontaminated fire hydrant flushings do not include systems utilizing reclaimed wastewater as a source water); 
3.  Water from the routine external washing of vehicles, the external portion of buildings or structures, and pavement, where detergents and soaps are not used and where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless spilled materials have been removed; and if local, state, or federal regulations are applicable, the materials are removed according to those regulations), and where the purpose is to remove mud, dirt, or dust; 
4.  Uncontaminated water used to control dust; 
5.  Potable water sources including waterline flushings (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect aquatic life); 
6.  Uncontaminated air conditioning condensate; 
7.  Uncontaminated ground water or spring water, including foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with industrial materials such as solvents; and 
8.  Lawn watering and similar irrigation drainage. 
d.  Other permitted discharges. Any discharge authorized under a separate permit may be combined with discharges authorized by this article, provided those discharges comply with the associated permit. 
(b)  Concrete truck wash out. The washout of concrete trucks associated with off-site production facilities may be conducted at regulated construction sites in accordance with the requirements of section 5-281. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-274. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  No person shall be granted a site development permit for a project disturbing 0.25 acre of land or more without the approval of a storm water pollution prevention plan (as described more fully in section 5-275) by the city engineer or the city building official or his/her/their duly authorized representative(s). 
(b)  No site development permit is required for the following activities: 
(1)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
(2)  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(3)  Gardening that is associated with the maintenance and landscaping of existing facilities and that is unrelated to new construction. 
(c)  Each NOI shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. 
(d)  Each NOI shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with an approved storm water pollution prevention plan. 
(e)  For large construction activities, the applicant will be required to file with the city or its duly authorized representative a faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient by the city manager or his designee or city engineer or his/her/their duly authorized representative to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the city, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-275. - Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3). 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Storm water pollution prevention plans must be prepared for the purpose of limiting pollutants in discharges from small and large construction activities that will reach MS4s and privately-owned separate storm sewer systems. The SWP3 must also identify and address potential sources of pollution (including off-site material storage areas, overburden and stockpiles of dirt, borrow areas, equipment staging areas, vehicle repair areas, fueling areas, and etc.) that are reasonably expected to affect the quality of construction site discharges. The SWP3 must describe the practices that will be used to minimize, to the extent practicable, the discharge of construction-related pollutants in storm water and certain non-storm water discharges. 
(2)  SWP3s must utilize temporary and permanent BMPs, measures, and controls complying with the city's Technical Guidance Manual. 
(3)  SWP3s require maps and/or drawings. The scale of the maps and drawings must be large enough to provide a clear understanding of the site and the project. Sheet sizes must not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. Where the amount of information required to be included on the map would result in a single map being difficult to read and interpret, the operator shall develop a series of maps that collectively include the required information. 
(4)  SWP3s must list MS4s receiving discharges from the subject construction activity. The same MS4s must receive copies of the SWP3 and application submittal. 
(5)  Shared SWP3 development. 
a.  For more effective coordination of BMPs and opportunities for cost sharing, a cooperative effort by the different operators at a site is encouraged. Operators must independently obtain authorization but may work together to prepare and implement a single, comprehensive SWP3 for the entire construction site. 
b.  The SWP3 must clearly list the name and, for large construction activities, the permit authorization numbers, for each operator that participates in the shared SWP3. Until the city responds to receipt of the NOI with a permit authorization number, the SWP3 must specify the date that the NOI was submitted to the city by each operator. Each operator participating in the shared plan must also sign the SWP3. 
c.  The SWP3 must clearly indicate which operator is responsible for satisfying each shared requirement of the SWP3. If the responsibility for satisfying a requirement is not described in the plan, then each permittee is entirely responsible for meeting the requirement within the boundaries of the construction site where it performs construction activities. The SWP3 must clearly describe responsibilities for meeting each requirement in shared or common areas. 
d.  Individual operators may develop separate SWP3s that apply only to their portion of the project, provided reference is made to the other operators working on the site. Where there is more than one SWP3 for a site, permittees must coordinate to ensure that BMPs and controls are consistent and do not negate or impair the effectiveness of other controls. Regardless of whether a single comprehensive SWP3 is developed or separate SWP3s are developed for each operator, it is the responsibility of each operator to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of this article in the areas of the construction site where that operator has control over construction plans and specifications or day-to-day operations. 
(b)  For small and large construction activities, the SWP3 must include, at a minimum: 
(1)  A site or project description, which includes the following information: 
a.  The address and lot description of the site; 
b.  A description of the nature of the construction activity; 
c.  A list of potential pollutants and their sources; 
d.  A description of the best management practices (BMPs) that will be used to minimize pollution in runoff. 
e.  The intended schedule or sequence of activities that will disturb soils for major portions of the site. The schedule of sequence must provide dates for beginning and ending construction activities such as stripping and clearing, rough grading, installing utilities, constructing infrastructure, constructing buildings, final grading, landscaping, and installing erosion and sediment controls including temporary and permanent measures; 
f.  The total number of acres of the entire project property and the total number of acres where construction activities will occur, including off-site material storage areas, overburden and stockpiles of dirt, and borrow areas that are authorized under the permittee's NOI; 
g.  Data describing the soil or the quality of any discharge from the site; 
h.  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of mineral and fertilizer, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures; and 
i.  A maintenance plan for BMPs. 
(2)  A general map showing the location of the site; 
(3)  A detailed topographic site map (or maps) indicating the following: 
a.  North arrow; 
b.  Identifying property lines; 
c.  Easements; 
d.  Access to the site; 
e.  Existing site conditions; 
f.  The areas and extent of proposed soil disturbance; 
g.  Proposed project conditions; 
h.  Conveyances and watercourses; 
i.  Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities; 
j.  Locations of all planned or in-place structural controls; 
k.  Locations of temporary and permanent stabilization measures; 
l.  Locations of construction support activities, including off-site activities, that are authorized under the permittee's NOI, including material, waste, borrow, fill, equipment storage, asphalt plants, and concrete plants; 
m.  Surface waters (including wetlands) either at, adjacent to, or in close proximity to the site; 
n.  Locations where storm water discharges from the site directly to a surface water body or MS4; and 
o.  Vehicle wash areas. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-276. - Maintenance and inspection of controls. 
(a)  Maintenance of controls. 
(1)  All protective measures identified in the SWP3 must be maintained in effective operating condition. If, through inspections or other means, the permittee determines that BMPs are not operating effectively, then the permittee shall perform maintenance as necessary to maintain the continued effectiveness of storm water controls, and prior to the next rain event if feasible. If maintenance prior to the next anticipated storm event is impracticable, the reason shall be documented in the SWP3 and maintenance must be scheduled and accomplished as soon as practicable. Erosion and sediment controls that have been intentionally disabled, run over, removed, or otherwise rendered ineffective must be replaced or corrected immediately upon discovery. 
(2)  If periodic inspections or other information indicates a control has been used incorrectly, is performing inadequately, or is damaged, then the operator must replace or modify the control as soon as practicable after making the discovery. 
(3)  Sediment must be removed from sediment traps and sedimentation ponds no later than the time that design capacity has been reduced by 50 percent. For perimeter controls such as silt fences, berms, etc., the trapped sediment must be removed before it reaches 50 percent of the above-ground height. 
(4)  If sediment escapes the site, accumulations must be removed at a frequency that minimizes off-site impacts, and prior to the next rain event, if feasible. If the permittee does not own or operate the off-site conveyance, then the permittee must work with the owner or operator of the property to remove the sediment. 
(b)  Inspection of controls. 
(1)  Personnel provided by the permittee must inspect disturbed areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, discharge locations, and structural controls for evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering the drainage system. Personnel conducting these inspections must be knowledgeable of this article, any permit issued under it, and the TCEQ general construction permit, familiar with the construction site, and knowledgeable of the SWP3 for the site. Sediment and erosion control measures identified in the SWP3 must be inspected to ensure that they are operating correctly. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site must be inspected for evidence of off-site sediment tracking. Inspections must be conducted at least once every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of a storm event of one-half inches or greater. 
(2)  Where sites have been finally or temporarily stabilized or where runoff is unlikely due to winter conditions (e.g. site is covered with snow, ice, or frozen ground exists), inspections must be conducted at least once every month. 
(3)  As an alternative to the above-described inspection schedule of once every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of a storm event of one-half inches or greater, the SWP3 may be developed to require that these inspections will occur at least once every seven calendar days. If this alternative schedule is developed, then the inspection must occur on a specifically defined day, regardless of whether or not there has been a rainfall event since the previous inspection. The inspections may occur on either schedule provided that the SWP3 reflects the current schedule and that any changes to the schedule are conducted in accordance with the following provisions: the schedule may be changed a maximum of one time each month, the schedule change must be implemented at the beginning of a calendar month, and the reason for the schedule change must be documented in the SWP3 (e.g., end of "dry" season and beginning of "wet" season). 
(4)  In the event of flooding or other uncontrollable situations which prohibit access to the inspection sites, inspections must be conducted as soon as access is practicable. 
(5)  The SWP3 must be modified based on the results of inspections, as necessary, to better control pollutants in runoff. Revisions to the SWP3 must be completed within seven calendar days following the inspection. If existing BMPs are modified or if additional BMPs are necessary, an implementation schedule must be described in the SWP3 and wherever possible those changes implemented before the next storm event. If implementation before the next anticipated storm event is impracticable, these changes must be implemented as soon as practicable. 
(6)  A report summarizing the scope of the inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, and major observations relating to the implementation of the SWP3 must be made and retained as part of the SWP3. Major observations should include: The locations of discharges of sediment or other pollutants from the site; locations of BMPs that need to be maintained; locations of BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved inadequate for a particular location; and locations where additional BMPs are needed. 
(7)  Actions taken as a result of inspections must be described within, and retained as a part of, the SWP3. Reports must identify any incidents of non-compliance. Where a report does not identify any incidents of non-compliance, the report must contain a certification that the facility or site is in compliance with the SWP3 and this permit. The report must be signed by the person and in the manner required by 30 Texas Administrative Code, Section 305.128 (relating to signatories to reports). The names and qualifications of personnel making the inspections for the permittee may be documented once in the SWP3 rather than being included in each report. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-277. - Review, approval, and obtaining authorization to discharge. 
(a)  In order to apply for a permit for site development and to obtain an approval for a small or large construction activity, the applicant must complete or develop and submit the following application documents to the city for review: 
(1)  Small construction activity (submit at least 15 calendar days prior to the date to commence work): 
a.  NOI. 
b.  Copies of any prior related permits. 
c.  SWP3 meeting requirements for a small construction activity. 
d.  Small construction site notice. 
e.  Review fee. 
(2)  Large construction activity (submit at least 30 calendar days prior to the date to commence work): 
a.  NOI. 
b.  Copies of any prior related permits. 
c.  SWP3 meeting requirements for a large construction activity. 
d.  Large construction site notice. 
e.  Review fee. 
(b)  The city engineer or city building official will review each submittal for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this article. After receiving a submittal, the city engineer or city building official within 15 calendar days for a small construction activity and 30 calendar days for a large construction activity, shall, in writing: 
(1)  Approve the permit; 
(2)  Approve the permit subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
(3)  Disapprove the permit, indicating the reason(s) for disapproval and the procedure for submitting a revised and/or submission. 
(c)  Minor modifications to an approved SWP3 shall be documented by the permittee on a form provided by the city and shall be approved or disapproved by the city engineer or city building official, with such decision so indicated on the form, within five business days of receiving the completed form. 
(d)  Major modifications to an approved SWP3 shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as for first time submittals of this article and may be authorized by the city engineer and/or city building official by written authorization to the permittee. 
(e)  If an additional primary operator is added or changed after the initial NOI is submitted, the new primary operator must submit an NOI at least ten calendar days prior to assuming operational control. 
(f)  All primary operators and permittees must post a copy of the signed NOI at the construction site in a location where it is readily available for viewing by the general public, local, state, and federal authorities prior to commencing construction activities, and must maintain the NOI in that location until completion of the construction activity. 
(g)  All operators and permittees must post a site notice. The site notice must be located where it is safely and readily available for viewing by the general public, local, state, and federal authorities prior to commencing construction, and must be maintained in that location until completion of the construction activity. 
(h)  All secondary operators are regulated under this article, but are not required to submit an NOI, provided that another operator(s) at the site has submitted an NOI, or is required to submit an NOI and the secondary operator has provided notification to the primary operator(s) of the need to obtain coverage (with records of notification available upon request). Any secondary operator notified under this provision may alternatively submit an NOI under this article as set forth above, may seek coverage under an alternative TPDES individual permit, or may seek coverage under an alternative TPDES general permit if available. 
(i)  Effective date of coverage. Operators of construction activities are authorized and their construction activities are permitted after the required submittals are received by the city, reviewed by the city, and written notification; including a stamped SWP3 and city authorization number are issued by the city to the operator/permittee. 
(j)  Operators are not prohibited from submitting late NOIs or posting late notices to obtain authorization under this article. The city reserves the right to take appropriate enforcement actions for any unpermitted activities that may have occurred between the time construction commenced and authorization was obtained. 
(k)  Notice of change (NOC). 
(1)  If relevant information provided in the NOI changes, the following items must be submitted: 
a.  For small construction activities: An NOC at least seven calendar days prior to the change occurring; and 
b.  For large construction activities: An NOC at least 14 calendar days prior to the change occurring. 
(2)  When the required advance notice is not possible, the operator must submit an NOC within 14 days of discovery of the change. If the operator becomes aware that it failed to submit any relevant facts or submitted incorrect information in an NOI, the correct information must be provided to the City Manager or his designee, the city engineer, or city building official in an NOC within 14 days after discovery. The NOC shall be submitted on a form provided by the City Manager or his designee, the city engineer, or city building official, or by letter if an NOC form is not available. A copy of the NOC must also be provided to the operator of any MS4 receiving the discharge, most notably the city. 
(3)  Information that may be included in an NOC includes, but is not limited to, the following: the description of the construction project, an increase in the number of acres disturbed (for increases of one or more acres), and the operator name. A transfer of operational control from one operator to another, including a transfer of the ownership of a company, must be included in an NOC. A transfer of ownership of a company includes changes to the structure of a company, such as changing from a partnership to a corporation or changing corporation types, so that the filing number (or charter number) that is on record with the Texas Secretary of State must be changed. An NOC is not required for notifying the city of a decrease in the number of acres disturbed. This information must be included in the storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) and retained on site. 
(l)  Signatory requirement for NOI forms, notice of termination (NOT) forms, NOC letters, and construction site notices. NOI forms, NOT forms, NOC letters, and construction site notices that require a signature must be signed according to 30 Texas Administrative Code, Section 305.44 (relating to signatories for applications). 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-278. - Inspections by city. 
(a)  The city engineer, the city building official, or his/her/their designated agent, shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the storm water pollution prevention plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work and an SWP3 bearing the stamp of city approval shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the city engineer or the city building official at least two working days before the following: 
(1)  Start of construction. 
(2)  Installation of sediment and erosion measures. 
(3)  Completion of site clearing. 
(4)  Completion of rough grading. 
(5)  Completion of final grading. 
(6)  Close of the construction season. 
(7)  Completion of final landscaping. 
(b)  The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved storm water pollution prevention plan(s). The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the storm water pollution prevention plan and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented on forms provided by the city and submitted to the city engineer or the city building official at the time interval specified in the approved permit. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall enter the construction site or disturbed area as deemed necessary to make inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed by the permittee. 
(d)  If the city manager or his designee is refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city manager or his designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-279. - Limitations on permit coverage. 
(a)  Post construction discharges. Discharges that occur after construction activities have been completed, and after the construction site and any supporting activity site have undergone final stabilization, are not eligible for coverage under a permit issued in accordance with this article. Discharges originating from permitted sites are not authorized under this article following the submission of the notice of termination (NOT) for the construction activity. 
(b)  Prohibition of non-storm water discharges. Except as otherwise provided, only discharges that are composed entirely of storm water associated with construction activity may be authorized under this article. 
(c)  Compliance with water quality standards. Discharges to surface water in the City that would cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards or that would fail to protect and maintain existing designated uses are not eligible for coverage under this article. The city manager or his designee may require an application for a TPDES individual permit to authorize discharges to surface water in the state from any activity that is determined to cause a violation of water quality standards or is found to cause, or contribute to, the loss of a designated use. The city manager or his designee may also require an application for a TPDES individual permit considering factors described in section 5-275(b). 
(d)  Discharges to water quality-impaired receiving waters. New sources or new discharges of the constituents of concern to impaired waters are not authorized by a permit granted under this article unless otherwise allowable under 30 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 305 and applicable state law. Impaired waters are those that do not meet applicable water quality standards and are listed on the EPA approved Clean Water Act Section 303(d) list. Constituents of concern are those for which the water body is listed as impaired. Discharges of the constituents of concern to impaired water bodies for which there is a total maximum daily load (TMDL) are not eligible for a permit unless they are consistent with the approved TMDL. Permittees must incorporate the limitations, conditions, and requirements applicable to their discharges, including monitoring frequency and reporting required by Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) rules, into their storm water pollution prevention plan in order to be eligible for coverage under this article. 
(e)  Discharges to specific watersheds and water quality areas. Discharges otherwise eligible for coverage cannot be authorized by this article where prohibited by 30 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 311 (relating to watershed protection) for water quality areas and watersheds. 
(f)  Protection of streams and watersheds by other governmental entities. This article does not limit the authority or ability of federal, state, or other local governmental entities from placing additional or more stringent requirements on construction activities or discharges from construction activities. 
(g)  Storm water discharges from agricultural activities. Storm water discharges from agricultural activities that are not point source discharges of storm water are not subject to the requirements or restrictions of this article. Where properly zoned for such uses, these activities may include clearing and cultivating ground for crops, construction of fences to contain livestock, construction of stock ponds, and other similar agricultural activities. 
(h)  Other. Nothing in section 5-271 is intended to negate any person's ability to assert the force majeure (act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe) defenses found in 30 Texas Administrative Code, Section 70.7. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-280. - Storm water runoff from concrete batch plants. 
    Upon passage and approval of this article, the city hereby adopts the regulations regarding storm water runoff from concrete batch plants found at Part IV of the TCEQ General Construction Permit No. TXR150000, which is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-281. - Concrete truck wash out requirements. 
    Wash out of concrete trucks at construction sites is permitted provided that the following requirements are satisfied. 
(1)  Land disposal of concrete truck wash out water is permitted only from concrete trucks that are associated with off-site production facilities. Disposal of concrete truck wash out water associated with on-site concrete production facilities is specifically prohibited within the city. 
(2)  Direct discharge of concrete truck wash out water to surface water in the state, including discharge to storm sewers, is prohibited. 
(3)  Concrete truck wash out water shall be discharged to areas at the construction site where structural controls have been established to prevent direct discharge to surface waters, or to areas that have a minimal slope that allow infiltration and filtering of wash out water to prevent direct discharge to surface waters. Structural controls may consist of temporary berms, temporary shallow pits, temporary storage tanks with slow rate release, or other reasonable measures to prevent runoff from the construction site. 
(4)  Wash out of concrete trucks during rainfall events shall be minimized. The direct discharge of concrete truck wash out water is prohibited at all times, and the operator shall insure that its best management practices are sufficient to prevent the discharge of concrete truck washout as the result of rain. 
(5)  The discharge of wash out water shall not cause or contribute to groundwater contamination. 
(6)  If a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) is required to be implemented, the SWP3 shall include concrete wash out areas on the associated map. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-282. - Deadlines for obtaining discharge authorization. 
(a)  Large construction activities. 
(1)  New construction. Discharges from sites where the commencement of construction occurs on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived must be authorized, either according to this article or a separate permit issued by the city, prior to the commencement of those construction activities. 
(2)  Ongoing construction. Operators of large construction activities operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and continuing to operate after the effective date of a permit issued under this article, must submit an NOI to the city manager or his designee, the city engineer, or city building official to renew authorization of any permit issued under any previous law, ordinance or rule under which construction activity began within 90 days of the ordinance. During this interim period, as a requirement of issuance of such permit under this article, the operator must continue to meet the conditions and requirements of any previous permit. 
(b)  Small construction activities. 
(1)  New construction. Discharges from sites where the commencement of construction occurs on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived must be authorized, under this article, prior to the commencement of those construction activities. 
(2)  Ongoing construction. Discharges from ongoing small construction activities that commenced prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and that would not meet the conditions to qualify for termination of a permit issued under this article must meet the requirements to be authorized under this article within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance. During this interim period, as a requirement of a permit issued under this article, the operator must continue to meet the conditions and requirements of any previous permit issued by the city under which construction activities began. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-283. - Permit expiration. 
(a)  A permit issued under this article is issued for a term not to exceed one year. Unless otherwise specified in the permit issued, all active discharge authorizations expire one year from the date provided in the permit. Following public notice and comment, the city may amend, revoke, or cancel a permit issued under this article at any time. 
(b)  If the city officially provides, in writing, a notice of the intent to renew or amend a permit before the expiration date, the permit will remain in effect for existing, authorized discharges until the city takes final action on the permit. Upon issuance of a renewed or amended permit, permittees may be required to submit an NOI within 90 days following the effective date of the renewed or amended permit, unless that permit provides for an alternative method for obtaining authorization. 
(c)  If the city does not propose to reissue a permit within 90 days before the expiration date, permittees shall apply for authorization under a new permit or an alternative permit. If the NOI for a new permit is submitted before the expiration date, authorization under the expiring permit remains in effect until the issuance or denial of a new permit. No new NOIs will be accepted nor new authorizations honored under the original permit after the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-284. - Retention of records. 
    The permittee must retain the following records for a minimum period of three years from the date that a NOT is submitted as required by Part II.F.1. of an applicable TCEQ TPDES TXR150000 construction general permit. For activities in which an NOT is not required, records shall be retained for a minimum period of three years from the date that the operator terminates coverage as provided under this article. Records include: 
(1)  A copy of the SWP3; 
(2)  All reports and actions required by this permit, including a copy of the construction site notice; 
(3)  All data used to complete the NOI, if an NOI is required for coverage under this general permit; and 
(4)  All records of submittal of forms submitted to the operator of any MS4 receiving the discharge and to the secondary operator of a large construction site, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-285. - Standard permit conditions. 
(a)  The permittee has a duty to comply with all permit conditions. Failure to comply with any permit condition is a violation of the permit and statutes under which it was issued, and is grounds for enforcement action, for terminating coverage under a permit issued under this article, or for requiring a discharger to apply for and obtain an individual permit under this article. 
(b)  Authorization under a permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for cause. Filing a notice of planned changes or anticipated non-compliance by the permittee does not stay any permit condition imposed by this article. The permittee must furnish to the city manager or his designee, the city engineer, or city building official, upon request and within a reasonable time, any information necessary for the city manager or his designee, the city engineer, or city building official to determine whether cause exists for revoking, suspending, or terminating authorization under any permit issued in compliance with this article. Additionally, the permittee must provide to the city manager or his designee, the city engineer, or city building official, upon request, copies of all records that the permittee is required to maintain as a condition of this article. 
(c)  It is not a defense for a discharger in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the permitted activity to maintain compliance with the permit conditions. 
(d)  Inspection and entry by the city shall be allowed under V.T.C.A., Water Code chs. 26-28; V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 361.032-361.033 and 361.037; and 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 122.41(i). The statement in V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.014 that city entry of a facility shall occur according to an establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection is not grounds for denial or restriction of entry to any part of the facility or site, but merely describes the city's duty to observe appropriate rules and regulations during an inspection. 
(e)  The discharger is subject to administrative, civil, and criminal penalties, as applicable, under V.T.C.A., Water Code §§ 26.136, 26.212, and 26.213 for violations including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Negligently or knowingly violating the federal Clean Water Act (CWA), §§ 301, 302, 306, 307, 308, 318, or 405, or any condition or limitation implementing any sections in a permit issued under CWA, § 402, or any requirement imposed in a pretreatment program approved under CWA, § 402(a)(3) or 402(b)(8); 
(2)  Knowingly making any false statement, representation, or certification in any record or other document submitted or required to be maintained under a permit, including monitoring reports or reports of compliance or noncompliance. 
(f)  All reports and other information requested by the city manager or his designee, the city engineer, or city building official must be signed by the person and in the manner required by 30 Texas Administrative Code, Section 305.128 (relating to signatories to reports). 
(g)  Authorization under this article does not convey property or water rights of any sort and does not grant any exclusive privilege. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow storm water runoff from any construction and/or land disturbing activity onto any other public or private property except as expressly provided by this article. Additionally, any permittee under this article is specifically required to complete internal final stabilization of the entirety of a permitted construction and/or land disturbance area prior to the city's acceptance of an NOT, or the issuance by the city of any certificate of occupancy. However, temporary stabilization shall be construed as compliance with this requirement provided such temporary stabilization meets the requirements defined in the definition of "temporary stabilization" in section 5-272. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-286. - Fees. 
(a)  A review fee as must be submitted along with any NOI. 
(b)  Fees are due upon submission of the application documents, including the NOI. An application will not be declared administratively complete unless the associated fee has been paid in full. 
(c)  No separate annual fees will be assessed upon the issuance of a permit under this article with duration of greater than one year. Any fee assessed under the terms of the TCEQ general construction permit, or any other permit required by any other federal, state or local governmental entity or agency, is a separate fee, and it is the sole responsibility of the prospective permittee to satisfy any such fee requirement(s). 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Secs. 5-287-5-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 5-300. - General provisions. 
(a)  Introduction. Development and redevelopment alter erosion, sediment transport and sediment deposition patterns. These changes contribute to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants, which are harmful to public health and safety as well as to the natural environment. These effects can be managed and limited by applying proper long-term design and well-planned permanent controls to development and redevelopment projects. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to limit the adverse pollutant effects of post-construction storm water runoff. This article establishes specific objectives and means to limit the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. 
(c)  Objectives of this division: 
(1)  Establishing decision-making processes for development and redevelopment projects that protect the integrity of watersheds and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Establishing minimum post-construction storm water management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of storm water runoff quantity and quality in order to protect the city and its residents from post construction pollutants that find their way into streets, storm sewers, ditches and streams; 
(3)  Establishing design and review criteria for the construction, function, and use of structural storm water control facilities that may be used to meet the minimum post-construction storm water management standards; 
(4)  Establishing provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural and nonstructural storm water best management practices (BMPs) to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose minimum risk to public safety; and 
(5)  Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of storm water management plans, for the inspection of approved projects, and to assure appropriate long-term maintenance. 
(6)  To reduce soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through storm water management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and kept in a condition that threat limits to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-301. - General prohibitions and requirements. 
(a)  Applicability and jurisdiction. The requirements of this article shall apply to all developments and redevelopments within of the City of Live Oak which are classified as small and large construction activities according to the latest edition of the construction site storm water runoff control ordinance. Municipal projects located within the City of Live Oak rights-of-way are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  No development or redevelopment until permit is issued. No person, corporation, or other legal entity shall engage in new development or redevelopment projects without the required city approval and a post construction storm water quality permit. Non-structural and structural best management practices shall be required and shall be in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-302. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  A preliminary meeting shall be conducted during the early portion of the development process between the applicant and the city engineer to discuss the scope of the project, the post-construction storm water management control measures needed for the proposed project, project constraints, and potential approaches to storm water management before formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit an application package including: 
a.  Application for post-construction storm water quality permit. 
b.  Initial application fee in the amount of $500. 
c.  Plans showing the proposed structural and/or non-structural post-construction storm water quality control measures and maintenance schedules if applicable. 
(3)  Record plans certified by a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the city within 60 days of completion of construction activities. The plans shall show how accurately the design plans were implemented. The plans shall contain a signed and sealed certification indicating that the plans are an accurate representation of the work that was completed and that the work complies with the requirements of this post-construction storm water quality control ordinance. 
(4)  The city engineer shall develop an application used for applying for approvals of post-construction storm water quality control plans. The application shall be completed by the applicants licensed engineer or licensed landscape architect in order for eligible projects to be considered by the city for PCSWQ plan approvals. 
(5)  In order to qualify a project to be reviewed for PCSWQ compliance, an initial review fee of $500.00 shall be paid to the City of Live Oak. The applicant will be billed for actual costs associated with the professional review of the PCSWQ plan to the extent that such costs exceed the initial review fee. Final project approval shall be withheld until all such fees are paid in full. 
(b)  Plans. 
(1)  Design plans: The PCSWQ plan must include, at a minimum: 
a.  A site or project description, which includes the following information: 
1.  the address and lot description of the site; 
2.  a description of the nature of the construction activity; 
3.  a list of potential pollutants and their sources; 
4.  a list with descriptions of the best management practices (BMPs) that will be used to minimize pollution in runoff; 
5.  the total number of acres of the entire project property and the total number of acres where on-site construction activities will occur; 
6.  data describing the soil or the quality of any discharge from the site; 
7.  seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of mineral and fertilizer, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures; and 
8.  a maintenance plan for temporary BMPs. 
9.  a maintenance plan for temporary BMPs. 
b.  A general map showing the location of the site; 
c.  A detailed topographic site map (or maps) indicating the following: 
1.  north arrow; 
2.  identifying property lines; 
3.  easements; 
4.  existing site conditions; 
5.  proposed project conditions; 
6.  Conveyances and Watercourses; 
7.  Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities; 
8.  Locations of all planned or in-place structural controls; 
9.  Locations of temporary and permanent stabilization measures; 
10.  Locations of construction support activities, including off-site activities, that are authorized under the permittee's NOI, including material, waste, borrow, fill, equipment storage, asphalt plants, and concrete plants; 
11.  surface waters (including wetlands) either at, adjacent to, or in close proximity to the site; and 
12.  locations where storm water discharges from the site directly to a surface water body or MS4. 
(c)  Approvals and permit expiration. 
(1)  Approval authorizes the applicant to go forward with only the specific plans and activity authorized in the permit. The approval shall not be construed to exempt the applicant from obtaining other applicable approvals from local, state, and federal authorities. 
(2)  Any permit granted under this Subchapter/section shall expire and be subject to renewal requirements 12 months from the date of issuance. A 30-day grace period shall be granted after permit expiration before the permittee is considered to be in violation of city ordinance. Approved plans shall not be amended without authorization of the city manager or his designee. 
(3)  Development activity under the PCSWQ permit must begin within a 180 days from the date of issuance. Extensions to the period of validity of the PCSWQ permit prior to the start of development activities must be requested by the permittee in writing to the city manager or his designee. 
(4)  A permit may be suspended or revoked by the city because of incorrect information supplied or for any violation of the provisions of this Subchapter. 
(d)  Appeals. If an application for a PCSWQ permit is denied or the permit is suspended, revoked or not renewed by the city, the applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the city manager or his designee. All appeals shall be routed through the City of Live Oak Building and Permit Department and will have two weeks to review and render a decision. If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the city manager or his designee's decision, order, requirement, or determination, they may file an appeal to the board of adjustment for the City of Live Oak within 30 days. The applicant or permittee may dispute the building and permit department decision in a District Court or County Civil Court. The appeal of a denial, suspension, or revocation of the PCSWQ permit shall not relieve the permittee of any penalties accrued following the expiration of the 30-day grace period. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-303. - Maintenance and inspection of controls. 
    During or after construction, inspections and inspection programs by the City of Live Oak may be conducted or established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges; surface water, groundwater; and material or water in BMPs; and evaluating the condition of BMPs. If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit such inspection, the city manager or his designee shall proceed to obtain an administrative search warrant. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, partnership, corporation, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city manager or his designee, the city engineer and/or any contractor or employee designated by the city, the city manager or his designee and/or the city engineer to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(a)  Maintenance of BMPs. 
(1)  The owner of a structural BMP installed pursuant to this article shall maintain and operate the BMP to preserve and continue its function in controlling storm water quality at the degree or amount of function for which the structural BMP was designed. 
(2)  All privately-owned post-construction BMPs shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement shall be between the city and the entity responsible for maintaining the BMP and will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the post-construction BMPs, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the post-construction BMPs. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all post-construction BMPs shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. If the city, in its sole discretion, chooses to accept the storm water management facility as a public improvement, no maintenance agreement will be necessary. 
(3)  All BMPs identified in the PCSWQ plan must be maintained in effective operating condition. If, through inspections or other means, the permittee determines that BMPs are not operating effectively, then the permittee shall perform maintenance as necessary to maintain the continued effectiveness of storm water controls, and prior to the next rain event if feasible. If maintenance prior to the next anticipated storm event is impracticable, the reason shall be documented in the SWP3 and maintenance must be scheduled and accomplished as soon as practicable. 
(b)  Monitoring of BMPs. 
(1)  The city manager or his designee may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its storm water discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring. 
(2)  The city manager or his designee may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(c)  Inspection of BMPs. 
(1)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land, building, structure, or premises to ensure compliance with this article, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this article, and to determine whether the activity is being conducted in accordance with this article and the approved storm water management plan, storm water management design criteria and whether the measures required in the plan are effective. No person shall willfully resist, delay, or obstruct the city manager or his designee while the city manager or his designee is inspecting or attempting to inspect an activity under this article. 
(2)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the BMPs to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the city manager or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger. 
(d)  Right of entry. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises of any person or entity to ensure compliance with this article, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this article, and to determine whether the activity is being conducted in accordance with this article and the approved storm water management plan, storm water management design criteria and whether the measures required in the plan are effective. No person shall willfully resist, delay, or obstruct the city while the city is inspecting or attempting to inspect an activity under this article. 
(2)  Owners of property containing PCSWQ BMPs shall allow the city manager or his designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the city manager or his designee and his or her designees, upon request, any SWPPs, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this article and with any state or federal discharge permit. 
a.  Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities. 
b.  The city shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations. 
c.  The city may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its storm water discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring. 
d.  The city may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
e.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the city manager or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger. 
f.  Delays in excess of 12 hours in allowing the city access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(e)  Search warrants. If the city manager or his designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city manager or his designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
DIVISION 4. - VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 5-304. - General provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the city manager or his designee, his or her designee or any authorized agent of the City of Live Oak. Any failure to comply with an applicable requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this article, or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or redevelopment approval or authorization granted pursuant to this article, is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this article. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting. No person shall refuse entry or access to the city manager or his designee who requests entry for purpose of inspection or investigation, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with the city manager or his designee while in the process of carrying out official duties. The city manager or his designee shall also have the power to require written statements, or the filing of reports under oath as part of an investigation. 
(a)  Enforcement remedies. The city shall suspend or revoke PCSWQ permits and/or fine permittees to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter/section. A 30-day grace period will be granted before the city begins criminal or civil proceedings. 
(b)  Notice of violation and order to correct. Whenever the city manager or his designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city manager or his designee shall notify in writing the responsible person/entity and shall indicate the nature of the violation, contain the address or other description of the site upon which the violation occurred or is occurring, or the necessary action to abate the violation, and give a deadline for correcting the violation. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and/or 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee may deliver the notice of violation and correction order personally, by certified mail or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by any means authorized for the service of documents. 
(d)  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline by which the responsible person/entity must comply with this article, and advise that the responsible person/entity is subject to remedies and/or penalties or that failure to correct the violation within the time specified will subject the responsible person/entity to remedies and/or penalties as described in this article. If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time, as provided in the notification, the representatives of the city may take appropriate action, to correct and abate the violation and to ensure compliance with this article. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-305. - Penalties assessed concurrent with notice of violation. 
    Penalties may be assessed concurrently with a notice of violation for any of the following in which case the notice of violation shall also contain a statement of the civil penalties to be assessed, the time of their accrual, and the time within which they must be paid or be subject to collection as debt: 
(a)  Performing construction activities without an approved PCSWQ plan. 
(b)  Obstructing, hampering or interfering with an authorized representative who is in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(c)  A repeated violation for which a notice was previously given on the same project and to the same responsible person/entity responsible for the violation. 
(d)  Willful violation of this article. 
(e)  Failure to install or maintain BMPs per the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-306. - Enforcement after time to correct. 
    After the time has expired to correct a violation, including any extension(s) if authorized by the city manager or his designee, the city manager or his designee shall determine if the violation is corrected. If the violation is not corrected, the city manager or his designee may act to impose one or more of the enforcement actions and penalties authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-307. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $500.00 per violation per day. Each day that a violation occurs shall be a separate violation and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. The city may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(b)  If the city proves that the person that has violated or continues to violate this article (a) was actually notified of the provisions of this article and (b) after receiving notice of the provisions of this article committed acts in violation of this article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this article, then such person shall be liable to prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for a violation of this article except that a civil penalty may not exceed $5,000.00 per day for a violation of this article. Each day that a violation occurs shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
Sec. 5-308. - Remedies. 
    The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this article, whether civil or criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by law, and may be exercised in any order. 
(a)  Various remedies. 
(1)  Withholding of certificate of occupancy. The city manager or his designee or other authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site and served by the storm water practices in question until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(2)  Disapproval of subsequent permits and development approvals. As long as a violation of this article continues and remains uncorrected, the city manager or his designee or other authorized agent may withhold, and the City of Live Oak may disapprove, any request for permit or development approval or authorization provided for by this article or the zoning, subdivision, and/or building regulations, as appropriate for the land on which the violation occurs. 
(3)  Injunction, abatements, etc. The city attorney, with the authorization of the city council may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement to correct a violation of this article. Any person violating this article shall be subject to the full range of equitable remedies provided in the General Statutes or at common law. 
(4)  Correction as public health nuisance, costs as lien, etc. If the violation is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public safety, the city attorney, with the authorization of the city council, may cause the violation to be corrected and the costs to be assessed as a lien against the property. 
(5)  Stop work order. The city manager or his designee may issue a stop work order to the person(s) violating this article. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violation or violations described therein. The stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the person to take the necessary remedial measures to correct such violation or violations. 
(6)  Restoration of areas affected by failure to comply. By issuance of an order of restoration, the city manager or his designee may require a person(s) who engaged in a land development activity and failed to comply with this article to restore the waters and land affected by such failure so as to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting pollution. This authority is in addition to any other civil penalty or injunctive relief authorized under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1579 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-30-19) 
APPENDIX. - FEE SCHEDULE[14] 
1.0  Fee Schedule. All fees charged for this section are hereby authorized for implementation of buildings and building regulations and shall be in accordance with the development services fee schedule as adopted by the city council and amended from time to time as necessary. All fees in this section not addressed in the fee schedule, but adopted by the city council and addressed in this section shall remain the same in full force and effect. 
(a)  A building permit is required to comply with the requirements in this chapter and building permits shall be in conformance with current building or other codes in this chapter. 
(b)  A fee for the issuance of a building permit is required pursuant to the city's fee schedule stated above. 
    Note: Building permit fee is total cost of project for commercial building permits. For large projects requiring TDLR review the building permit fee will be figured on the cost that was sent to TDLR. Plan review fee is stated in the city's fee schedule adopted by the city council and as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18; Ord. No. 1581 , § 1, 6-11-19) 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, amended Ch. 5, Appendix in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5, Appendix pertained to fee schedule and derived from Res. No. 1842, art. I(Exh. A), adopted June 12, 2012. 

Chapter 7 - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1375, §§ 1-8, 10, adopted June 24, 2008, amended chapter 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 7, §§ 7-1-7-12, pertained to emergency preparedness, and derived from Ord. No. 551, §§ 1-12, adopted October 11, 1983. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention and protection, Ch. 9; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; planning, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning regulations, App. A. 
State Law reference- Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A. Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; municipal programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.103; local planning required, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.12; local government responsibility, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.23; requesting state assistance, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.24; local government control affirmed, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.26; National Incident Management System is standard within Texas, Executive Order RP-40 (Feb. 23, 2005). 

Sec. 7-1. - Organization. 
    There exists the office of director of emergency management of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(a)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director and in accordance with the city personnel policies. 
(b)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and the responsibilities set forth in this chapter. They may delegate authority for the execution of these duties to the coordinator, but the ultimate responsibility for execution shall remain with the director. 
(c)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the department heads and other employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plans, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among the individuals in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 1, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 7-2. - Emergency management director-Powers and duties. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the director of emergency management shall include the following: 
(1)  Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid agreements deemed necessary for the implementation of this plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of emergency or state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of an emergency or disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of the emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of all mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval of the city attorney, for the use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418). 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 2, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 7-3. - Emergency management plan. 
(a)  A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the overall emergency management organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate the departments and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the governor's division of emergency management (GDEM) of the state. Insofar as possible, the organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state emergency management agency. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The city emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(b)  Failure of any individual to comply with the emergency management plan or with a rule, order or ordinance adopted under the emergency management plan is an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or confinement in jail for a term not to exceed 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 3, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 7-4. - Inter-jurisdictional program. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Bexar and the mayors of the other cities in Bexar County in the formation of an inter-jurisdictional emergency management program for the County of Bexar, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an inter-jurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 4, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 7-5. - Override. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 5, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 7-6. - Liability. 
    This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of this city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of this activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice natural, manmade, or terrorism related disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 6, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 7-7. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of life, health, or property. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 7, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 7-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless the authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  In addition it shall be unlawful for any authorized person to operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(d)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter, other than under section 7-3, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 8, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 7-9. - Limitations. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 10, 6-24-08) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; emergency management, Ch. 7; fire lanes, § 13-40; planning, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Home rule municipality, fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011; volunteer firefighters and fire departments, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 419.071; state law does not preempt municipal authority to prohibit or regulate use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - International Fire Code adopted. 
    The International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference as the Fire Prevention Code of the city, which shall control in regard to all subjects covered by such code, except as otherwise provided in this article or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 419, § 1, 11-27-79; Ord. No. 641, § 1, 7-23-85; Ord. No. 656 § 1, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 799, § 1, 6-28-88; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 6-11-91; Ord. No. 1058, § 1, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 1509, § I, 1-27-15; Ord. No. 1560 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1218, § 1, adopted February 8, 2005, changed the title of § 8-1 from "Standard Fire Prevention Code adopted" to "International Fire Code adopted." 
Cross reference- Building code, § 5-16 et seq.; gas code, § 5-81 et seq.; mechanical code, § 5-96 et seq.; electrical code, § 6-4; plumbing code, § 18-1. 
Sec. 8-2. - Amendments 
    The Code adopted by this Article is hereby amended as set out in this section: 
    Section 101.6, "Requirements of other agencies" , shall be added, and read: 
101.6 Requirements of other Agencies. 
The City of Live Oak Building Codes do not include all additional requirements for buildings and structures that may be imposed by other state/county agencies, occupational licensing boards or commissions. It shall be the responsibility of a permit holder, design professional, contractor or occupational license holder to determine whether any additional requirements exist. 
    Section 102.3 Change of use or occupancy , is amended, and shall read: 
102.3 Change of use or occupancy 
A change of occupancy shall not be permitted unless the use or occupancy is made to comply with the requirements of this code and the International Building Code. A change of the business name, responsible party, designated use, or any activity that deviates from the original submitted application within the occupancy shall qualify as a change of occupancy. 
    Sections 104.3.2 Photographic Documentation , shall be added, and read; 
104.3.2 Photographic Documentation. 
Members of the Fire Department making such examinations or inspections shall have the right, with proper credentials, and be authorized to take a reasonable number of photographs or videotapes for evidence and for records for use by the Fire Department to study hazards and scientific control for fire safety. 
    Section 105.4.1, Submittals , shall read: 
105.4.1 Submittals 
Construction documents and supporting data shall be submitted in two or more sets, and at least once by portable document format accepted on electronic memory card with each application for a permit and in such form and detail as required by the fire code official. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. 
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and supporting data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code. 
    Section 105.6.1, Aerosol Products , shall read: 
105.6.1, Aerosol Products 
An operational permit is required to manufacture, store or handle an aggregate quantity of Level 2 or Level 3 aerosol products in excess of 250 pounds net weight. Aerosol storage noted in the above weight shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 51 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, and NFPA 30B, 2015 edition. The classification of aerosol, Level 1, 2 or 3, will be printed on the product manufacturer's packaging. 
There shall not be allowed any storage or handling an aggregate quantity of any combination or single type of Level 1 or Level 2 aerosol products more than a combined net weight to exceed 1,000 pounds at any time, unless the products are stored in approved flammable liquid storage rooms (NFPA 30B, 2015 edition). 
When stored or handled within the allowable quantities, segregation rules apply as referenced in Chapter 51 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition. Where chain link fence enclosures are required, the fencing must comply with the following; 
1.  The fence shall not be less than No. 9 gauge steel wire, woven into a maximum 2-inch diamond mesh. 
2.  The fence shall be installed from the floor to the underside of the roof or ceiling above. 
3.  Class III, IV and high-hazard commodities shall be stored outside of the aerosol storage area and a minimum of 8 feet (2438 mm) from the fence. 
4.  Access openings in the fence shall be provided with either self-closing or automatic-closing devices or a labyrinth opening arrangement preventing aerosol containers from rocketing through the access openings. 
5.  Not less than two means of egress shall be provided from the fenced enclosure. 
Aisle requirements for segregated storage in general purpose warehouses shall comply with Table 5104.3.2.2 
    Section 105.6.33 Open flames and torches , shall read. 
A building permit is required to remove paint with a torch; or to use a torch or open flame device in a wildfire risk area. 
    Section 105.6.37 Places of assembly. - Deleted 
    Section 105.7.7, Fire alarm and detection system and related equipment, add at end of paragraph: 
Replacing a fire alarm panel is not considered maintenance to an existing system and shall require construction permit. 
    Section 106.3 Work commencing before permit issuance , shall read: 
106.3 Work commencing before permit issuance 
Any person who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a double permit fee. All work shall cease until the required permits are obtained and inspections completed. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this code, subject to penalties as described herein, for any person to continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform by the Fire Chief, in order to remove a violation or unsafe condition. 
    Section 108.3.1, Records of Hazardous Materials , is added, and shall read: 
108.3.1, Records of Hazardous Materials 
Owners or the Owner's Representative of buildings or properties that store or use hazardous materials shall maintain chemical documents (SDS), and building/site data, construction, maintenance and modifications over the entire life of the building. A means shall be developed for off-site storage and maintenance of the documents. In addition, a secondary source of this information shall be made available in suitably designed hard copy or electronic format for use by emergency responders within a reasonable timeframe. The primary source of information shall be easily accessible by responders during emergencies. 
    Section 109, Board of Appeals , shall be retitled to read: 
Section 109, Appeals 
    Section 109.1, Board of appeals established , is replaced with: 
109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created an appeals process. Appeals shall be made first to the Fire Chief, then City Manager, and finally the City Council. 
    Section 109.2 , shall read: 
109.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The process shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
    Section 109.3 , shall read: 
109.3 Qualifications. The process of appeals shall consist of the Fire Chief who is qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to fire code, City Manager, and City Council. 
    Section 109.4 is added and shall read: 
109.4 Administration. The fire code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the appeals process. 
    Delete Appendix A 
    Section 110 
110.4. Should read: Violations; penalty. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Code adopted by this article, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved there under, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine not to be less than $500.00 and not more than $2000.00. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. 
    Section 111.2.1 Removal of Occupants is added, and shall read: 
111.2.1 Removal of Occupants. A member of the Fire Department is authorized to require the removal of occupants at a location when actual occupancy exceeds the permitted or posted occupant load. A person commits an offense if he refuses to obey an order to vacate. 
    Section 113.1.1 Prohibition of Electrical Service , is added and shall read; 
113.1.1 Prohibition of Electrical Service 
When any fire hazard is permitted to continue in existence by the owner after receiving the notice provided in Section 110.1 and after expiration of the time limit as determined under Section 110.3 if the Fire Marshal shall find and determine from the facts that the danger to human life is materially increased by the electrical wiring and appliances present in the building, he shall notify City Public Service of the city to disconnect its service and forthwith cease supplying electric current thereto. It shall thereupon be the duty of the manager of City Public Service to cause said service to be disconnected and the supply of electrical current disconnected immediately. 
    Section 113.1.2 Prohibition of Gas Service , is added and shall read; 
113.1.2 Prohibition of Gas Service 
When any fire hazard is permitted to continue in existence by the owner after receiving the notice provided in Section 110.1 and after expiration of the time limit as determined under Section 110.3, if the Fire Marshal shall find and determine from the facts that the danger to human life is materially increased by the gas plumbing and/or appliances present in the building, he shall notify City Public Service to disconnect its gas service and forthwith cease supplying gas thereto. It shall thereupon be the duty of the manager of the City Public Service to cause said service to be disconnected and the supply of gas disconnected immediately. 
    Section 202, Add to definitions in section 202: 
ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area, number of stories, or height of a building or structure. 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING(s). Any building with an occupied floor located more than 50 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. Any other definition or description described throughout this code shall be disregarded. 
FIRE HAZARD shall mean any condition or act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire, or which may obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the fire department or the egress of occupants in the event of fire. 
FIRE LANE shall mean any area appurtenant to entrances or exits of a building deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or his designee to remain free and clear of parked vehicles for access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by him as such, and may include sidewalks, driveways, portions of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near building entrances or exits, or any fire hydrant. 
FIRE MARSHAL shall mean the fire code official responsible for investigations of fires, inspection of facilities, and code enforcement. 
FIRE WATCH Qualified individuals are defined as State Certified Fire Inspectors assigned to the Fire Prevention Division of the City of Live Oak, or, if approved by the Fire Marshal, Texas Certified Firefighters, Peace Officers, individuals employed by a private security firm, or other designated individuals whose sole duty when assigned a fire watch is to perform constant patrols of the premises and keep watch for signs of unwanted fire. A written attendance log must be maintained and personnel must have at least one approved means of notifying the fire department of fire or other emergencies. 
FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME shall mean a single independent residential occupancy that is the primary residence of the caregiver and licensed by the state to provide twenty-four (24) hour care for six or fewer children (including those related to the caregiver) up to the age of eighteen (18) years. 
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall mean a mobile food operation using any heat producing equipment to cook, fry, or warm products for consumption from a motorized vehicle, towable trailer, or watercraft. 
PARK shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actively engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs, or signals or an involuntary stopping of a vehicle by reason of a cause beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle. 
Whenever the word "JURISDICTION" is used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
Whenever the words "Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention", or "Fire Code Official" are used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean "The Fire Chief." 
    304.2.1 Dangerous Storing of Combustibles is added and shall read: 
304.2.1 Dangerous Storing of Combustibles 
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to have or keep or store, within the city, any quantity of tar, pitch, resin, petroleum or its products, or other combustible materials or substances in such manner that such materials or substances shall be in danger of taking and communicating fire. 
    Section 307.2, Permit required , is deleted in its entirety. 
    Section 307.2.1, Authorization , is deleted in its entirety. 
    Section 307.4, Location , is deleted in its entirety. 
    Section 307.4.1, Bonfires , is deleted in its entirety. 
    Section 307.4.2, Recreational Fires , is deleted in its entirety. 
    Section 307.4.3, Portable Outdoor Fireplaces , is deleted in its entirety. 
    Section 307.6 Sky Lanterns prohibited is added, and shall read: 
307.6 Sky Lanterns 
Sky lanterns; also known as Chinese lanterns, sky candles, or fire balloons, which are airborne lanterns constructed of combustible material and contain a candle or fuel cell that when lit, causes the device to go airborne and travel in the air; are prohibited within the city limits. 
    Section 311.2.2 Fire Protection , exceptions number one (1), two (2), and three (3) are deleted and shall read: 
311.2.2 Fire protection 
Fire alarm, sprinkler, and stand-pipe systems shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times. 
    Section 501.3, Construction documents shall read: 
Section 501.3 Construction documents 
Construction documents for proposed fire apparatus access, location of fire lanes, security gates across fire apparatus access and construction documents and hydraulic calculations for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to the fire department for review and approval prior to construction. 
Upon completion of construction and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a copy of finished drawings (as built) shall be provided to the fire department in an electronic format, acceptable by the Fire Chief. 
    Section 501.3.1 Fire Protection Site Plan is added, and shall read: 
501.3.1 Fire Protection Site Plan 
A Fire Protection Site Plan (labeled as such) shall be submitted electronically in portable document format with the construction documents when application is made for a building permit. Plans must be reviewed and approved by the Fire Marshal and/or fire plan review staff before a building permit is issued. The approved Fire Protection Site Plan will be retained by the City of Live Oak. The Fire Protection Site Plan shall be drawn to scale and shall show and include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Compass reading. 
2.  Property and/or lot lines. 
3.  Street frontages. 
4.  Location of all buildings (existing and proposed). 
5.  Fire apparatus access roads (i.e., fire lanes, aerial apparatus access roads) to buildings. Fire lanes shall be highlighted and shall include dimensions (width, turning radii, clearance to overhead obstructions, etc). The plans shall also show dimensions and calculations for evaluation of compliance with Section D105.3. 
6.  Fences, gates, walls, streams and other obstructions to firefighter access. 
7.  Location of all fire hydrants (existing and proposed).This shall include the direction and the distance to all hydrants not shown on the site plan, but within one thousand (1000) feet of the building to be protected. 
8.  Size (diameter and length) and locations of all fire main piping (proposed and existing). The pressure class and type of new pipe to be installed shall be identified. 
9.  The location, type, and size of backflow prevention devices, where installed. 
10.  Number of lanes, including turning lanes, of all adjacent streets and the location of medians as applicable. 
11.  Location of all automatic sprinkler and standpipe risers. 
12.  Location of Fire Department Connection(s). 
13.  Size, type, and location of valves including post indicator valve (if they are located in a pit), control room automatic sprinkler system shut-off, etc. 
14.  Other water supplies. 
15.  Where required, type of protection from collision that may cause physical damage to fire protection equipment. 
    Section 503.2.1 Dimensions shall read: 
503.2.1 Dimensions 
Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet, exclusive of shoulders, except where a fire hydrant is located on a fire department access road, in which case the minimum road width shall be 26 feet. An unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet and shall be required and maintained at all times. Security gates shall be sized to match the required clear width. 
    Section 503.2.1.2 Mountable Curbs is added, and shall read: 
503.2.1.2 Mountable Curbs 
Mountable curbs are permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal. 
    Section 503.2.3 Surface is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
503.2.3 Surface 
Drivable grass surfaces, or other alternative drivable surfaces, are permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal or his designee. 
    503.2.4 Turning radius , shall read: 
503.2.4 Turning radius 
The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be determined by the fire code official. The turning radii of a fire apparatus access roadway shall require a minimum of 50 feet outside radius and a minimum of 25 feet clear distance to the inside radius on all turns in excess of 30 degrees. 
    Section 503.2.5, Dead ends shall read: 
503.2.5, Dead ends 
Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45 720 mm) in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire apparatus. Turn arounds approved by the Fire Marshal or as permitted by Appendix D are acceptable. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads located between buildings shall have a 10-foot setback from the edge of the access road to the structures on each side of the road. 
    Section 503.2.7 Grade is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.7 Grade 
The gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed ten percent (10%). 
    Section 503.3 Marking shall read: 
503.3 Marking. 
Striping, signs or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs, and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
    Section 503.3.1 Striping is added, and shall read: 
503.3.1 Striping 
Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lined of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at twenty five feet (25') intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical and horizontal of the curb. 
    Section 503.3.2 Signs is added, and shall read: 
503.3.2. Signs 
Signs, when approved by the fire code official, shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be twelve inches (12") wide and eighteen inches (18") high. Signs shall be on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than two inch (2") tall lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6' 6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Chief. 
    Section 503.3.1 Maintenance of markings is added and shall read: 
503.3.1 Maintenance of markings 
The person in possession of the premises on and into which a fire apparatus access roadway or fire lane is required shall be solely responsible for the maintenance of such roadways or fire lanes and all required signs. No owner, manager, or other person(s) in charge of premises served by a required fire apparatus access roadway or fire lane shall abandon, close, or alter the fire apparatus roadway or any part thereof without permission of the Fire Chief. The person(s) in possession of the premises shall be responsible for ensuring that fire apparatus roadways are clear at all times. 
    Section 503.4.2 Parking in fire lane is added and shall read: 
503.4.2 Parking in fire lane 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, equipment or device to park in or block a fire lane. Any owner of vehicle, equipment or device found to have parked in or blocking a fire lane shall be cited or have vehicle, equipment, or device removed and impounded by police or the fire department. 
    Section 503.6 Security Gates , shall read: 
503.6 Security Gates 
The installation of a security gate(s) across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the Fire Chief. Where security gates are installed, they shall be required to have installed on such gate a siren operated sensor, and manual access controls. The siren operated sensor shall open gates when approached by an emergency apparatus. Manual access controls shall open gates during non-emergency responses and serve as a backup in the event that the siren operated sensor fails to operate. The maintenance of access controls and the siren operated sensor system shall be the responsibility of the Owner or Owner's Agent. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F2200. 
    Section 503.6.1 Direction of Swing is added and shall read: 
503.6.1 Direction of Swing 
Security gates installed across a Fire Apparatus Access Road shall swing in the direction of travel towards the building or open horizontally to avoid backing up of Fire Apparatus and to allow for an expedited response. 
    Section 503.6.1.2 Gate timing is added and shall read: 
503.6.1.2 Gate timing 
Gates must fully open within 15 seconds of activation and remain in the open position until closed by operation of the electrical control device. 
    Section 503.6.1.3 Fail safe position is added and shall read: 
503.6.1.3 Fail safe position 
Fire department access gates shall fail safe (open) in the event of a power failure. 
    Section 503.6.1.4 Gate and entrance design is added and shall read: 
503.6.1.4 Gate and entrance design 
Gates shall be designed so that the access roadway or turning radius (AASHTO WB50) shall not be obstructed by the operation of the gate. Minimum setback from the public street shall be a distance determined by the City Engineer and shall allow the emergency vehicle the ability to safely operate the lock box or panel without the rear of the vehicle protruding into the street. Security gates installed across a Fire Apparatus Access Road shall swing in the direction of travel towards the building or open horizontally to avoid backing up of Fire Apparatus and to allow for an expedited response. Turning radius from the public street shall be in accordance with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standard, WB50. 
    Section 503.6.1.5 Access controls is added and shall read: 
503.6.1.5 Access controls 
Access controls shall be exterior to the gate and located for activation by the vehicle operator without leaving the vehicle. The height of the lock box/control panel shall be 66 inches, measured from the finished grade line of the street. 
    Section 503.6.1.6 Additional access is added and shall read: 
503.6.1.6 Additional access 
If required by the Fire Chief, additional "exit only" or "emergency access" gates shall be set up for fire department emergency access. Exit only gates, which are not motorized, shall be installed per the fire department's recommendations. Exit only gates shall have a minimum clearance of 20 feet clear width and be posted with a sign that states "Caution Gate Opens Out", and designated as a Fire Lane. In addition to Fire Lane markings, the markings on the pavement shall include a 5-inch yellow stripe showing the depth of the gate swing. 
    Section 503.6.1.7 Additional access gate controls is added and shall read: 
503.6.1.7 Additional access gate controls 
Where motorized, operation of a secondary gate shall be by siren operated sensor. 
    Section 503.7 Temporary Fire Department Access Roads is added: 
503.7 Temporary Fire Department Access Roads shall comply with Section 3304 paragraph 3304.1.5 of the International Building Code. 
    Section 505.1.1 Building Complex Identification is added and shall read: 
505.1.1 Building Complex Identification 
A building complex composed of multiple structures shall have an official suite/unit 
    Section 505.1.2 Graphic Directories is added and shall read: 
505.1.2 Graphic Directories 
Approved graphic directories shall be provided at all driveway entrances for all multiple-dwelling developments, manufactured home parks, or when required by the Fire Chief. Such directories shall be illuminated, shall conform to the city sign design standards, and shall be approved by the Fire Chief. 
    Section 505.4 Additional markings and signs is added: 
505.4 Additional markings and signs 
When required by the fire code official, additional markings or informational signs shall be posted in an approved manner, in conspicuous location(s): 
    Section 506.1 Where required shall read: 
506.1 Where required 
Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be a Knox &reg; rapid entry system capable of holding the number of keys necessary for operation and access of necessary equipment, doors, and other areas necessary for access as determined and approved by the fire code official. The Knox &reg; rapid entry system shall be keyed to system code registered for the City of Live Oak Fire Department. 
    Section 506.1.1 Locks shall read: 
506.1.1 Locks 
Any lock required by the fire code official for access, or where a lock is placed per request of the owner or manager of the business or property, and the area locked is determined by the fire code official to require access; the lock shall be a Knox &reg; rapid entry system keyed to the system code registered by the City of Live Oak Fire Department. 
    Section 506.1.2 Key boxes for non-standardized fire service elevator keys shall read: 
506.1.2 Key boxes for non-standardized fire service elevator keys 
Key boxes provided for non-standardized fire service elevator keys shall comply with Section 506.1 and all of the following: 
1.  The key box shall be a Knox &reg; rapid entry system keyed to the system code registered by the City of Live Oak Fire Department. 
2.  The front cover shall be permanently labeled with the words "Fire Department Use Only-Elevator Keys." 
3.  The key box shall be mounted at each elevator bank at the lobby nearest to the lowest level of fire department access. 
4.  The key box shall be mounted 5 feet 6 inches (1676 mm) above the finished floor to the right side of the elevator bank. 
5.  Contents of the key box are limited to fire service elevator keys. Additional elevator access tools, keys and information pertinent to emergency planning or elevator access shall be permitted when authorized by the fire code official. 
6.  In buildings with two or more elevator banks, a single key box shall be permitted to be used when such elevator banks are separated by not more than 30 feet (9144 mm). Additional key boxes shall be provided for each individual elevator or elevator bank separated by more than 30 feet (9144 mm). 
Exception: A single key box shall be permitted to be located adjacent to a fire command center or the nonstandard fire service elevator key shall be permitted to be secured in a key box used for other purposes and located in accordance with Section 506.1. 
    Section 506.2.1 Key Box Access and Removal of Keys is added and shall read: 
506.2.1 Key Box Access and Removal of Keys 
The Fire Department shall have the only key to the key box. Removal of any key by other than the authorized Fire Department personnel shall be a violation of this Code. 
    Section 507.3 Fire flow is amended and shall read: 
507.3 Fire flow 
The approved method to determine the required Fire Flow for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities shall be as per Appendix B of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition. When utilizing Table B105.1 to determine number and distribution of fire hydrants, and the flow requirement falls between the values on the table, the flow requirement shall be rounded up to meet the higher value. 
    Section 507.4 Water Supply Test is amended and shall read: 
507.4 Water Supply Test 
Adequacy of the water supply shall be determined by an approved flow test that is conducted on the fire hydrants nearest the project site. The flow test shall be as follows: 
1.  The flow test shall have been conducted no more than twelve (12) months prior to the date of construction document submittal to the City of Live Oak. 
2.  The flow test shall be constructed in accordance with the 2016 edition of NFPA 291, Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants. 
3.  The flow test results shall be submitted with the construction documents in accordance with the NFPA standard fire flow test format. 
4.  If the water supply piping is not yet constructed, hydraulic calculations for the proposed piping design shall be submitted. The calculations shall be based on the flow test conducted on the fire hydrants nearest the project site and shall verify that the piping design provides the minimum require fire flow at no less than 25 psi residual. Upon completion of construction and prior to final certificate of occupancy, a flow test shall be conducted to verify the results of the calculations. 
    507.5.1.2 Additional Locations required is added and shall read: 
507.5.1.2 Additional Locations required 
Public and/or private fire hydrants are required to be installed where one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Existing fire hydrants do not meet the required fire hydrant location and spacing criteria defined in Section 507.5.1, or Appendix C. 
2.  The complexity of the project justifies their installation as determined by the Fire Marshal. 
    507.5.5 Clear space around hydrants is amended and shall read: 
507.5.5 Clear space around hydrants 
A 3-foot (914 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise required or approved. The clear space around hydrant and the access to the hydrant shall be level, unobstructed, and firefighters must be able to operate the hydrant without climbing above surrounding grade level. 
    507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Installation Criteria is added and shall read: 
507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Installation Criteria 
Fire hydrants shall be installed per the following criteria: 
1.  Fire hydrants shall be a minimum of one (1) foot and a maximum of seven (7) feet from the gutter face of the curb. 
2.  The steamer connection shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) feet and a maximum of two (2) feet above grade. 
3.  All private hydrants shall be painted red. 
4.  Fire hydrants shall be right turn only. 
5.  The steamer connection shall face the street, fire access road or fire lane. 
6.  The steamer connection size/type shall be approved by the Fire Chief. 
    Section 508.1.6 Required Features is amended and shall read: 
508.1.6 Required Features 
The fire command center shall comply with NFPA 72 and shall contain the following features: 
1.  The emergency voice/alarm communication system control unit. 
2.  The fire department communications system. 
3.  Fire detection and alarm system annunciator. 
4.  Annunciator unit visually indicating the location of the elevators and whether they are operational. 
5.  Status indicators and controls for air distribution systems. 
6.  The fire-fighter's control panel required by Section 909.16 for smoke control systems installed in the building. 
7.  Controls for unlocking stairway doors simultaneously. 
8.  Sprinkler valve and water-flow detector display panels. 
9.  Emergency and standby power status indicators. 
10.  A telephone for fire department use with controlled access to the public telephone system. 
11.  Fire pump status indicators. 
12.  Schematic building plans indicating the typical floor plan and detailing the building core, means of egress, fire protection systems, fire-fighting equipment and fire department access, and the location of fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers and smoke partitions. 
13.  An approved Building Information Card that contains, but is not limited to, the following information: 
13.1.  General building information that includes: property name, address, the number of floors in the building (above and below grade), use and occupancy classification (for mixed uses, identify the different types of occupancies on each floor), estimated building population (i.e., day, night, weekend); 
13.2.  Building emergency contact information that includes: a list of the building's emergency contacts (e.g., building manager, building engineer, etc.) and their respective work phone number, cell phone number, and e-mail address; 
13.3.  Building construction information that includes: the type of building construction (e.g., floors, walls, columns, and roof assembly); 
13.4.  Exit stair information that includes: number of exit stairs in the building, each exit stair designation and floors served, location where each exit stair discharges, exit stairs that are pressurized, exit stairs provided with emergency lighting, each exit stair that allows reentry, exit stairs providing roof access; elevator information that includes: number of elevator banks, elevator bank designation, elevator car numbers and respective floors that they serve, location of elevator machine rooms, location of sky lobby, location of freight elevator banks; 
13.5.  Building services and system information that includes: location of mechanical rooms, location of building management system, location and capacity of all fuel oil tanks, location of emergency generator, location of natural gas service; 
13.6.  Fire protection system information that includes: locations of standpipes, location of fire pump room, location of fire department connections, floors protected by automatic sprinklers, location of different types of automatic sprinkler systems installed (e.g., dry, wet, pre-action, etc.); 
13.7.  Hazardous material information that includes: location of hazardous material, quantity of hazardous material. 
14.  Work table. 
15.  Generator supervision devices, manual start and transfer features. 
16.  Public address system, where specifically required by other sections of this code. 
17.  Elevator fire recall switch in accordance with ASME A 17.1. 
18.  Elevator emergency or standby power selector switch(es), where emergency or standby power is provided. 
19.  Water flow rates from pressure and flow rate devices. 
20.  Certain building rooms and corridor temperature and smoke conditions. 
21.  Status of smoke doors and status and operation of smoke pressurization and smoke removal systems. 
22.  All communications and control pathways in the building shall be hardened, designed and installed to have increased resistance to failure and increased survivability. 
    Section 603.5.3 Special day care provision is added and shall read: 
603.5.3 Special day care provision 
In adult and child day care facilities, unvented fuel burning heaters and portable electric heaters of all types are prohibited. 
    Section 703.2 identification of protected openings is added and shall read: 
703.2 Identification of protected openings 
Walls and partitions required to have protected openings (fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers, and smoke partitions) shall be permanently identified with signs or stenciling. Such identification shall be above any ceiling or other concealed space. Markings shall be red in color, with at least four (4) inch letters with one half (1/2) inch stroke width, and shall be spaced so that no more than ten (10) feet is visible without a marking. Markings shall include the phrase, "Fire Barrier, Protect All Openings". 
    Section 901.4.6 Pump and riser room size , shall read: 
901.4.6 Pump and riser room size 
The main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area shall be installed inside the building. A door providing direct access from the exterior wall into the room containing fire sprinkler controls may be required by the Fire Chief. The main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13, and shall be equipped with a listed double horizontal or vertical backflow prevention device(s) sized to match riser piping. Clearance around the fire riser and other equipment shall not be less than 36 inches. This room shall be designed and used for fire protection and fire detection equipment only. Fire pump and automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be provided with a door(s) and an unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest piece of equipment. 
    Section 901.4.6.2 Marking on access doors, shall read: 
901.4.6.2 Marking on access doors 
Access doors for automatic sprinkler system riser rooms and fire pump rooms shall be labeled with an approved sign. The lettering shall be in contrasting color to the background and reflective. Letters shall have a minimum height of 2 inches (51 mm) with a minimum stroke of 3/8 inch (10 mm). 
    Section 901.4.6.5 Exterior identification of main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area is added, and shall read: 
901.4.6.5 Exterior identification of main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area 
Where an exterior access door is required by the Fire Chief, a weatherproof horn and strobe unit shall be installed on the exterior wall outside of the main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area. This horn and strobe shall be installed according to the requirements for a water-flow notification appliance referenced in NFPA 13. It shall be interconnected to actuate concurrently with the water-flow alarm-initiating device of the system, but its placement is in addition to the minimum requirements for water-flow alarm, unless otherwise approved by the Fire Chief. 
    Section 901.5 Installation Acceptance Testing is hereby amended to read as follows: 
901.5 Installation Acceptance Testing. 
Fire detection and alarm systems, fire-extinguishing systems, fire hydrant systems, fire standpipe systems, fire pump systems, private fire service mains and all other fire protection systems and appurtenances thereto shall be subject to acceptance tests as contained in the installation standards and as approved by the fire code official. The fire code official shall be notified before any required acceptance testing. A representative of the Fire Marshal shall witness all required acceptance tests for all these systems. 
    Section 901.6 Inspection, testing and maintenance is amended by adding Section 
    901.6.2.3 Maintenance Agreement as follows: 
901.6.2.3 Maintenance Agreement. 
A maintenance agreement, as defined by Section 202, with a licensed fire protection company shall be provided to the Fire Marshal for each fire protection system at all times. Proof of a maintenance agreement shall be provided during any system acceptance test. Agreements for testing and inspection only as defined by Section 202 shall not be credited with having met this requirement. 
    Section 901.7 Systems out of service is hereby amended to read as follows: 
901.7 Systems out of service. 
Where a required fire protection system is out of service, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shutdown until the fire protection system has been returned to service. 
A fire watch will be performed at all times that a system is taken out of service. Except for emergencies, the fire code official shall be given 72-hours' notice before a system is voluntarily taken out of service. When, at the discretion of the Fire Chief or his designee, there is a life safety issue, uniformed employees of the Live Oak Fire Department or other fire watch personnel as approved by the Fire Chief or his designee shall perform a fire watch. Fire watch personnel shall be provided with at least one approved means for notification to the fire department dispatch and their sole duty shall be to perform constant patrols and watch for safety hazards and occurrences of fire. The cost of the fire watch shall be at the current overtime rate for fire inspections and shall be the sole responsibility of the owner/contractor to pay. The fire watch fee shall be paid before final approval is granted on system work. 
    Section 903 
Section 903.1 Add: 
(a)  Henceforth automatic sprinkler systems must be installed throughout all levels of all new Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies as defined in the International Building Code (IBC) of more than 500 square feet and throughout all R-3 occupancies as defined in said International Building Code of more than 5,000 square feet. The calculated area shall include all habitable space as well as the area of attached garages or storage facilities. Such systems shall be in accordance with Section 903 of the International Building Code as well as National Fire Protection Association Standards 13D and 13R, 2002 edition, for single-family dwellings. 
(b)  The following exceptions are hereby established: 
(1)  Detached gazebos and armadas for residential and public use. Independent buildings such as restrooms or snack shops 400 square feet or less without cooking or heating appliances that are associated with golf courses, parks and similar uses. 
(2)  Detached noncombustible carports or shade canopies. 
(3)  Guardhouses that are less than 300 square feet in size and used to control access to or within residential and/or commercial developments. 
(4)  Detached equipment or storage buildings for commercial use not exceeding 250 square feet. 
(5)  Detached residential storage buildings or garages that are not inhabitable and not exceeding 1000 square feet. 
(6)  Barns and agricultural buildings for private, residential, noncommercial use, and not exceeding 3,000 square feet. 
(7)  Detached noncombustible canopies used exclusively for automotive, motor-fuel dispensing stations for private passenger vehicles and not exceeding 5,000 square feet. 
(8)  Manufactured (mobile) homes built in a permanent chassis designed and built as a dwelling unit and recreational vehicles that were not site-built and are portable in nature. 
(c)  Retrofit. 
(1)  Building additions that equal 50 percent or more of the existing building floor area, or building additions that exceed 10,000 square feet regardless of percentage increase. 
(2)  Two or more building permits, related to area increase, are issued over any three consecutive years. 
(3)  One or more additions are made to an R-3 occupancy and the new total area of the building exceeds 3500 square feet. 
(4)  Building remodels that require structural changes affecting the primary structural system of the existing building 
    Add Section 903.1.1.2 Existing fire areas increased by an addition shall comply with this code and Chapter 9 of the International Building Code. 
    Section 903.3.1.2.3 Elevator Machine Room is added and shall read: 
903.3.1.2.3 Elevator Machine Room 
In all R occupancies or occupancies using a 13R system with elevator systems, the elevator machine room shall be sprinklered as per NFPA 13 standards. 
    Section 905.2.1 Class-I Reducer is added, and shall read: 
905.2.1 Class-I Reducer 
A two and one-half (2-1/2) inch by one and one-half (1-1/2) inch reducer shall be provided on Class-I standpipe connections with caps and chains. 
    Section 905.3 Required installations , Delete the exception. 
    Section 905.3.1 Building height shall read: 
905.3.1 Building height 
Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than 20 feet above the lowest level of the fire department access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 20 feet below the highest level of fire department vehicle access. 
    Section 906.5.1 Conspicuous location in Group R occupancies is added and shall read: 
Section 906.5.1 Conspicuous Locations in Group R occupancies 
In addition to other areas listed herein or in NFPA10, fire extinguishers in R occupancies may also be placed in any of the following locations to satisfy the requirements: 
1.  On a wall in the unit; 
2.  Inside a closet, cabinet or pantry as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher inside; 
3.  Inside a mechanical closet as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher insider; or 
4.  Inside storage closets as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher insider and there is no locking device on the door that requires a key or combination to open it. 
    Section 907 Add 907.1.3 Re-inspections or False Alarms exceed Five (5) in a calendar year starting from 1 Jan to 1 Jan the preceding year a municipal court summon/incident can be issued. 
    Section 907.2 , Delete exception to section 907.2. 
    Section 907.2.1 , Delete exception to section 907.2.1. 
    Section 907.2.2 , Delete exception to section 907.2.2. 
    Section 907.2.3 , Delete all exceptions in section 907.2.3. 
    Section 907.2.4 , Delete exception to section 907.2.4. 
    Section 907.2.6 , Delete exceptions to section 907.2.6. 
    Section 907.2.6.1 , Delete exceptions to section 907.2.6.1. 
    Section 907.2.6.2 , Delete exceptions to section 907.2.6.2. 
    Section 907.2.6.3.3 , Delete exceptions to section 907.2.6.3.3. 
    Section 907.2.7 , Delete exception to section 907.2.7. 
    Section 907.2.8 , Delete exceptions to section 907.2.8. 
    Section 907.2.8.2 , Delete exceptions to section 907.2.8.2. 
    Section 907.2.9.1 , Delete exceptions to section 907.2.9.1. 
    Section 907.2.12 , Delete exceptions to section 907.2.12. 
    Section 912.1 Installation , add to section 912.1: 
When single or multiple fire department connections service a building or group of buildings, the piping shall be arranged so that use of any fire department connection will supply the entire building or group of buildings. 
    Section 912.2 Location , add to section 912.2: 
Sprinkler system and standpipe fire department connections shall be: 
1.  Within forty (40) feet of a public street, approved fire lane, or access roadway; 
2.  Within one hundred (100) feet of an approved fire hydrant as measured and approved by the Fire Chief. 
3.  Minimum of two (2) feet above finished grade and a maximum of four (4) feet above finished grade for standard inlets and minimum of 30 inches at lowest point above finished grade and maximum of four (4) feet above finished grade for the fire inlet; 
4.  The Fire Chief shall approve the location of any freestanding fire department connections; 
5.  Fire department connections for H occupancies will be freestanding remote and located as determined by the Fire Chief. 
6.  Where required in automatic or manual fire sprinkler or standpipe systems, fire department connections shall be provided with approved covers. 
7.  Fire department connection(s) shall be located on the main entrance side of the building or as approved by the Fire Chief, and within 100 feet of a fire hydrant. 
    Section 912.5 Signs , add to section: 
912.5 Signs 
An additional metal sign with dimensions ten (10) inches wide and eight (8) inches in height shall be posted not more than 72 and not less than 48 inches from the bottom of the sign to grade level and within 6 feet of the fire department connection. This additional sign shall have a white reflective background and have the letters "FDC" in red reflective material and be permanently affixed to a wall or post. The letters shall be at least 4 inches in height and a 1/2 inch stroke width. 
    Section 1003.8 Special Provisions , is added, and shall read: 
1003.8 Special Provisions 
Rooms in E occupancies used for kindergarten or daycare, children 5 or under, classified as an E occupancy shall not be located above or below the first story. 
    Section 1008.3.4 Illumination in Group E is added, and shall read: 
1008.3.4 Illumination in Group A and Group E 
Group E occupancies shall have emergency lighting in interior stairs, corridors, shops, and laboratories, and windowless areas with student occupancy. 
    Section 1009.2.2 Elevators required , is added, and shall read: 
1009.2.2 Elevators required 
Where an elevator is required to meet the standards of an accessible means of egress, its construction shall be hardened, designed to withstand a maximum credible fire scenario without collapse. The structure's fire resistance shall be enhanced to ensure that an uncontrolled fire shall result in a burnout without collapse of the elevator structure. The building's structure shall not depend on the elevator shaft for support. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate a 24-inch by 84-inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than 3 inches high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoist way doorframe. Delete exceptions. 
    Section 1010.1.9.5 Bolt locks. Delete exceptions; #3, #4, and #5. 
    Section 2303.2 Emergency disconnect switches , shall read: 
2303.2 Emergency disconnect switches 
An approved, clearly identified and readily accessible emergency disconnect switch shall be provided at an approved location to stop the transfer of fuel to the fuel dispensers in the event of a fuel spill or other emergency. An emergency disconnect switch for exterior fuel dispensers shall be located within 100 feet (30 480 mm) of, but not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) from, the fuel dispensers. For interior fuel-dispensing operations, the emergency disconnect switch shall be installed at an approved location. Such devices shall be distinctly labeled as: EMERGENCY FUEL SHUTOFF. Signs shall be provided in approved locations and be a minimum of 18 inches high and 24 inches wide. 
    Section 2303.2.2 Additional Emergency disconnect switches for attended self-service is hereby added as follows: 
2303.2.2 Additional emergency disconnect for attended self-service. 
Attended facilities shall have an additional emergency disconnect switch located inside the building for attendant use at a location approved by the fire code official. 
    Section 2306.2.1.1 Inventory Control for underground tanks is amended to read as follows: 
2306.2.1.1 Inventory Control for underground tanks. 
Accurate daily (normal working days only) inventory records shall be maintained and reconciled on all Class I, II or III-A liquid storage tanks for indication of possible leakage from tanks or piping. The records shall be made available for inspection by the Fire Marshal, and shall include, as a minimum, records showing by product: daily reconciliation between sales, use, receipts, and inventory on hand. If there is more than one system consisting of a tank(s), serving pump(s), or dispenser(s) for any product, the reconciliation shall be made separately for each tank system. 
1.  Daily inventory shall be maintained for each tank system at each location by the operator. The inventory records shall be kept for the past 12 months at the premises. 
2.  Inventory shall be based on the actual daily measurement and recording daily recording of actual sales, or by readout from an automated gauging system. The inventory records shall include a daily compilation of gain or loss. The mere recording of pump meter reading and product delivery receipts shall not constitute adequate inventory records. 
3.  The operator of the location shall be held responsible for notifying the owner or person(s) in control of the facility to take action to correct any abnormal loss or gain not explainable by spillage, temperature variations or both causes. 
4.  The Fire Marshal may require the operator of an underground tank storage system to test the system for tightness, at the operator's expense, when accurate daily inventory records have not been maintained as required or when in his judgment conditions indicate possible leakage of product from the location of such tanks. 
5.  The Fire Marshal may require copies of Class I, II and III-A liquid storage tank inventories, deliveries or receipt of product sales and dip gauge stick readings or other control measures in addition to copies of any tank tightness or line leakage test results from the station operator, agent, or terminal management. 
6.  When a service station tank is found to be leaking, its contents shall be removed immediately. If any investigations or tests indicate the source of such loss, the owner shall take immediate action to correct the system failure and remove dangerous spillage from the environment. 
7.  The Fire Marshal may order the closure of a Service Station by barricading if necessary and the emptying of contents from storage tanks should the operator of a service station be unwilling to cooperate with the Fire Department during the search for the source of such leakage or should the Fire Marshal determine that a hazardous condition exists that merits such action. 
    Section 2306.2.3 Above-ground tanks located outside, above grade is amended by adding Sections 2306.2.3.1 Inspections, 2306.2.3.2 Required Access, and 2306.2.3.3 Fire Hydrant Access as follows: 
2306.2.3.1 Inspections. 
An inspection of the installation shall be conducted prior to loading the tank with fuel. For those installations approved by the Fire Chief or his designee to dispense class 1 liquids, the initial loading of fuel shall be witnessed by the fire inspector. 
2306.2.3.2 Required Access. 
Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every aboveground storage tank. The aboveground storage tank shall not be more than 150 feet from fire apparatus access roads as measured by an approved route. 
2306.2.3.3 Fire Hydrant Access. 
A minimum of one fire hydrant shall be provided for every aboveground storage tank. The aboveground storage tank shall not be located more than 250 feet from a fire hydrant as measured by an approved route. 
    2308.2.3 Vehicle impact protection is added, and shall read: 
2308.2.3 Vehicle impact protection 
Vehicle impact protection shall be installed and approved by the Fire Chief. 
    Section 3405.1 Individual Piles shall read: 
3405.1 Individual Piles 
Tire storage shall be restricted to individual piles not exceeding 1500 square feet of continuous area. Piles shall not exceed 10 feet in height. 
    Section 3405.6 Volume more than 150,000 cubic feet is deleted. 
    Section 5602.1 Definitions is amended by adding a definition as follows: 
5602.1 Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein. 
HIGHWINDS. Sustained wind velocity of 15 mph or gusts of 25 mph. 
    Delete Appendix A , "Board of Appeals". 
    Section C103.4 Additional Distribution is added, and shall read: 
C103.4 Additional Distribution 
A fire hydrant shall be located not more than 100 feet from an unobstructed and approved route to a fire department connection (FDC) located at ground level. The FDC may be installed in an approved remote location, and within 100 feet to a fire hydrant. This distance and route is as approved by the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. No. 1560 , § I, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 8-3. - References to officials. 
    When reference is made in the codes adopted by this article to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such codes shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 419, § 3, 11-27-79) 
Sec. 8-4. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or the codes adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any detailed statement of plan submitted and approved under this article or the codes adopted by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 419, § 4, 11-27-79; Ord. No. 748, 8-25-87; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 3-29-88) 
Cross reference- Administration generally, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 8-5. - Outdoor fires above ground level in multifamily housing units. 
(a)  No person living within any multifamily housing such as an apartment, apartment condominium, hotel, motel, or any other multifamily type occupancy shall construct, install, maintain or use any incinerator, bar-b-que pit, charcoal or propane grill or container of any kind above ground level or within ten feet of the structure, for the purpose of igniting any combustible material for whatever domestic purpose such as cooking, washing, etc. 
(b)  Each violation of this section shall be punished by a penalty of a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 812, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-88) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; zoning, App. A. 
Secs. 8-6-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 8-21. - Created. 
    There is hereby created the Live Oak Fire Department which shall be operated as a departmental function of the city by the members acting with the authority hereinafter provided. The department shall serve the city and such other areas as the city council may approve. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 1, 2-24-81; Ord. No. 942, § 1, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 8-22. - Apparatus and related equipment. 
    The city council shall procure and maintain firefighting and rescue apparatus and related equipment necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 2, 2-24-81) 
Sec. 8-23. - Composition. 
    The membership of the fire department may consist of volunteers and/or full-time, paid firefighters to provide for appropriate protection of life and property. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 3, 2-24-81) 
Sec. 8-24. - Fire chief. 
(a)  The fire chief shall be responsible to the city manager and shall report on all activities of the fire department to the city manager. The fire chief shall be responsible for the inspection of all business and residential properties and all places of public gatherings for fire hazards and violations of the city fire code. He shall also inspect buildings and premises damaged or burned immediately after the extinguishment of every fire within the city limits, endeavor to determine the cause thereof and report all findings to the city manager within 24 hours thereafter. 
(b)  The fire chief shall at all times be responsible for maintaining an effective training program and permanent record thereof. The training program prescribed by the fire chief shall be in accordance with recognized state firefighting and medical procedures and standards. He shall maintain a complete monthly attendance record of all officers/firefighters and render a monthly report thereof to the city manager within five days following the expiration of each calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 448, §§ 4-6, 2-24-81) 
Sec. 8-25. - Budget. 
    The city will provide funds on account in the amount called for by the formal budget submitted by the fire chief and approved by the city council. This budget will provide for all expenditures and maintenance of vehicles and associated equipment. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 7, 2-24-81) 
Sec. 8-26. - Volunteer funds. 
    The fire department will have an account drawn from its volunteer members and by any fund-raising activities. These funds will be used to provide the fire department with items that it needs or desires not provided for in the formal budget and for the general operation of the organization. Any equipment bought with these funds immediately becomes the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 8, 2-24-81; Ord. No. 942, § 2, 11-24-92) 
Sec. 8-27. - Exemption from volunteer firefighters' relief and retirement fund. 
(a)  The city does hereby exempt itself from the provisions of Revised Civil Statutes, article 6243e.3, dealing with the volunteer firefighters' relief and retirement fund. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of Revised Civil Statutes article 6243e.3, section 2(b), the action of the city in exempting itself from the provisions of such statute at this time shall be without prejudice to rescind this action at a future time by the then city council. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 1, 9-13-77) 
State Law reference- Authority, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243e.3, § 2(b). 
Sec. 8-28. - [Fees for permits and inspections.] 
    The city is authorized and shall charge fees for permits and inspections of fire alarm systems, fire line permits, automatic fire sprinkler systems, fire line underground, re-inspection fees, false fire alarms and burn permits. Such fees shall be charged in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the city council and amended from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Secs. 8-29-8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 8-41. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated in this section: 
    Fireworks shall mean and include any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display and shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks whether herein specially designated and defined or not. 
    Person shall mean and include any natural person, association of persons, partnerships, corporations, agent or officer of a corporation, and shall also include all warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors and administrators. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 9-12-78) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 8-42. - Territorial applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable and in force throughout the territory of the city within its corporate limits. 
(b)  This article shall also be applicable and in force within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending for a distance outside the city limits for a total of 5,000 feet, and it shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this article within such area of 5,000 feet outside the city limits; provided that, this article shall not apply within any portion of such 5,000 feet area which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 6, 9-12-78) 
Sec. 8-43. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer or have in his possession with intent to sell, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 2, 9-12-78) 
Sec. 8-44. - Declared a public nuisance. 
    The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The fire marshal is directed and required to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found within the jurisdiction in violation of this article and any member of the fire prevention division of the city fire department or any city police officer or any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally until the fire marshal can be notified in order that such fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section. Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city or the fire marshal or both for injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent the unlawful sale, storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city and to aid the fire marshal in the discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and destruction of such fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 4, 9-12-78) 
Sec. 8-45. - Exceptions to article. 
    This article shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroad and which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any such railroad for use in railroad operation; nor shall this article apply to any marine signal flare or rocket of the type and kind commonly carried by a vessel at sea for its own use and which signal flares or rockets are transported or received or stored for use only as ship's stores nor shall this article apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 9-12-78) 
Sec. 8-46. - Not necessary to negative exceptions. 
    In any prosecution for any violation of this article, it shall not be necessary for the prosecution to negative any proviso or exception but the same may be raised by the defendant by way of defense. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 8, 9-12-78) 
Sec. 8-47. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his possession with intent to sell any fireworks shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code for each offense. If the fireworks are separately wrapped or packaged, the doing or omitting to do any act prohibited by this article shall be a separate offense as to each such separately wrapped or separately packaged fireworks. Each day that a violation of this article shall continue with respect to any package of fireworks shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall use, discharge, or cause to be discharged, ignited, detonated, fired or otherwise set in action any fireworks shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Any parent or guardian of any minor child below the age of 16 who permits or allows such minor child to use, discharge, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 9-13-83) 
Chapter 9 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1426, articles 1-5, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed and reenacted chapter 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 9, articles I-III, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1022, arts. 1-5, adopted January 30, 1996. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; emergency preparedness, Ch. 7; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning regulations, App. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt flood control regulations, V.T.C.A. Water Code § 16.315(13). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has, in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 1, § A, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 1, § B, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 1, § C, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development, which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 1, § D, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-5. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. Also called the "base flood." 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See "Flood elevation study." 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. See "Regulatory floodway." 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above flood level for purpose of flood plain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, hydrological effect or urbanization on the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area. See "Area of special flood hazard." 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in [National Flood Insurance Program regulations] Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 2, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 3, § A, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Bexar County," dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated September 29, 2010 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 3, § B, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 3, § C, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-9. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 3, § D, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 3, § E, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-11. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 3, § F, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-12. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 3, § G, 5-11-10) 
Secs. 9-13-9-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 9-31. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The planning director is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 4, § A, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-32. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 9-7, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(11)  Right of entry and stop work orders. 
a.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the floodplain administrator, or the floodplain administrator's duly authorized representative, has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or Code violation, which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the floodplain administrator, or his duly authorized representative, may: 
1.  Enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the floodplain administrator by this Code. 
2.  If the building or premises is occupied, the floodplain administrator, or the floodplain administrator's authorized representative, will first present property credentials and request entry. 
3.  If the building or premises is unoccupied, the floodplain administrator, or the floodplain administrator's authorized representative, will first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. 
4.  If entry is refused, the floodplain administrator has recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
b.  When the floodplain administrator has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care, or control of any building or premises may fail or neglect, after proper request is made, to promptly permit entry by the floodplain administrator or the floodplain administrator's authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination under this Code. 
c.  Upon notice from the floodplain administrator or the floodplain administrator's authorized representative, that work on any building, structure, dike, bridge or any improvement, which would affect water drainage, is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the work must be immediately stopped. 
d.  Any notice to stop work must be in writing and be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
e.  Where an emergency exists, no written notice is required to be given by the floodplain administrator. However, written notice must follow within 24 hours from the time oral notice to stop work is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 4, § B, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-33. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 9-52(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 9-32(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(c)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provision of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based or whenever the permit or approval was issued in error. 
(2)  Violation of Code provisions. The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the floodplain administrator that the construction, erection, alteration or repairs of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 4, § C, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-34. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 9-33(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 9-3). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a)-(i) are met, and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 4, § D, 5-11-10) 
Secs. 9-35-9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 9-51. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(8)  Additional protection is specifically recommended such that the lowest floor of any building be elevated to a level of one foot higher or more above the base flood elevation since such additional protection may provide for significant reductions in insurance premiums. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 5, § A, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-52. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 9-7, (ii) subsection 9-32(8), or (iii) subsection 9-53(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement and all attending utilities), elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 9-33(a)(1) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement and all attending utilities) elevated one feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 9-33(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4). A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 5, § B, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-53. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 9-2, 9-3, and 9-4. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 9-8; section 9-33; and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 9-7 or subsection 9-32(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 5, § C, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-54. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-7 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 9-33 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 5, § D, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-55. - Floodways. 
(a)  Channels of streams, which must be kept clear of encroachments to enable a 100-year flood to pass without an increase in flood height, and which are located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-7 are designated as regulatory floodways. 
(b)  Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard [engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge]. 
(2)  If subsection (1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements must comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(4)  The placement of manufactured homes is prohibited, except in an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 5, § E, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-56. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 5, § F, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 9-57. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1426, Art. 5, § G, 5-11-10) 
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 4; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; utilities, Ch. 23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this article shall have the meaning indicated in this section. 
    Brush shall include all trees or shrubbery under seven (7) feet in height not cultivated and cared for by the person owning or controlling the premises. 
    Deface shall mean and apply to writing, carving or scratching on the varnish or paint or plaster of any public trash receptacles or staining such receptacles with paint, or any other article which will produce a discoloration of the painting or plaster on them. 
    Garbage shall include any kitchen waste consisting of animal or vegetable matter. 
    Injure shall mean and include any and all character of physical damage, whether caused by fire or force, and which shall be done or caused wilfully by any person. 
    Lot shall include, in addition to land within their respective boundaries, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line of any lot or parcel of land to the curb line or adjacent streets, where a curb line has been established, and, where no curb line has been established to eight (8) feet beyond the property line. The word "lot" shall also include all land lying between the property line of any lot or parcel of land and the center of adjacent alleys. The size of a lot in this article is considered to be any land up to and including five (5) acres. 
    Nuisance means any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash or debris. 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers. 
(3)  Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects, provided that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance. 
(4)  All trash, refuse, tin cans, old vessels of all sorts, useless articles, discarded clothing and textiles of all sorts. 
    Public trash receptacle shall mean and include all cans, boxes, tubs or barrels placed on the streets and sidewalks by the city or by anyone else under the direction of the city, or by contract or agreement with the city for placing receptacles for trash or waste of the general public. 
    Weeds shall include all rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter which has grown to more than one (1) foot in height, or which, regardless of height, is unsightly. 
(Ord. No. 165, 1-5-71; Ord. No. 847, § 1, 10-10-89) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 10-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1483 , § 1, adopted August 13, 2013, repealed §§ 10-2 and 10-2.1, which pertained to accumulations and exterior storage of nonoperating vehicles, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 165, § 1, adopted January 5, 1971; and Ord. No. 847, § 2, adopted October 10, 1989. 
Sec. 10-2.1. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to § 10-2. 
Sec. 10-2.2. - Garbage collection requirements. 
(a)  The necessity for the establishment of a garbage and refuse collection system in the city for sanitary and public health purposes is hereby declared for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare of this community. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for residents of the city or persons dwelling therein, or proprietors or managers of commercial establishments, to knowingly, intentionally, recklessly, or through criminal negligence as those terms are defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code art. 6.03, to refuse to avail themselves of the garbage and refuse collection provided by the city itself or through its contractor and to refuse to pay the charges for said services established by the city council. 
(c)  Each violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a penal offense and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Each day that such offense continues shall be a separate offense. 
(d)  All ordinances previously passed and adopted inconsistent with or in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(e)  If any one or more sections, sentences, clauses or parts of this section are held invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining provisions of this section but shall be confined in its operation to the specific sections, sentences, clauses or parts of this section held invalid, and the invalidity of any section, sentence, clause or part of this section in any one or more instances shall not affect or prejudice in any way the validity of this section in other instances. 
(Ord. No. 1082, §§ 1-5, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1483 , § 1, 8-13-13) 
Sec. 10-3. - Transporting-Tight cover required. 
    Any vehicle used to transport garbage, rubbish, brush, weeds or offal in any of the streets or alleys, within the city, shall be fitted with a good substantial cover thereon. The covering shall be of wood, metal or canvas and shall be so closely fitted as to prevent the escape or flying about of any of the contents. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 2, 1-5-71) 
Secs. 10-4-10-16. Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1483 , § 1, adopted August 13, 2013, repealed §§ 10-4-10-16, which pertained to garbage and public nuisances and derived from Ord. No. 165, §§ 4-7, and 9-17, adopted January 5, 1971; Ord. No. 847, §§ 3, 4, adopted October 10, 1989; and Ord. No. 1231, §§ 1, 2, adopted August 9, 2005. 
Sec. 10-16.5. - Assessment of expenses; lien. 
(a)  The city may assess expenses incurred under this article against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made. 
(b)  To obtain a lien against the property, the mayor, municipal health officer or the code compliance officer designated by the city manager must file a statement of expenses with the Bexar County clerk at the Bexar County Courthouse. The lien statement must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk. 
(c)  The lien obtained by the municipality's governing body is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city. 
(d)  The lien is inferior only to: 
(1)  Tax liens; and 
(2)  Liens for street improvements. 
(e)  The city council may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to cover the expenditures and interest due. 
(f)  The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements. 
(g)  The remedy provided by this section is in addition to any other remedies available at law. 
(h)  The city may foreclose a lien on property under this subchapter in a proceeding relating to the property brought under V.T.C.A., Tax Code subch. E, ch. 33, §§ 33.91 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 2, 8-9-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1231, § 2, adopted August 9, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 10-16.5 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 10-16.6. - Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds. 
(a)  The city may abate, without notice, weeds that: 
(1)  Have grown higher than 48 inches; and 
(2)  Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety or any person. 
(b)  Not later than the tenth day after the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the manner provided for hereinabove in this article. 
(c)  The notice shall contain: 
(1)  An identification of the property which is not required to be a legal description; 
(2)  Description of the violations of the ordinance that occurred on the property; 
(3)  A statement that the municipality abated the weeds; and 
(4)  An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the municipality's abatement of the weeds. 
(d)  The municipality shall conduct an administrative hearing under the abatement of weeds before its municipal court under this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the municipality a written request for a hearing. 
(e)  An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the date a request for hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds. 
(f)  The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and create liens under the provisions set out above. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as the lien created above. 
    This remedy is cumulative of any other remedy that the city has to abate nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 2, 8-9-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1231, § 2, adopted August 9, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 10-16.6 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 10-17. - Burning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any brush, garbage, rubbish, weeds or other burnable material within the corporate limits of the city unless such burning is done within an incinerator, pit or device made or manufactured for such use and approved by the city fire chief. Such devices must be designed and constructed to emit as little air pollution as possible for smog and air pollution control. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 18, 1-5-71) 
Sec. 10-18. - Premises to be kept clean. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons occupying premises in the city to keep such premises, including sidewalks, banquettes and street gutters in front thereof, in a neat, clean and sanitary condition, free from all weeds, brush, rubbish, garbage and other substance injurious to health, and to deposit each day all sweepings, trash and garbage from their respective premises in a receptacle as provided in sections 10-5, 10-6, and 10-7. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 8, 1-5-71) 
Sec. 10-19. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay or who may become delinquent in payment of solid waste disposal service fees within the time specified shall be deemed to be delinquent, and the city may, at its option, cause any or all utility services and solid waste removal services to be discontinued, and such discontinuance shall be reported to the city's health officer. The city may further enforce this article by any other lawful means including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and, in the event the city deems it necessary to resort to such proceedings to enforce the provisions hereof, the city may seek an additional civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 per day for any such violation. In such event each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 5, 10-10-89; Ord. No. 935, § 2, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 943, §§ 1, 2, 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1483 , § 1, 8-13-13) 
Secs. 10-20-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DUMPING OF REFUSE IN EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION AREA 

Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated in this section: 
    Garbage. Solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Industrial solid wastes. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry or manufacturing, or mining or agricultural operations, including discarded or unwanted solid materials suspended or transported in liquids, and discarded or unwanted materials in liquid or semi-liquid form. 
    Junk. Any worn out, cast off, or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. 
    Person. Any individual, corporation, organization, business trust, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. 
    Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 degrees Fahrenheit to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Solid wastes. All putrescible and nonputrescible discarded or unwanted solid materials, but does not apply to nor include soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural and man-made inert solid materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 1, 1-30-79) 
Sec. 10-32. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  The dumping, depositing, or leaving of solid wastes, industrial solid wastes, garbage, rubbish, and junk on public or private property within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending for a distance outside the city limits for a total of 5,000 feet, which area is not within the corporate limits of any other municipal corporation is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply when such solid wastes, industrial solid wastes, garbage, rubbish or junk are processed and treated in accordance with rules and standards promulgated by the state department of health. 
(c)  The provisions of this article further shall not affect farmers in the handling of anything necessary in the growing, handling and care of livestock, or the erection, operation and maintenance of any and all such improvements that may be necessary in the handling, threshing and preparation of any and all agricultural products. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 2, 1-30-79) 
Sec. 10-33. - Prosecution need not negative exceptions. 
    In any prosecution for any violation of this article, it shall not be necessary for the prosecution to negative any proviso or exception, but the same may be raised by the defendant by way of defense. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 5, 1-30-79) 
Sec. 10-34. - Effect of state penal code and other statutes. 
    If any activities prohibited under this article are further proscribed by the state penal code or general statute, then, and if either of such events, such statutes shall supersede and be applicable, and this article shall be expressly subordinated to such statutes or penal code. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 7, 1-30-79) 
Sec. 10-35. - Injunctive relief. 
    The city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city for injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 6, 1-30-79) 
Secs. 10-36-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK AND SALVAGE DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-51. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the meaning listed below for the purpose of this article: 
    Dealer shall mean a person, firm, or corporation who operates a junk or salvage yard as defined in this section. 
    Director shall mean the director of public works and inspections. 
    Junk means all worn-out, worthless, and discarded material, including odds and ends, old iron or other metal, glass, paper, and cordage. 
    Junk yard or salvage yard shall mean any premises where junk, articles or materials, including junked, wrecked, or inoperable vehicles, which are ready for destruction or which have been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1(a)-(d), 12-14-78) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 10-52. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to any person which may impound motor vehicles pursuant to request of the city police department as to such persons. It shall be enforced only after the expiration of twenty (20) days from the earliest possible time such vehicles may be sold to third parties under the state's laws dealing with impounded, unclaimed motor vehicles. This shall not apply to the city. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1(e), 12-14-78) 
Sec. 10-53. - Fencing. 
(a)  The following regulations apply to all junk and salvage yards which were in existence in the city as of December 1, 1978, and to any expansions thereof: 
(1)  Such junk and salvage yards may be operated within the city limits only if the premises fronting on roadways are entirely enclosed by a solid fence or wall and where such premises are visible to the public from side approaches; 
(2)  They shall be further screened by a solid fence not less than fifty (50) feet on the side yards to reduce such visibility. Such fences shall not be less than six (6) feet and not more than ten (10) feet in height constructed of masonry, metal or wood, or a combination, screened with venetian blinds, or other similar material; provided, further, that, fences at least five (5) feet in height which were in existence on December 1, 1978, shall be allowed to remain intact, with no additional height requirements except that the owners and operators of the businesses shall conform to the screening requirements hereinabove set out unless otherwise previously complied with. In industrial districts, not fronting residential or commercial districts, and not located to adversely affect sight distance at street and/or alley intersections, there shall be no limitations as to fence heights. 
(3)  They shall be constructed and maintained in a neat, substantial and safe condition and so as not to be easily penetrated. 
(4)  Gates for access to the premises at each street or alley line shall not have combined openings which would exceed thirty (30) per cent of the alley or street frontage. All gates for access to the premises shall swing inward and shall be kept closed and secured when the premises are not open for business. 
(5)  The fencing requirements set forth in subparagraphs (a)(1) through (4) of this section shall not apply to junk or salvage operations conducted solely within a completely enclosed structure or structures. 
(b)  The following regulations apply to all new junk and salvage yards approved by the city council after December 1, 1978. 
(1)  Such junk and salvage yards shall be enclosed on all sides (including front and rear) which abut a street, or residentially used or zoned property, with a solid screen fence or wall eight (8) feet in height. Such fence or wall shall be maintained in a neat, substantial, not easily penetrated, and safe condition. 
(2)  Gates for access to the premises at each street or alley line shall not have combined openings exceeding thirty (30) per cent of the alley or street frontage. All gates for access to the premises shall swing inward and shall be kept closed when the premises are not open for business. 
(3)  The fencing requirements in this subsection shall not apply to junk or salvage yards conducted solely within a completely enclosed structure or structures. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 4, 12-14-78) 
Cross reference- Buildings fence regulations generally, § 5-61 et seq. 
Sec. 10-54. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  Junk or salvage or other merchandise on the premises shall be arranged so that reasonable inspection of, or access to, all parts of the premises can be had at any time by proper fire, health, police and building authorities, which dealers shall permit at any reasonable time. All junk car bodies, which are located outside of the building, shall be stored on racks or supports so that the body makes no contact with the ground so as to provide easier inspection, control of insects and rodents, and so as to facilitate water drainage. 
(b)  No junk shall be placed outside of the fences or walls. 
(c)  Dealers shall place and maintain a sign on the premises that may be read from street right-of-way listing the name(s) and telephone number(s) of one (1) or more persons in the county who may be called to give admittance to the premises in case of emergency. 
(d)  All junk and salvage yards shall have a rodent, serpent and vector extermination program conducted covering the entire premises not less often than once every six (6) months, using such chemicals and conducted in such manner as is acceptable to professional exterminator standards. This rodent, serpent and vector control program is the responsibility of the dealer. City inspectors shall inspect all junk and salvage yards within the city not less often than once each six (6) months. At the time of inspection, the inspector shall be provided with evidence to prove that such an extermination procedure has occurred within the preceding six (6) month period. If a professional exterminator has been employed, he shall provide a certification of what was done and the area covered. If the dealer, with the director's approval, conducts the extermination himself, then he shall maintain a record of chemicals and methods utilized, furnishing the inspector with evidence necessary for a determination that the control has been accomplished in as effective manner. It shall be unlawful for any dealer to fail to have the necessary rodent, serpent and vector extermination conducted in accordance herewith, and it shall also be unlawful to fail to present to the inspector the necessary verifications of such effective extermination upon request. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 5, 12-14-78) 
Sec. 10-55. - Time limit for compliance with provisions of article. 
    Owners and operators of junk and salvages yards which are annexed into the city shall have a period of six (6) months from the effective date of such annexation to bring their yards into compliance with sections 10-53 and 10-54. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 6, 12-14-78) 
Sec. 10-56. - Inspections. 
    Monthly inspections shall be made of all junk and salvage yards by the director of public works or his appointed inspector for the purpose of assuring compliance with the terms of this article. A form shall be devised by the director to be completed at the time of such inspection showing the date that the inspection occurred. Such form showing the date of the last inspection shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises at all times by the dealer. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 7, 12-14-78) 
Sec. 10-57. - Variances. 
    The board of adjustment is authorized to grant, pursuant to the procedures set forth in the city's zoning ordinance, and in the exercise of its statutory powers, a variance from the provisions of sections 10-53 and 10-54, but only due to unique circumstances on the premises or adjacent thereto (such as topography), not created by the dealer and not merely financial and which are not a part of general conditions in the area. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 9, 12-14-78) 
Sec. 10-58. - City council approval required for establishment or expansion. 
(a)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to establish or expand any junkyard or salvage yard within the corporate limits of the city without obtaining prior approval of the city council. In granting such approval, the city council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by grantee before certificates of occupancy may be issued by the director for the use of the land or buildings on such property pursuant to such approval; and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of such approval, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to granting of the certificates of occupancy. 
(b)  The decision of the city council whether to approve the expansion or establishment of a junk or salvage yard or not, and whether conditions shall be imposed upon same if it is to be approved, shall be made only after a public hearing before the council on the question at which interested parties shall have the right to be heard. The department of public works and inspection shall mail notice to the owners of all property located within two hundred (200) feet of the area to be occupied by the new junk or salvage yard or expansion, which notice shall state the nature of the approval sought, for what location, and shall state the date and time of the hearing and advise that the addressee will have a right to be heard on the question. Procedures outlined in the zoning ordinance will be followed for making these required notices. 
(c)  At any time a junk or salvage yard should cease operations and the property continue not to be used for a junk or salvage yard for a period of six (6) months or more, reestablishment of such use will require approval of the city council in the same manner as an expansion or establishment of a new junk or salvage yard use. 
(d)  The city council will not approve the establishment of a new junk or salvage yard, or an expansion of an existing junk or salvage yard, if the location of the new yard or the expansion area is within five hundred (500) feet of a church or school building or a residence (single-family home, duplex, apartment, townhouse) if such church, school, or residence is located in any predevelopment or residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 10, 12-14-78) 
Secs. 10-59-10-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits, and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 10-71. - Required. 
    No dealer shall transact or engage in such businesses and no junk or salvage yard shall be operated within the city, unless and until an annual license has been obtained pursuant to this division. Licenses may not be transferred by the applicant to another person or to another location. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 2, 12-14-78) 
Sec. 10-72. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for licenses to operate junk or salvage yards shall be made in writing to the director on a form prescribed by him and shall, among other things contain the name, residence, and business address of the applicant (this information shall be listed for each member of a partnership and for each officer of a corporation); name and nature of the proposed operation, and the present zoning, address, and legal description of the premises on which application is being applied for. The application shall contain the following statement: 
"The license applied for shall be subject to all provisions of the codes and ordinances of the city relating to junk or salvage operations." 
(b)  Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the party applying therefor (by a general partner in the case of a partnership and by an officer of the corporation in the case of a corporation) before a notary public or other official authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 3, 12-14-78) 
Sec. 10-73. - Issuance; appeal from denial. 
    Annual licenses shall be issued by the director of public works and inspection upon receipt of the prescribed fee and the completed application, provided that: 
(1)  Applicant (including partners or officers in the case of a partnership or a corporation) has not been convicted within the previous five (5) years of two (2) or more violations of this article; and 
(2)  After inspection of the premises are in compliance with this article and other applicable city ordinances and codes. 
    In the event a license is denied, the applicant may appeal this decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 7, 12-14-78) 
Sec. 10-74. - Fees. 
    The annual license fee for each establishment or location shall be sixty dollars ($60.00), paid to the city secretary with the application for the license. Such fee will be refunded if the license request is refused. The license shall cover the period January first through December thirty-first of each year. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 8, 12-14-78) 
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals and fowl, Ch. 4; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 10. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1483 , § 2, adopted August 13, 2013, repealed Art. I, § 11-1, which pertained to storage of lumber and other materials restricted and derived from Ord. No. 311, § 17(1), adopted February 8, 1977. 

Secs. 11-1-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1245, adopted January 10, 2006, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 311, § 2(a)-(e), (g), (h), 3, 4(a)-(d), 8-11, 13, 14, adopted February 8, 1977, and Ord. No. 484, adopted August 31, 1982. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-16. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this article: 
    Food establishment. "Food establishment" shall mean a food service establishment, a retail food store, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor and includes those selling prepackaged food items. 
    Food and beverage handler. The term "food and beverage handler" is any person, including any cook, cook's helper, waiter, waitress, dishwasher, bartender, barmaid, bus boy, or other person, whether or not the owner of the establishment in which the activity is performed employs or pays any compensation to such person to perform such activity, who engages in the delivery, storing, preparation or dispensing or serving of food or beverages, as defined herein, for human consumption; or who engages in the handling, use, cleaning or preparation for use of any pots, pans, grills, skillets, plates, trays, eating utensils, or similar wares in, on or with which such food or beverage is prepared, dispensed or served. 
    Health inspector. The term "health inspector" shall mean the city health inspector or his authorized representative. 
    Permit. The term "permit" shall be used to designate an annually renewed license to operate a food establishment issued by the city. 
    State rules. Rules found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Sec. 11-17. - Inspector. 
(a)  Office created. There is hereby created the office of health inspector in and for the city. 
(b)  Appointment. The office of health inspector shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. 
(c)  Term. The person appointed as health inspector shall serve in such office at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(d)  Duties. The health inspector shall perform the duties required by the provisions of this Code, state law, and city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Sec. 11-18. - Food handler sanitation training course. 
    It shall be unlawful for any employer to employ or any person to be employed as a food handler without such employee having completed a city food handler sanitation training course within 30 days of employment or the next such course scheduled thereafter. Satisfactory completion of a city food handler sanitation training course constitutes authority to permit a person to accept employment to work in, around, or about all food and beverage establishments for a period of one year. 
    Exception: All volunteers within a non-profit organization shall not be required to attend such course, but all food preparation and serving activities must be directly supervised by someone who has satisfactorily completed a city food handler sanitation training course. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Sec. 11-19. - Examination and condemnation of unwholesome or questionable food or drink. 
(a)  Samples of food, drink and other substances shall be taken and examined by the health inspector as often as deemed necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness and deleterious qualities. The health inspector may condemn and forbid the sale of or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome or deleterious. 
(b)  Any food which appears to the health inspector to be of a questionable nature from the standpoint of wholesomeness or possible deleterious quality may be held for further examination by attaching a "City of Live Oak Retained" tag to the item(s). Foodstuffs so retained may not be removed or disturbed without the permission of the health inspector. The city health inspector shall promptly proceed by examination, laboratory or other wise to determine the wholesomeness of such food. As soon as such wholesomeness has been determined, such food must be immediately released. If however, such food is found to be unwholesome or deleterious, the health inspector must promptly condemn such food as herein stated and shall file petition in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunction to restrain the owner form selling such condemned food and to obtain order for destruction of such unwholesomeness or deleterious food or drink. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Sec. 11-20. - Inspection of establishments. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rule or rules as amended by the state board of health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, and Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(b)  As often as deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article, the health inspector, shall inspect every food establishment, and temporary food establishment, as defined by this article that is located within the city. In case of violations of any items of sanitation brought to the attention of the health inspector, he shall so advise the person in charge of the food establishment and shall make a second inspection after a lapse of such time as deemed sufficient for the violation to be corrected and the second inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the requirements of this article. Any violation of the same provision of this article on such second inspection shall call for immediate suspension of the permit by the health inspector. 
(c)  In the interest of public clarification, the results from compiling the inspection report will be converted to a letter grade with the letter "A" being the highest level of food service operation. The criteria for the various certificates are: 
(1)  Grade "A"-Attain a sanitation score of 85 or above; 
(2)  Grade "B"-Attain a sanitation score between 70 and 84; 
(3)  Grade "C"-Below 70 on the sanitation inspection; 
    An inspection certificate shall be issued and a copy shall be posted by the health inspector at some conspicuous location on the premises where it will be clearly visible to all patrons. The certificate shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the health inspector. Violation of this section shall be a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00 per day that the certificate is removed, moved or defaced and/or suspension of the food establishment permit for 30 days. The health inspector shall permit the owner to correct any non-critical infractions within no more than 24 hours unless the owner can demonstrate to the health inspector's reasonable satisfaction that such infraction cannot be corrected within the allotted 24 hours or less. If the health inspector determines that the infraction is of an immediate threat to the public health, there shall be no grace period for correction. Repeat violations may result in higher point deduction. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Secs. 11-21-11-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 11-36. - Permits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment or temporary food establishment in the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the health inspector. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Such permits are valid for one year and shall not be transferable from either one establishment at a different location or from one person to another person. All permits expire in October of each year. All permits must be renewed within 30 after expiration or they will be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Sec. 11-37. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual permit fee and reinstatement after revocation fee to cover the city's costs incurred in conjunction with the inspection of food establishments located within the city shall be paid prior to the issuance of such permit. Fees shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council and amended from time to time as necessary. 
(b)  If at any time during the period of validity of any such permit additional persons are employed by an establishment, it shall be the duty of the person in charge to immediately notify the health department and if such a increase in personnel brings the establishment into a higher permit fee bracket, they shall pay the city the additional sum required. This charge and the charge for new establishments that start during the year will be prorated based on a 12-month calendar and divided based on the months remaining during the year. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Secs. 11-38-11-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SANITATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 11-46. - Food establishments generally. 
(a)  All food establishments shall comply with all of the sanitation provisions set out in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, and Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175. 
(b)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversions shall be submitted to the city for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangements, mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The city will approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of the rules contained in this article. Prior to opening for business, each new remodeled establishment will be inspected by the health inspector to insure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Sec. 11-47. - Disease control. 
    No person who is infected with any disease in a communicable form or is a carrier of such a disease shall work in any food establishment or temporary food establishment. All provisions of 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Section 171 (o) and (p) shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Secs. 11-48-11-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 11-61. - Sanitation requirements. 
    Temporary food establishments shall be constructed and operated in an approved manner. The health inspector shall approve a temporary food establishment only if it complies with the provisions of 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Section 170 (a) through (k). 
(Ord. No. 1245, 1-10-06) 
Secs. 11-62-11-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1483 , § 2, adopted August 13, 2013, repealed Art. III, §§ 11-81-11-91, which pertained to rat control in business buildings and derived from Ord. No. 311, §§ 17, 17(a)(1)-(6), and 17(b)-(g), adopted February 8, 1977. 

Secs. 11-81-11-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1483 , § 2, adopted August 13, 2013, repealed Art. IV, §§ 11-106-11-108, which pertained to unsanitary, unsightly, etc. conditions on private premises and derived from Ord. No. 311, §§ 16(a)-(h), adopted February 8, 1977; Ord. No. 808, § 1, adopted August 9, 1988; Ord. No. 813, § 1, adopted November 15, 1988; and Ord. No. 1469, § I, adopted June 26, 2012. 

Secs. 11-106-11-108. - Reserved. 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses required for cats and dogs, § 4-46 et seq.; permit required for fences, § 5-62; house mover's license required, § 5-117; permit required for moving of buildings, § 5-123; permit required for relocation of building, § 5-127; flood control regulations development permit, § 9-36 et seq.; licenses required for junkyards, § 10-71 et seq.; food establishment health card and certificate, § 11-18; rat control in business buildings, § 11-81 et seq.; permit required for alarm systems, § 19-81 et seq.; parade permits, § 20-31 et seq.; gross receipts tax on bingo games for charitable purposes, § 22-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINE OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1365, §§ I-III, adopted March 11, 2008, repealed and reenacted article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article II, §§ 12-16-12-22 pertained to coin-operated machines, and derived from Ord. No. 480, §§ 1-7, adopted April 13, 1982. 

Sec. 12-16. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  An occupation tax is imposed on each coin-operated machine that an owner exhibits or displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed within the city limits. 
(b)  The tax rate is one-fourth of the rate of the state-imposed occupation tax on coin-operated machines. 
(c)  The tax is due and payable by January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1365, §§ II, III, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 12-17. - Exemption. 
    The tax imposed under this article does not apply to an owner of a coin-operated machine or a machine that is exempt from the state occupation tax under the Texas Occupations Code or if the owner: 
(1)  Holds an import license; and 
(2)  Possesses the coin-operated machine for resale only. 
(Ord. No. 1365, §§ II, III, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 12-18. - Tax permit. 
(a)  The city secretary shall issue a tax permit to an owner who pays the tax. 
(b)  The city secretary may issue a duplicate tax permit to an owner if the owner's tax permit is lost, stolen, or destroyed. The fee for a duplicate permit is $5.00. 
(c)  A tax permit shall be securely attached to the coin-operated machine for which the permit is issued in a manner that requires continued application of steam and water to remove the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1365, §§ II, III, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 12-19. - Sealing authorized; release fee. 
(a)  The city is authorized to seal any such coin-operated machine for which the tax is not timely paid. 
(b)  A fee of $5.00 shall be paid for the release of each coin-operated machine sealed under the provisions of this article in addition to the occupation tax so owed. 
(Ord. No. 1365, §§ II, III, 3-11-08) 
Secs. 12-20-12-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1221, § 1, adopted April 12, 2005, repealed the former article III, §§ 12-36-12-48, 12-61-12-71, in its entirety, which pertained to massage business and masseurs, and derived from Ord. No. 318, §§ 1-24, adopted April 26, 1977. 

Secs. 12-36-12-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND TRANSIENT VENDORS OF MERCHANDISE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1161, §§ 1-15, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, repealed article IV and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former article IV, §§ 12-86-12-89 and 12-101-12-110, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 158, §§ 1-13, adopted Nov. 3, 1970; and Ord. No. 377, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 1978. 
State Law reference- Home rule municipality may license any lawful business subject to police power, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-86. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Peddler means any person who engages in commercial activities within city limits by carrying goods or merchandise and selling or offering for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house-to-house, business-to-business, or upon public property. 
    Solicitor means any person who solicits or attempt to solicit, from house-to-house, business-to-business, or upon public property, funds or orders for services, commercial goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions or publications to be delivered at a future date or time. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-87. - Hours of operation. 
    No peddler or solicitor may conduct activities defined in section 12-86 except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 12, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-88. - No solicitor signs. 
    Any peddler or solicitor who conducts or attempts to conduct business at a place where a sign clearly indicates that solicitors or peddlers are unwelcome is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 13, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-89. - Violation/penalty. 
    Any person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or through criminal negligence violating any of the provisions of this article is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than allowed by law ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 14, 12-12-02) 
Secs. 12-90-12-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 12-101. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in business within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city's zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 2, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-102. - Exemptions. 
    The following are excluded from permitting provisions: 
(1)  Newspaper carriers; 
(2)  Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them; 
(3)  Locally based nonprofit organizations; 
(4)  Religious proselytizing or distribution of religious literature; 
(5)  Political speech; or 
(6)  Canvassers who attempt only to solicit political support or to determine opinions or sentiments. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 3, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-103. - Written application required. 
    Any person desiring to engage in activities as a peddler or solicitor within the city must complete and file a written application for permit with the zoning department, which application shall give the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's name, telephone number, address, birth date, physical description, and either: 
a.  Driver's license number and state; or 
b.  Social security number and an official, government-issued picture identification card; 
(2)  If the applicant is peddling or making solicitations for any commercial organization, the name, telephone number and address of such organizations; 
(3)  Full and complete list of goods to be sold and/or services to be delivered; 
(4)  For each individual involved in the peddling or solicitation campaign; name, telephone number, address, birth date, physical description, and either: 
a.  Driver's license number and state; or 
b.  Social security number and an official, government-issued picture identification card; 
(5)  Description (year, make, type) and license plate number and state of all vehicles to be used in soliciting and peddling; 
(6)  Applicant must provide original identifying documents to zoning department upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 4, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-104. - Fees. 
    All peddlers and solicitors not exempted by section 12-102 shall pay an application fee to the city's police department as stated in the fee schedule adopted by the city council and amended from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, repealed the former § 12-104 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 12-104 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1161, § 5, adopted Dec. 12, 2002. 
Sec. 12-105. - Denial. 
(a)  A copy of the application for permit will be referred to the police department which will undertake an investigation of the applicant's record and background, such as shall be reasonably necessary to protect the public. An application for permit under this article may be denied where: 
(1)  Required application information is incomplete or incorrect; or 
(2)  Applicant is currently wanted on warrant for arrest. 
(b)  If the zoning department denies a permit, the applicant may appeal the decision in writing to the city manager or his nominee, who may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the zoning and police departments. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 6, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-106. - Issuance; duration. 
(a)  If the zoning department finds that the application is completed in conformance with sections 12-103 through 12-105, a permit shall be issued within five working days. The permit shall be the original application under section 12-103, with an official stamp indicating approval. Each permit will be valid for the time period stated. 
(b)  The permittee is required to notify the zoning department before any peddling or soliciting under the issued permit is conducted on any new calendar date other than the date stated on the issued permits. At this time, the permittee will update any information required under section 12-103 that has changed. 
(c)  The zoning department will retain one copy of the approved permit for official records. The permit may not be represented as an endorsement or approval by the city of the purposes of a solicitation or a product offered by the permittee. 
(d)  Only those peddlers or solicitors whose names are listed on the approved application may conduct business under the issued permit. If any new peddlers or solicitors join the campaign after the original permit is issued, they must supply the zoning department with the information required in section 12-103. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 7, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-107. - Display. 
    Each peddler or solicitor will carry his or her permit at all times while engaging in business in the city. Upon request or demand, the peddler or solicitor will exhibit the permit to indicate compliance with all of the relevant requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 8, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-108. - Nontransferability. 
    Permits issued under the provision of this article are not transferable in any situation and will be clearly marked "Not transferable." 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 9, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-109. - Suspension. 
(a)  The zoning department or its designee may, upon documented complaint or violation of law, suspend and confiscate a permit issued under this article. 
(b)  Peddlers and solicitors whose licenses are suspended have three business days during which to request an administrative review of the suspension. If request for administrative review is not made within three working days, the permit is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 10, 12-12-02) 
Sec. 12-110. - Revocation. 
(a)  Upon permittee's request the zoning department shall provide the permittee with written notice containing particulars of any and all complaints against him or her, and the time, date and place for an administrative review of the suspension. 
(b)  The zoning department will conduct an administrative review to determine whether the permit shall be restored or revoked. 
(c)  After notice and review, the zoning department may revoke any permit issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent statements, omissions on permit application or in conduct of permitted business. 
(2)  Violation of law. 
(3)  Endangerment of public welfare, health or safety. 
(d)  If the zoning department revokes a permit, applicant may appeal this decision in writing to the city council, which may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the zoning department. 
(e)  Revocation of any permit shall bar the permittee from eligibility for any person under this article for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 11, 12-12-02) 
Secs. 12-111-12-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 841, adopted Sept. 12, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ A-Q of such ordinance as a new Art. V was at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-201. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities", or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Live Oak or his designated agent. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following. 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" if provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or areola of the female breasts. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offer for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult novelty store, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area existed on October 1, 1988. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the building; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 841, § A, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-202. - Interpretation, gender and number. 
    The use of the masculine herein includes the feminine; the use of the singular includes the plural. 
(Ord. No. 841, § O, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-203. - Inspections. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, fire department and planning department, as well as health inspector and building inspector, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 841, § E, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-204. - Escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 841, § K, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-205. - Nude model studios. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(b)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 841, § L, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-206. - Adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 841, § M, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-207. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is on the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) above commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 841, § N, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-208. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of this article is punishable as a class "C" misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided by subsection (a), any person violating a provision of this article, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $2,000.00. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 12-205 and section 12-221 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 12-221 that each item of descriptive printed, film or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Ord. No. 841, § D, 9-12-89) 
Secs. 12-209-12-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-221. - Required; application; inspection. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 12-207 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 12-207. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the planning department, health department, fire department and building official. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 12-222 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses a valid permit and/or license pursuant to any other ordinances of this city does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a permit or license pursuant to any other ordinance of the city shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this article as well as such other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 841, § B, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-222. - Issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the city health officer to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the planning department, health department, fire department and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(8)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated that he is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(9)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with sections 12-202 through 12-208 and section 12-228 and Ordinance No. 840. 
(10)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penalty Code: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses described in Chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code: 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; 
(iii)  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualifications of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense in subsection (a)(10) may qualify for a sexually oriented business only when the time period required by subsection (a)(10)b. has elapsed. 
(d)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 841, § C, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-223. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is $500.00. 
(b)  If an applicant is required by ordinance of this city to obtain a license or a permit pursuant to any other applicable ordinance, for the business at a single location, payment of the fee for the sexually oriented business license shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, payment of any other fees required by other applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 841, § D, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-224. - Expiration. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 12-221. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the chief of police denies a renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the chief of police finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 841, § F, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-225. - Suspension. 
    The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 12-202 through 12-208 and section 12-228 E, and Ordinance No. 840. 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 841, § G, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-226. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 12-225 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A license has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection 12-222(a)(10)a. for which the time period required in subsection 12-222(a)(10)b. has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 12-222(a)(10)a., for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Section 21.01, Texas Penalty Code; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 12-222(a)(10)b. has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 841, § H, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-227. - Appeals from denial, suspension or revocation. 
    If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, he shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police in suspending or revoking a license until the board of adjustment and appeals makes a final decision. If, within a ten-day period, the chief of police suspends, revokes or denies issuance of any other permit pursuant for the same location involved in the chief's actions on the sexually oriented business license, then the chief may consolidate the requests for appeals of those actions into one appeal. 
(Ord. No. 841, § I, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-228. - Transfer. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 841, § J, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 12-229. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license as provided in this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 841, § O, 9-12-89) 
Chapter 13 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; emergency preparedness, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention and protection, Ch. 9; municipal court, Ch. 14; police, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Enforcement of traffic laws; authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the city's duly appointed police officers, to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and of article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes, within the city, and to arrest violators of this chapter and such statute and to file complaints against such violators. 
(b)  The chief of police and the city's duly appointed police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, police officers of the city may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. No. 235, § V, 10-30-73) 
Sec. 13-2. - Obedience to police officers. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Ord. No. 235, § V(B), 10-30-73) 
State Law reference- Obeying warning signs, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.501; obeying warning signs and barricades, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.501. 
Secs. 13-3-13-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 13-16. - Stop sign and through streets. 
(a)  All stop sign traffic control devices situated at those intersections hereafter designated from time to time, which shall be octagonal in shape and shall bear the word "STOP" in lettering plainly visible for a distance of at least 100 feet along the street upon which such signs are situated, are hereby established as, declared to be, and adopted as lawful and official traffic control devices requiring and giving notice to drivers of all vehicles to stop and otherwise conform to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The streets designated from time to time as through streets at the intersections mentioned or referenced, and all streets mentioned or referenced which intersect, cross or form a junction with such designated through streets are designated as stop sign streets. 
(c)  The intersections formed by streets designated from time to time are hereby designated to be intersections at which both of the intersections or joining streets are stop sign streets. 
(Ord. No. 235, § I, 10-30-73) 
Sec. 13-17. - Operation of motorcycle, etc., on public and private property restricted. 
    No person shall drive or operate any motorcycle, motor-bike, mini-bike, or any motor powered two-wheel vehicle on any privately owned grounds (other than those owned by him or which he has permission to use) or on any publicly owned property other than a roadway or driveway or parking area. 
(Ord. No. 333, § 9-13-77) 
Sec. 13-18. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-19. - Speed regulations. 
(a)  All maximum prima facie speed limits for vehicles traveling upon certain portions of streets and highways located in the city shall be adopted pursuant to ordinance as may be required by law and shall be on file with the city secretary's office. 
(b)  The prima facie maximum lawful speed limit on the highways and access roads which are excluded from the above referenced 20 miles per hour limit shall be the limit set by the Texas Highway Department, pursuant to the authority of Article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 235, § II, 10-30-73) 
Sec. 13-20. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-21. - Passing in school zone prohibited. 
    No vehicle of any kind shall pass any other vehicle, or commence or carry out any passing movement at any point within any school crossing zone within the city. 
(Ord. No. 133, § I, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 13-22. - Left turns into school parking lots. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to turn left into school parking lots as follows: 
(1)  Drivers traveling west in the 12300 block of Welcome Drive at Ed Franz Elementary School. 
(2)  Drivers traveling west in the 7700 block of Narrow Pass at Crestview Elementary School. 
(b)  This prohibition of left turns as described in subsection (a) above shall be in effect during school days only and between the hours of 6:30 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m. 
(c)  Any person found to violate this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not more than $75.00. Each continuing day's violation under this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1461, §§ 1, 3, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 13-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1551 , § 1, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed § 13-23, which pertained to load limits and oversized vehicles on Lookout Road and derived from Ord. No. 1533 , § 1, adopted July 12, 2016. 
Secs. 13-24-13-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as collision laws are covered by the Texas Transportation Code, and at the direction of the city, the former section 13-23, which pertained to negligent collisions and derived from Ord. No. 134, § 2, adopted February 26, 1970, has been repealed in its entirety. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 13-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as parallel parking is addressed in the Texas Transportation Code, and at the direction of the city, the former section 13-36, which pertained to parallel parking required and derived from Ord. No. 235, § III(B), adopted October 30, 1973, has been repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 13-37. - Parking so as to obstruct driveways prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, having registered in his name or owning or operating or having in charge any vehicle, knowingly to allow or suffer or permit the same to stop, stand or be parked in any street in the city in violation of any of the provisions of this section or other ordinances of the city regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 235, § III(C), 10-30-73) 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Texas Transportation Code § 545.302. 
Sec. 13-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as lamps on parked vehicles are addressed in V.T.C.A., Texas Transportation Code § 547.383, and at the direction of the city, the former section 13-38, which pertained to lamps on parked vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 235, § III(A), adopted October 30, 1973, has been repealed in its entirety. 
State Law reference- Lighting requirements on parked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.383. 
Sec. 13-39. - Specific motor vehicles restricted. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Motor carrier, for the purpose of this section is defined to include trucks and truck tractors with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity which exceeds 3,000 pounds and/or total outside width, including any load thereon of over 80 inches. Motor carrier for the purpose of this section does not include those vehicles that fall under the definition of "Light Truck" as defined in the Texas Motor Vehicle Laws (V.A.C.S. 6701d, Article I, Subdivision I, Section 2h). 
    Motorboat means any vessel propelled or designed to be propelled by machinery, whether or not the machinery is permanently or temporarily affixed or is the principal source of propulsion. 
    Outboard motor means any self-contained internal combustion propulsion system, excluding fuel supply, which is used to propel a vessel and which is detachable as a unit from the vessel. 
    Owner means a person who rightfully claims lawful possession of a vessel by virtue of the legal title or an equitable interest. 
    Recreational vehicles, for the purpose of this section are defined as any vehicle subject to registration by the state department of transportation which would be used for camping, temporary housing while camping, or outdoor events commonly associated with camping to include, but not exclusive of, boating, jet skis, or the like. 
    Semitrailer means a vehicle that is designed or used with a motor vehicle so that part of the weight of the vehicle and its load rests on or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Specific motor vehicles, for the purpose of this section are defined as any vehicle subject to registration by the state department of transportation which exceeds 80 inches in total outside width, including any load thereon, of over 80 inches in total outside width. 
    Trailer means a vehicle that is designed or used to carry a load wholly on the trailer's own structure and is drawn or designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Vessel means any watercraft, other than a sea plane on water, used or capable of being used for transportation on water. 
(b)  A motor vehicle is deemed abandoned if the motor vehicle: 
(1)  Is inoperable, is more than five years old; and has been left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(3)  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property for more than 48 hours. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or driver of any motor carrier and specific motor vehicles as previously defined, to park said vehicle on a public street within the corporate limits of the city, Bexar County, Texas except when receiving or delivering property which is not the property of the owner or operator of said motor carrier to any person or place within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, person in control or driver of any vessel, outboard motor, semitrailer, trailer or other types of structural objects to place them on a public street within the corporate limits of the city. 
(e)  Abandoned motor vehicles as defined above shall be subject to removal from either public streets or public property when they remain on same for a period that exceeds 48 hours. 
(f)  Abandoned vehicles declared a public nuisance. 
(1)  Abandoned motor vehicles, vessels, outboard motors, trailers or semitrailers and other objects placed on the city's public streets or public property tend to reduce the value of private property, invite vandalism, create fire hazards, are attractive nuisances creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors and produce urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and such personal property is therefore declared to be a public nuisance when maintained on public streets or public property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to park and leave unattended any abandoned motor vehicles as defined herein on public streets or public property for a period in excess of 48 hours. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any individual, company or corporation to leave or permit to remain on public or private property or upon public rights-of-way, within the city, the above described personal property for any period of time. It shall be an exception to this section to permit the parking of recreational vehicles on city streets for the purpose of preparing said vehicles for utilization prior to and following said use by owner-operator. Said preparation shall not exceed 48 hours in duration. 
(4)  Whenever it is brought to the attention of city police officers or its code compliance officer that such personal property or abandoned motor vehicles are left unattended and are in violation of this section on public property or public rights-of-way, a notice shall be placed on said personal property advising the owners or persons in control of such property that they are in violation of this section and that it must be removed immediately by owner or it will be removed by city authorities or as to abandoned motor vehicles within 48 hours if not removed from the public streets or public property. 
(g)  Removal of personal property from public property or public rights-of-way. 
(1)  After notice has been delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises on which an abandoned motor vehicle or other personal property is located, and same has not been removed from such public property or public rights-of-way, the chief of police of the city, members of the police department of the city, or the city's code compliance officer, acting under the direction of the chief of police, or any other authorized person may, if said nuisance has not been abated, remove or cause to be removed the abandoned motor vehicle or other personal property which was the subject of such notice to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or the city storage yard for impounded vehicles. 
(2)  Once such personal property is impounded the same shall be kept in storage for a period of 21 days and the city's agents, servants and employees shall notify the owners and/or lienholders, if known, that said personal property may be redeemed by paying impoundment and storage charges incurred during said 21-day period. When any abandoned motor vehicles or other personal property have remained in storage in the storage area provided by the city, the chief of police may dispose of same by removal to a scrap yard or by sale to a demolisher for the highest bid or offer received therefor or to remove same to any suitable site operated by the city for processing scrap or salvage. 
(3)  Out of the proceeds of same the chief of police shall pay for the cost of removal and storage and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto (either the owner or lienholder). 
(4)  If there is not a bid or cash offer for the abandoned motor vehicle the chief of police may dispose of same by causing it to be demolished or removed to a place provided by the city council, or by permitting it to be removed by a demolisher who is willing to do so for the benefit of the junk or parts he can salvage. 
(5)  The chief of police is charged with the enforcement of this section but he may delegate said authority to the city code compliance officer and/or police officers of the city. 
(h)  Penalty. In any prosecution arising hereunder, it shall not be necessary to allege a specific culpable state of mind, and the same is hereby dispensed with. Nor shall it be necessary for the prosecution to negate any exception to this section, but the same shall constitute an affirmative defense to such prosecution. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(i)  Savings clause. The changes in this section apply only to an offense committed on or after the effective date of this section. Any offenses committed before the effective date of this section are covered by the ordinance then in effect (Ordinance No. 959) when the offense was committed, and the former ordinance is continued in effect for that purpose. For purposes of this section, an offense was committed before the effective date of this act if any element of the offense occurred before that date. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 3, 12-11-79; Ord. No. 959, 8-10-93; Ord. No. 1020, 1-30-96; Ord. No. 1232, §§ 1-25, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 13-40. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle shall have the meaning set out in section 2 of article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes. 
    Fire lane shall mean any area designated by the city to be kept free and clear of parked vehicles or any obstruction whether on the ground, overhead or at the side to allow the movement of fire or other emergency vehicles or personnel to and from public streets, fire hydrants, buildings and structures. 
    Park or parking shall be defined as a vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle that shall be found standing or parked in any area designated and marked as "No Parking Zone." 
(b)  Designation. Fire lanes shall be designated as follows: 
(1)  Generally. Fire lanes shall be designated in accordance with the Specification dated July 31, 1979. 
(2)  New construction. All new site and building plans shall be reviewed for determination of need for fire lanes. Where determined necessary, no building permits shall be issued until such required fire lanes are designated and added to the site plan. Permits shall include such designated fire lanes and signs. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the fire lanes have been striped and the necessary signs erected. 
(3)  Existing construction. 
a.  When existing buildings or structures have been reviewed and the need for fire lanes determined, a plan showing such designated fire lanes shall be prepared by the city and delivered to the property owner. Such transmittal shall contain the basis for the requirement, shall state the time allotted for compliance and state the procedure for filing an objection. 
b.  The property owner shall be required to make the necessary marking, install the signs and clear any obstructions within 30 days of the date of forwarding the plan unless an objection is filed within 15 days of the date of forwarding the plan. 
c.  Making the necessary markings, purchasing and installing the sign and clearing the obstructions shall be at the sole expense of the property owner. 
d.  Where the designation of fire lane(s) reduces the parking spaces below the minimum required by the zoning ordinance, such designation shall constitute approval for a variance reducing the parking space requirement by the number of spaces eliminated by the fire lane. 
(4)  Maintenance of markings and signs. 
a.  It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the markings and signs in a clear, legible condition. 
b.  If, on inspection, any of the markings or signs are found to be in an unsatisfactory condition a notice of violation shall be transmitted to the property owner. 
(c)  Unlawful to park unauthorized vehicles. It is hereby declared to be unlawful to park any vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle in any fire lane established hereto 
(d)  Towaway and impoundment of vehicles. Any vehicle that shall be found standing or parked in any designated fire lane shall be immediately subject to being towed to the designated area of the city for impounded vehicles. 
(e)  Summons to be issued for parking violation. A summons or notice to appear in answer to a charge of parking in violation of this section, specifying the location of the fire lane in which such violation occurred and the date and time of such violation, may be issued by any police officer or any member of the arson investigating unit of the fire department. 
(f)  Unlawful to remove signs. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority to remove or attempt to remove any sign designating a fire lane erected pursuant hereto. 
(Ord. No. 403, §§ 2-7, 7-31-79) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 13-41. - Unrestricted parking prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any motor vehicle as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, and further including a motorboat, outboard motor, or a vessel subject to registration under applicable state registration laws to park or allow the same to be parked in the front yard, rear yard or side yards as established by the city zoning ordinance in any of the following residential districts: pre-development (PD), single-family residential (R-1), garden home residential (R-2), two-family residential (R-3) or townhouse residential (R-4). 
(b)  It shall be lawful and permissible for owners of such vehicles to park or allow such vehicles as above defined only in driveways or garages of their respective residential homes. The driveways shall be, at the minimum, constructed of concrete or asphalt, in accordance with the city's current subdivision ordinance. The construction of the driveway or parking areas on existing homes will be grandfathered that have gravel or tar base, if the original and primary driveway was gravel. 
(c)  The authority to enforce the provisions of this section shall be vested in the code compliance officer of the city or such other person as may be designated by the city manager. 
(d)  Proof that said vehicle was, at the date of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense, shall constitute prima facie evidence that said vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged by said owner, but the owner shall have the right to rebut such presumption by introducing evidence to show that said vehicle was not parked by him as charged in the complaint. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(f)  Inasmuch as this section is passed pursuant to the city's police powers, it shall be unnecessary to allege a culpable state of mind for any violations hereof and the same is hereby dispensed herewith. 
(Ord. No. 1217, §§ 1-6, 1-25-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1217, §§ 1-6, adopted January 25, 2005, repealed and reenacted § 13-41 to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 13-41 pertained to parking in front yards restricted, and derived from Ord. No. 621, §§ 1-3, adopted April 9, 1985. 
Secs. 13-42-13-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles as nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072; abatement of nuisance junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.071-683.078. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 13-56-13-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- 

Sec. 13-71. - Definition. 
    As used in this division, "abandoned motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than five years old and is left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the rights-of-way of any designated county, state or federal highway within this state for more than 48 hours or for more than 12 hours on any turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 2, 7-25-78; Ord. No. 869, § 1, 6-26-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 13-72. - Unlawful to leave in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave parked or standing in any public street, alley or other public place any abandoned motor vehicle as hereinafter defined, for a longer continuous period of time than 48 hours. 
(b)  No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name, or under his care, management or control, to park or stand in violation of this division. The same is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and the fact that such vehicle is unattended or unoccupied by any person shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner of such automobile unlawfully and knowingly parked such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 359, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-78) 
Sec. 13-73. - Removal. 
    Motor vehicles or other vehicles illegally parked or standing in violation of this division shall be removed or impounded in the same manner as provided for removal of motor vehicles under Revised Civil Statutes article 4477-9a, sections 5.02 through 5.07. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 4, 7-25-78) 
Secs. 13-74-13-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JUNKED VEHICLES AND STREET STORAGE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1125, §§ 1-17, adopted December 12, 2000, amended division 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 3 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 870, §§ 1-17, adopted June 26, 1990. At the discretion of the editor, the title of division 3 was changed from "Junked Vehicles" to "Junked Vehicles and Street Storage" with the codification of Ord. No. 1454, adopted July 26, 2001. 

Sec. 13-86. - Short title. 
    This division may be cited as the "Junked Vehicles and Street Storage Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 1454, § I, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 13-87. - Definitions. 
    The following terms whenever used or referred to in this division shall have the following respective meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
    Antique auto means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
    City shall mean the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert the motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles. 
    Inoperable means a passenger car or truck that is not functioning or not operable. 
    Junked vehicle means a motor vehicle that is self propelled and: 
(1)  Displays an expired license plate/sticker or an invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate; or does not display a license plate or motor vehicle inspection certificate; or 
(2)  Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded or inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
a.  Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
b.  Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
    Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A, Transportation Code ch. 501 et seq.). 
    Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicle; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Police department shall mean the police department of the city. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 2, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 1159, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 1454, § I, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 13-88. - Junked vehicles declared a public nuisance. 
    Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the state, by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the municipalities in the state, and such vehicles are therefore declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 3, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-89. - Making it unlawful to create or to maintain such nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual, company or corporation to leave or permit to remain upon public or private property (except as hereinafter provided), or upon public rights-of-way, within the city any junked vehicle or parts or portion thereof, for any period of time in excess of seven days. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 4, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 1454, § I, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 13-90. - Notice to code compliance officer of the city. 
    The code compliance officer, and when necessary, with the assistance of city police officers is authorized and directed to administer the procedures for abatement and removal of public nuisances inasmuch as he is a regularly salaried, full-time employee of the city. As such an enforcement officer he may, when accompanied by a city uniformed police officer enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
(1)  Whenever it is brought to the attention of the code compliance officer of the city, that a nuisance, as defined herein, exists either on public or private property in the city, he shall give or cause to be given to the person maintaining or suspected of maintaining said nuisance, in writing, a ten-day notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten days, and further that a request for hearing must be made before the expiration of said ten-day period, said written notice to be mailed, by certified or registered mail with a five-day return requested, to the owner or occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists, and also to each lienholder of record of the nuisance. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date 11 days from the date of such return. 
(2)  A public hearing shall be had prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance, and it shall be held before the municipal judge of the city, when such hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located, within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. Any resolution or order requiring the removal of the vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 5, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 1159, 10-29-02) 
Sec. 13-91. - Order by municipal judge. 
    After the hearing is held by the judge of the municipal court of the city, as herein provided, if said municipal judge finds that such a nuisance as herein defined exists he shall order the owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located to remove such junked vehicle within ten days after said order is given to such owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any such person to whom such order is given to fail or refuse to comply therewith and to remove such junked vehicle within the time provided by said order. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 6, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-92. - Duty of owner or occupant of the premises. 
    In the event the owner or occupant of the premises does not request a hearing as hereinabove provided it shall be his duty to comply with the provisions of the notice given him and to abate such nuisance within ten days after the date of the receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 7, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-93. - Vehicles not to be made operable. 
    After a vehicle has been removed in accordance with or under the terms and provisions of this division, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 8, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-94. - Notice to state highway department. 
    Notice shall be given to the state highway department within five days after the date of removal identifying the vehicle or part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 9, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-95. - Where article does not apply. 
    This division shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(3)  Antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on his property, provided that the vehicles and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means. By the term "other appropriate means" is meant either a custom made or a manufactured tarpaulin which conforms to the contours of the automobile and totally covers the vehicle so as to entirely obscure it from view. The tarpaulin must be maintained in good condition (no rips, holes or tears, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 10, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 1159, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 1454, § I, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 13-96. - Administration of this division. 
    The administration of this division shall be by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 11, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-97. - Removal of vehicle. 
    Within ten days after notice has been delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises on which a junked vehicle is located if a hearing is not requested, or if a hearing is requested, within ten days after an order requiring the removal of such junked vehicle has been served upon or delivered to the owner or occupant or the premises on which said vehicle is located, the chief of police of the city, members of the police department of the city, or the city's code compliance officer, acting under the direction of the chief of police, or any other duly authorized person may, if said nuisance has not been abated, remove or cause to be removed the vehicle which was the subject of such notice to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or the city storage yard for impounded vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 12, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-98. - Sale or disposal of vehicles. 
    When any junked vehicle has remained in the storage area provided by section 13-97, for not less than ten days, it shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city, to dispose of same by removal to a scrap yard or by sale to a demolisher for the highest bid or offer received therefor or to remove same to any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 13, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-99. - Disposition of sale proceeds. 
    Out of the proceeds of same the chief of police shall pay for the cost of removal and storage and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto (either owner or lienholder). 
    If there is not a bid or offer for the junked vehicle the chief of police may dispose of same by causing it to be demolished or removed to a place provided by the city council, or by permitting it to be removed by a demolisher who is willing to do so for the benefit of the junk or parts he can salvage. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 14, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-100. - Chief of police may delegate. 
    Wherever the chief of police is charged with the enforcement of this division, he may delegate said authority to any regular salaried employee of the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 15, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-101. - Purview of this division. 
    It is not intended by this division to make provisions pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles as that term is defined by the "Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act." 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 16, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 13-102. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate the terms and provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, and each and every day this division is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 17, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 1454, § I, 7-26-11) 
Secs. 13-103-13-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NON-CONSENT TOWING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , adopted Sept. 29, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 13-103-13-133. In order to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 13-121-13-127, 13-141-13-165. 

[DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL] 

Sec. 13-121. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of this article and any subsequent amendments thereto to prescribe the basic regulations for the operation of the City of Live Oak ("city") and City of Live Oak Police Department ("police department") towing service in emergency situations and in the removal of vehicles that are abandoned, involved in an accident, or constitute an obstruction to traffic because of mechanical failure. It is the purpose of the city council in enacting this article to provide a fair and impartial means of distributing requests for towing services among qualified franchises, and to ensure that such service is prompt and reasonably priced, and in the best interests of the public as well as the interest of efficient policing operations for the removal of such vehicles from public streets. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle has the meaning assigned by the Texas Transportation Code, Chapter 683, as amended. 
    Application means the application forms furnished by the city. 
    City means the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term does not include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle. 
    Department means the Live Oak Police Department. 
    Franchise agreement means an agreement between the city and a franchisee for the purposes of providing towing services as provided in this chapter. 
    Franchisee means a certain tow truck operator or tow truck/wrecker service owner to which the city council may, by the adoption of a resolution or ordinance, grant a nonexclusive franchise for purposes of providing towing services to the city under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Motor vehicle means any motor driven or propelled vehicle, required to be registered under the laws of this state or that can be legally operated on a roadway. 
    Operator means a holder of the franchise agreement set forth herein. Only one person or company may be an operator regardless of the fact that the owner owns another towing business that may qualify to be granted a franchise agreement. 
    Non-consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow; provided however, that nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to abridge the rights of an owner or operator of a vehicle involved in a traffic accident or incident. 
    Owner means any person who holds the legal title of a motor vehicle or who has the legal right of possession thereof or the legal right of the vehicle. 
    Street means any street, alley, public place, square or highway within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Tow truck has the meaning assigned by the Texas Administrative Code [Title 16], Section 86 definitions as amended. 
    Towing company has the meaning assigned by the Texas Administrative Code [Title 16], Section 86 definitions, as amended. 
    Vehicle means every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved only by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include trailers and semitrailers. 
    Vehicle storage facility means any vehicle storage facility that is properly licensed by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-123. - Administration. 
(a)  The police chief or his designee shall establish rules, administer and enforce this article pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, as well as any terms or conditions specified in the ordinance or resolution granting the franchise and the franchise agreement. 
(b)  The police chief may adopt rules for the administration and enforcement of this article. The rules provided for in the franchise agreement must be reasonably designed to promote public health and safety and ensure that: 
(1)  Towing companies and tow truck drivers are able to perform their responsibilities under this article and carry adequate liability insurance; 
(2)  The police chief is able to determine the correct identity and qualifications of individuals licensed under this article; 
(3)  Towing companies responding to the scene of an accident respond reasonably promptly; 
(4)  Tow trucks responding to an accident or incident scene have the appropriate capabilities to deal with damaged or noncompliant vehicles at the scene; and 
(5)  Tow trucks are operated in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the provisions of this article and state law. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-124. - Tow truck operator franchise. 
    The city council may at its discretion, by adoption of an ordinance or resolution, grant a nonexclusive franchise to a tow truck operator ("franchisee") to provide towing services to the city under and pursuant to the provision of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-125. - Towing services provided by franchisees only. 
(a)  All towing services performed for the city shall be provided only by a towing company that has obtained a franchise from the City of Live Oak. A franchise is not required under the following situations: 
(1)  Operators performing towing services for entities or persons other than the City of Live Oak; 
(2)  Operators performing towing services at the direction of the city when no franchisee is available or able to perform such services or cannot provide such services in a timely manner. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-126. - Nonexclusive franchise. 
(a)  All franchises granted pursuant to this article shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term specified by city council in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise hereunder and in the franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(b)  The city council may award one or more franchises for towing services and no provision of this chapter shall be deemed to require the city council to grant a franchise if the city council determines that the grant of any such franchise is not in the best interest of the city and the public. 
(c)  All franchisees shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified in this chapter, as well as any terms or conditions specified in the franchise agreement. 
(d)  The city council may prescribe such other terms and conditions, not in conflict with this chapter, as are determined by the city council to be in the best interest of the city and the public. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-127. - Selection of franchisee. 
(a)  All selection of the franchisees shall be done through an application process. All interested tow truck operators shall file with the police chief or designee an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city; which shall provide the following information, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Completed owner information sheet for each owner or partner of service; 
(2)  Copy of vehicle storage facility license; 
(3)  Copy of vehicle storage facility insurance; 
(4)  Documentation evidencing either worker's comp or occupational insurance; 
(5)  Copy of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation cab card for each tow truck; 
(6)  Copy of liability insurance card for each tow truck policy with minimum coverage limit in the amount of $1,000,000.00; 
(7)  Copy of current registration and inspection for each tow truck; 
(8)  Copy of current list of licensed drivers, to include incident management certification 
(9)  Confirmation of compliance with Title 16, § 86.710 of the Texas Administrative Code "Drug Testing Policy." 
(b)  The police chief or designee shall evaluate the qualifications of the tow truck operator to ensure the applicant is capable of providing the required services pursuant to the franchise agreement and in compliance with all applicable federal, state laws and local regulations. 
(c)  Within ten days of approval of application, operator must provide certificate of liability insurance naming City of Live Oak as an additional insured with 30 days written notice before cancellation or termination. 
(d)  The initial enrollment year will be determined by city council. Every two years thereafter, a new rotation list will be opened for any qualified towing company to apply and submit documents and information for enrollment, unless a sooner period is deemed necessary by the chief of police, at his sole discretion. The deadline for application submittal will be January 31 of each enrollment year. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Secs. 13-128-13-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISE 

Sec. 13-141. - Tow truck driver qualifications. 
(a)  Prior to a driver operating a tow truck for tows in connection with the Live Oak Police Department tow service rotation list ("rotation list"), each driver must obtain a City of Live Oak tow truck drivers permit. The application for the permit will be available from the City of Live Oak Police Department. The requirements for obtaining a City of Live Oak tow truck driver permit are as follows: 
(1)  Complete all information contained on the Application; 
(2)  Provide photos - front and profile; 
(3)  Copy of Texas driver's license; and 
(4)  Copy of TDLR incident management ID. 
(b)  City of Live Oak tow truck driver permits will be issued at the discretion of the police chief or his designee after a review of the application and supporting documents and the criminal background of the applicant. City of Live Oak tow truck driver permits may be revoked by the chief of police or his designee for any violation of the law, the franchise agreement, driver misconduct, or any other action or inaction deemed inappropriate by the chief of police or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-142. - Appeals. 
(a)  If an operator's application or driver's permit is denied or, after approval to participate in the city's rotation list, an operator or driver's participation privilege is removed/revoked, the following appeals procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Operator/driver shall file a written notice of appeal with the city secretary within ten days from the decision of the police chief or designee. 
(2)  The city secretary shall provide notice to the city manager of the appeal and set up a date and time for the hearing. 
(3)  The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager. The only issue to be decided at the hearing is whether any violation of the terms of the franchise agreement occurred that would justify suspension or termination of the agreement/license. 
(4)  The burden of proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence and shall be placed upon the city to demonstrate removal from the rotation list/driver's permit is appropriate. 
(5)  After conducting the hearing, the city manager will either sustain the action of the police chief or designee or issue an order to reinstate the operator or driver. 
(6)  Any decision by the city manager shall be final. 
(b)  The filing of a notice of appeal shall not stay the removal of the operator or driver from the rotation list until a final decision is rendered by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-143. - Rotation system. 
(a)  The tow truck operators who obtain a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall provide towing services to the city pursuant to the rotation system established by the police chief. The city, through the police chief or his designee, reserves the right to establish a rotation system for either light duty, heavy duty or a combination. 
(b)  The chief of police, or his designee, will maintain the rotation list consisting of eligible tow truck services. The rotation list will be maintained in alphabetical order. The tow truck company will handle all services for a period of seven days starting on Monday at 7:00 a.m. and ending the following Monday at 7:00 a.m. At the conclusion of this seven-day period the next tow truck company in alphabetical order will take over services for seven days in the same manner. This process will repeat itself until such time the alphabetical list is exhausted and at that point the process will start over again in the same manner. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-144. - Rates. 
(a)  Franchisee shall not charge towing rates in excess of the rates established by the city. 
(b)  This fee shall be complete compensation for all services rendered in connection with the performance of the tow, cleanup, and removal of wreckage or debris resulting from an accident involving the towed vehicle. 
(c)  Storage fees shall be charged by calendar day except that vehicles stored 12 hours or less shall be charged no more than one day [of] storage. 
(d)  Franchisee shall not charge an impound fee or storage fee in excess of the rates established by the Texas Administrative Code. 
(e)  Franchisee shall maintain a sign listing the rates and charges of all towing and storage services. Such sign shall be conspicuously posted in the office or other location clearly visible where customer financial transactions are processed. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-145. - Franchise fees. 
    The city council finds that in lieu of imposing a franchise fee, the city will require operators to perform the occasional tow of any city owned vehicles at no charge when requested to do so by authorized city personnel, including the city's police department. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-146. - Franchise agreements. 
    All franchises granted by the city council pursuant to this article shall be memorialized in a written franchise agreement between the franchisee and the city and approved by city council. The franchise granted therein shall be non-transferable unless prior consent is obtained from the city. The franchise agreement shall provide for immediate suspension or termination of the franchise granted under this chapter in event that the franchisee fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter and/or the franchise agreement. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-147. - Towing fee study. 
(a)  In this section, a "towing fee study" is a study to determine the fair market value of a non-consent tow originating in the city. 
(b)  The city may periodically conduct a towing fee study to ensure the established fees for services are within an acceptable range. Based on the results of the towing fee study, the city council may change the non-consent towing fees. The maximum fees must represent the fair market value of the services of a towing company performing non-consent tows originating in the city. The city shall give notice of the council meeting where the towing fee [study] results will be considered to each towing company that owns or leases tow trucks under a franchise. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-148. - Formalized complaint system. 
    The police department shall establish and maintain a formal complaint system to be used by members of the public wishing to complain about tow truck company services. The creation, maintenance and investigation of complaints lie within the authority of the police department. In addition, all permitted towing companies will notify the police department of any and all complaints received that are related to services rendered under this contract within five business days of receiving the complaint. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-149. - Solicitation of business prohibited. 
    No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city the business of towing any vehicle which is wrecked or disabled on a public street, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing said vehicle. Proof of the presence of any tow truck or motor vehicle marked with tow truck advertising that is owned or operated by any person engaged in the tow truck business, either as owner, operator, employee or agent, on any public street in the city, at or near the scene or sites of a wreck, accident or collision, within one hour after the happening of a wreck, accident or collision, shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this section. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-150. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  A tow truck under this article will not charge any fees in excess of rates established by city council. The rates charged shall be based on the gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle being towed and not the wrecker equipment that actually performs the tow. If there is a situation in which rates established by the state apply and those rates are in conflict with city rates, the towing company will comply with state regulations. The permitted towing service rate schedule is as determined by city council, attached as Exhibit B. [6] 
(b)  The bill for towing of any motor vehicle shall be itemized to reflect the services performed, labor or other materials required and any other charges and a copy provided electronically to the police department within ten calendar days, when requested. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note- Exhibit B to Ordinance No. 1524 is on file in the offices of the city secretary or police department. 

Sec. 13-151. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
    When any officer is placing an evidentiary hold or considers a vehicle under investigation, the city permitted tow truck service shall be called and will transport the vehicle to the location designated by the officer or the tow truck service vehicle storage facility. The city permitted tow truck service will secure the vehicle at the vehicle storage facility so as to protect any evidence that may be recovered from the vehicle. Once the evidentiary or investigative hold has been released, the city permitted tow truck service will contact the owner of the vehicle to make disposition arrangements, as soon as possible. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-152. - City permitted tow truck service to keep records. 
The  city permitted tow truck service shall maintain at its garage or storage location, records as to all vehicles moved by it after being notified to do so by personnel of the police department in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-153. - Content of records. 
(a)  Tow truck drivers shall provide each vehicle owner or agent at the scene a receipt verifying transportation and/or storage of vehicle. The receipt will contain at least the following information: 
(1)  Case number - Assigned by the police officer. 
(2)  Identification of the vehicle. 
(3)  Identification of the driver/owner. 
(4)  Date/time and location of the occurrence. 
(5)  Destination, contact information and cost of the tow/impound to include any added fees. 
(6)  Notation of whether or not there is a "hold" on the vehicle. 
(b)  The records required to be kept by the city permitted tow truck service shall contain the following information: 
(1)  An inventory log of all vehicles which are in an impoundment status to include the following: 
a.  Case number; 
b.  Invoice number; 
c.  Vehicle and registration information; 
d.  Date and time of impoundment; 
e.  Hold status to include date of release; 
f.  Name of person releasing vehicle; 
g.  Current amount of storage fees assessed; 
h.  Any release dates; 
i.  Make, model and serial number of the disabled vehicle moved by the city's permitted tow truck service; 
j.  Location from which the disabled vehicle was removed to include date and time of removal; 
k.  Total amount charged for towing (copy of the itemized bill); 
l.  Storage rate per day; 
m.  Description of all personal property within the disabled automobile at the time of its removal; and 
n.  Manner in which vehicle was disposed of. 
Monthly inventory will be sent via email to the Live Oak Police Department Records Unit (email address will be provided by the agency), Attention: Vehicle Impounds. 
(c)  The above-described records shall be preserved by the tow truck business for 36 months from and after the date said business comes into possession of the disabled automobile, or until the disabled vehicle is released from the possession of the tow truck business, whichever length of time is longer. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-154. - Records available to police. 
    The records required to be kept by the provisions of sections 13-120 and 13-121 shall be made available to the personnel of the police department by the tow truck franchisee at any reasonable time. City permitted towing companies will file a monthly report of vehicles towed as non-consent or non-preference for the police department with the police records section. This report must contain the information prescribed in section 13-121 and shall be submitted by the fifth day of the following month. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-155. - Lien for towing and storage fees. 
(a)  The vehicle storage facility shall provide notice of the possession of the vehicle to the owner, in accordance with the provisions of state law and to the police department; a copy of the certified, return receipt requested, letter of notice sent to the owner and a copy of the certification paper received by the vehicle storage facility from the post office after delivery of the certified notice. 
(b)  Unless specified by law, the city shall not be held liable for any towing and storage fees incurred. 
(c)  When a motor vehicle has been towed and placed in storage as a result of a police request, where the city may be liable under law, the city permitted tow truck service will notify the police department when the vehicle has remained for a period of 30 days under hold. The city permitted tow truck service may be compensated for towing and storage fees, not to exceed the minimum daily rate set by law or a total of $1,000.00 for any vehicle which the city may be found liable for expenses under the law. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-156. - City permitted tow companies to provide 24-hour operation. 
    The city permitted tow companies shall provide service contemplated by this article on a 24-hour basis, seven days a week. Maintain minimum office operating hours for storage facilities of Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., including holidays. Provide and maintain a telephone system that is operated in person 24 hours a day. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-157. - Response time. 
    The city permitted tow companies will arrive at the location of the vehicle to be towed within 20 minutes after receiving the request. City-owned vehicle or assist calls other than police business must have a 35 minute response time. Time will be extended to 45 minutes for requests that require heavy duty or specialized equipment. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-158. - Duty of tow truck operator. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the tow truck operator responding to a call to provide all labor, equipment and material to safely remove any vehicle from public streets, ways or other public property as directed by the city manager, assistant city manager, chief of police, fire chief or director of public works, or their designated representative. 
(b)  The tow truck operator must be able to provide and use as necessary materials needed to clean up and/or to contain normal fluid spills such as, but not limited to, radiator fluid, gasoline leaks, oil leaks, said cleanup shall be in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. This requirement does not include large, abnormal spills that require HAZMAT or truck transport companies to respond. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-159. - Qualifications of tow truck drivers. 
    All drivers of tow truck vehicles shall be a minimum of 18 years of age, possess a current Texas driver's license and must be certified in accordance with the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation incident management towing operator requirements. In addition, all drivers shall maintain compliance with TDLR criminal conviction guidelines. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A) , 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-160. - Tow truck operators to comply with traffic regulations. 
    Unless directed otherwise by a police officer a tow truck operator shall adhere to all traffic regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-161. - Standards of conduct for towing companies and tow truck drivers. 
(a)  A towing company or tow truck driver under this article shall adhere to the following standards of conduct: 
(1)  Abide by all reasonable instructions of police officers, fire fighters, EMS, other first responder personnel and city officials at the scene of an accident. 
(2)  Not engage in price gouging. Price gouging shall consist of charging a fee that is in excess of the prices listed with the police department. 
(3)  Respond to the location as directed by the police dispatcher within 20 minutes after notice. City-owned vehicle or assist calls other than police business must have a 35-minute response time. Time will be extended to 45 minutes for requests that require heavy duty or specialized equipment. 
(4)  Promptly notify the police department if the permit holder cannot respond within 20 minutes. 
(5)  Allow tow trucks, vehicle storage facilities and business premises to be inspected as required by provisions of this article. 
(6)  At all times while in operation on behalf of the city, drivers shall carry the city issued tow truck operator id card. All tow trucks shall display a city issued sticker. 
(7)  Towing companies shall have sufficient qualified personnel and equipment to provide services at all times to meet the needs of the police department. 
(8)  Use due care in the maintenance of the security of vehicles that are stored. 
(9)  Ensure that all of its tow trucks and required equipment are maintained and in compliance with Texas Transportation Code, Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, Texas Administrative Code, Texas Occupations Code and all other applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
(10)  Use due care to maintain the tow trucks in optimum operating condition. 
(11)  Use due care not to unreasonably interfere with the personnel at the scene of an auto accident and the orderly arrival at the scene of the tow truck called by the police department from the rotation list. 
(12)  Use due care to clean the site at the scene of the accident. 
(13)  Abide by all the terms as denoted in this article. 
(14)  The operator shall obtain and maintain during the term of the agreement all necessary insurance, licenses, permits and certificates required by law, including the city's regulations, for the conduct of the operator's activities and for the provision of services hereunder, including a business license issued by the city. 
(15)  Conduct themselves in a courteous, customer-service oriented and professional manner at all times. 
(16)  Upon receiving a complaint from any source claiming damage or loss to a vehicle or its contents towed by a tow truck operator, the operator shall submit a written report to the chief of police or his designee within 24 hours after receipt of such complaint. Such reports shall contain all facts pertinent to the claim or complaint presented. 
(17)  Franchisee shall be responsible for the acts of its employees and agents while on duty and for damage to towed vehicles while in its possession. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-162. - Required equipment. 
(a)  Towing companies are required to maintain wrecker and equipment as follows: 
(1)  Maintain available at all times a minimum of the following: Four light duty wreckers with a minimum of one ton or larger chassis equipped with a minimum of an 8,000-pound power driven winch and one of the wreckers must be a flatbed. One medium-duty wrecker with a minimum of a three-ton or larger chassis equipped with a minimum of a 16-ton boom and two 15,000-[pound] winches, 12,000 pounds under lift and the capabilities of towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating from 10,001-26,000 pounds. 
(2)  Carry as standard equipment safety chains, fire extinguisher (a minimum of five pounds), crow bar or wrecking bar at least 36 inches in length, broom designed for pushing with an 18-inch head and a handle at least 36 inches in length, shovel with a flat edge at least nine inches wide and a handle of at least 36 inches, road flares or reflective triangles, a container for carrying glass and debris, string, rope or straps suitable for securing doors, hoods, trunks, etc., and a towing dolly (flatbed shall be excluded on towing dolly). 
(3)  Wreckers will be equipped with outside rearview mirrors, one on each side of the vehicle. 
(4)  Auxiliary tail light kits to be used on all vehicles when being towed. 
(b)  Each heavy-duty tow truck must comply with the requirements in subsection (a) of this section unless this subsection specifies a different requirement. 
(1)  Shall have available one heavy duty wrecker with a minimum 25-ton boom, equipped a minimum of a 25,000-pound power driven winch, and 35,000-pound underlift. 
(2)  Carry as standard equipment safety chains, fire extinguisher (a minimum of ten pounds) crow bar or wrecking bar at least 36 inches in length, broom designed for pushing with an 18-inch head and a handle at least 36 inches in length, shovel with a flat edge at least nine inches wide and a handle of at least 36 inches, an axe, road flares or reflective triangles, a container for carrying glass and debris, string rope or straps suitable for securing doors, hoods, trunks, etc. 
(3)  Towing dollies are not required. 
(4)  Wreckers will be equipped with outside rearview mirrors, one on each side of the vehicle. 
(5)  Auxiliary tail light kits to be used on all vehicles when being towed. 
(c)  All vehicles and equipment shall meet the minimum vehicle safety standards as set forth by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and shall display unexpired Texas motor vehicle inspection stickers. The towing company shall provide the chief of police with a copy of the unexpired active tow company and vehicle storage facility licenses issued by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. 
(d)  An emergency warning light device shall be mounted on the wrecker, amber in color, alternately flashing or rotating, mounted as high as possible and as far to both left side and right side as possible, so as to be visible to the front and rear of the vehicle at all times when in operation. The warning device should be in operation from the time the tow truck arrives at the scene until the time of departure. The warning devices (amber) may be used, if necessary, for departure at the scene during travel to the storage facility, using the most expedient route. At no time shall a tow truck display a red light to the front of the vehicle. 
(e)  The police chief or his designee can amend these equipment requirements as necessary to meet industry standards or the city's service expectations. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-163. - Reporting and auction of abandoned vehicles. 
    City permitted towing companies shall report abandoned or unclaimed vehicles in their possession to the police department, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code Ch. 683, Abandoned Motor Vehicles. The department may designate another place or person to which that notification will be made. Vehicles abandoned at a vehicle storage facility as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683, shall be disposed of in accordance with appropriate statutory, police department authority or by a duly authorized agent. Failure by a towing company to make reports to either the police department or its designated contractor and to fully cooperate with either the police department or its designated contractor during the auction or disposal process shall be deemed grounds for permit revocation. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-164. - Suspension or cancellation of permitted towing companies. 
(a)  Any applicant who makes application under this article and is permitted by the city and is called by the police department under the terms of this article shall be required to respond to any authorized call. The chief of police or his designee may remove the towing company from service for any, but not limited to the following reasons: 
(1)  Passing on or failing to respond within the time limit to five calls in a 30 day period; 
(2)  Passing on or failing to respond within the time limit to 15 calls within a 12-month period; 
(3)  Causing undue damage to vehicles picked up or any other act of incompetency of operation; 
(4)  Intoxication or incompetency of a tow truck operator; 
(5)  Failure to maintain required insurance; registration, or operator and facility licensing; 
(6)  Failure to allow the chief of police or his designee to periodically make safety inspections of the tow truck or tow trucks, the tow truck service facilities, and/or the vehicle storage facility, as required herein; 
(7)  Failure to comply with the requirements of Section 13-130, pertaining to required equipment; 
(8)  Failure to reasonably comply with any provisions of this chapter; or 
(9)  The making of any false statement as to a material matter in an application for a permit, or permit renewal, or in a hearing concerning the permit or services required by this chapter. (Franchisees found to have made any false statements shall be removed from the city rotation list immediately and shall not be eligible to have its name replaced on the city rotation list for a period of at least 24 months from the date of removal.) 
(b)  Violations of this sections warranting removal of towing companies from the rotation list can range from seven, 14, or 21 days, 24 months or permanent depending on the severity of the violation. 
(c)  Any towing company that receives a total of three suspensions in a 12-month period shall have its permit terminated immediately. That towing company shall not be eligible to reapply for a permit for a 24-month period commencing on the date of termination. 
(d)  Any towing company that believes they cannot fulfill all of the terms of the permit for which they have been permitted under this chapter may apply to the chief of police for cancellation of the permit. Under this chapter, the cancellation of the permit decision rest with the chief of police. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Sec. 13-165. - Notice of denial, suspension, cancellation or revocation; appeal. 
(a)  Every denial, suspension, termination or revocation of a permit shall be in writing, shall be dated and shall state the reason for such denial, suspension, termination or revocation. Such notice shall be sent to the towing company by certified mail or by personal service. The denial, suspension, termination or revocation shall be effective on the date of the written notice. 
(b)  Towing companies, whose permit has been denied, suspended, terminated or revoked, may working days after the date of notice, submit a written request to the city manager for an appeal of the denial, suspension, termination or revocation. 
(c)  The City Manager or his designee shall set a date for hearing not later than seven working days following the receipt of the notice of appeal. Within five working days after such hearing, the city manager or his designee shall sustain or reverse the denial, suspension, termination or revocation. Written notice of the decision shall be given to the towing company. 
(d)  If no appeal is made within the time and by the method hereby provided, the denial, suspension, termination or revocation shall be final and binding and shall exhaust any administrative remedies. 
(e)  In the case of a suspension, after the period of suspension as herein determined, the tow truck service may apply for reinstatement of the permit. The original permit may be reinstated provided that the towing company meets all other qualifications for a permit. 
(f)  In the case of denial, termination or revocation of a permit, the towing company may reapply for a permit after a period of 12 months. 
( Ord. No. 1524, § 1(Exh. A), 9-29-15) 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7; administration, Ch. 2; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15; police, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1096, §§ 1-8, adopted October 12, 1999, has been treated as amending article I, §§ 14-1-14-8 in their entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, §§ 14-1-14-8 pertained to general provisions of the municipal court, and derived from Ord. No. 714, §§ I, III, adopted July 1, 1969; Ord. No. 529, § 1, adopted August 30, 1983; Ord. No. 749, § 1, adopted August 25, 1987; Ord. No. 912, § 1, adopted September 10, 1991. 

Sec. 14-1. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a municipal court of record to be known as the municipal court of the city which shall be comprised of its present municipal court. Any reference hereafter to the court of municipal court shall be understood to mean the municipal court of the city. The court shall be deemed always open for the trial of causes. 
    The city council shall provide the municipal court with a seal with a star of five points in the center and the words "Municipal Court of Live Oak, Texas." The impress of the seal shall be attached to all papers, except subpoenas, issued out of the court and shall be used by each municipal judge or the city secretary to authenticate all official acts of the clerk and the judge. 
(Ord. No. 1096, §§ 1, 9, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 14-2. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Jurisdiction of the court shall be as granted by the Charter and ordinances of the city, and any laws of this state that may now exist or may hereafter be passed by the legislature of this state, regulating or increasing the jurisdiction of the municipal courts in cities the size and grade of the city. 
(b)  Such jurisdiction shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Exclusive original jurisdiction within the city's territorial limits and property owned by the city located in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction in all criminal cases that arise under the ordinances of the City of Live Oak and are punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 in all cases arising under the city's ordinances or resolutions, rules, or orders that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, other than the dumping of refuse, $4,000.00 in cases arising under the city's ordinances that govern the dumping of refuse; and $500.00 in all other cases arising under a city ordinance; 
(2)  Exclusive original jurisdiction over cases arising in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as provided by law; 
(3)  Concurrent jurisdiction with the justice court of a precinct in which the city is located in all criminal cases arising under state law that arise within the territorial limits of the city or property owned by the city located in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction and that are punishable only by a fine or arise under V.T.C.A., Chapter 106, Alcoholic Beverage Code, and do not include confinement as an authorized sanction; 
(4)  In this section, an offense which is punishable by "fine only" is defined as an offense that is punishable by fine and such sanctions, if any, as authorized by state statute not consisting of confinement in jail or imprisonment; 
(5)  The fact that a conviction in a municipal court has as a consequence the imposition of a penalty or sanction by an agency or entity other than the court, such as a denial, suspension, or revocation of a privilege, does not affect the original jurisdiction of the municipal court; 
(6)  The municipal court has jurisdiction in the forfeiture and final judgment of all bail bonds and personal bonds taken in criminal cases of which the court has jurisdiction; 
(7)  Exclusive civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under V.T.C.A., Subchapter A, Chapter 214, Local Government Code, or Subchapter E, Chapter 683, Transportation Code; 
(8)  Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under V.T.C.A. Subchapter B, Chapter 54, Local Government Code, within the municipality's territorial limits and property owned by the municipality located in the municipality's extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances; and 
(9)  The authority to issue search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violation and seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending property and removing the debris from the premises. 
(10)  Jurisdiction in appeals taken from a dangerous animal determination made by the animal control supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 2, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 1530, § I , 5-10-16) 
Sec. 14-3. - Judge. 
    The court shall be presided over by the judge of the municipal court. He shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two years and must be a licensed attorney in good standing in this state and must have at least two years of experience in the practice of law in this state. The judge must be a citizen of the United States and of this state and shall devote as much time to the office as it requires. The judge is entitled to compensation from the city, the amount of which is to be determined by the city council and may not be diminished during the judge's term of office. The judge's compensation may not be based directly or indirectly on fines, fees, or costs collected by the court. The judge may be removed from office by the city council at any time for incompetence, misconduct, malfeasance, or disability. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 14-4. - Judicial powers. 
    The judge shall take judicial notice of the city ordinances and the corporate limits of the city in a case tried before the municipal court. The municipal judge may grant writs of mandamus, injunction, and attachment and other writs necessary to the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the court and may issue writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the offense charged is within the jurisdiction of the court. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 4, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 14-5. - Appointment by council. 
    The city council shall appoint a qualified person to fill the office of municipal judge whenever the occasion arises. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 5, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 14-6. - Alternate judge. 
    The city council may appoint one or more qualified persons to be available to serve for a municipal judge who is temporarily absent due to illness, family death, or continuing legal or judicial education programs or for any other reason. The presiding judge of the municipal court, if there is no chief judge, shall select one of the persons appointed by the city council to serve during an absence. An alternate judge, while serving, has all the powers and shall discharge all the duties of a municipal judge. An alternate judge must have the same qualifications as a municipal judge. If the judge of a municipal court is disqualified or recused in a pending case, the judge of another municipal court located in an adjacent municipality may sit in the case. A municipal court judge may not sit in a case for another municipal court judge under this section if either party objects to the judge. An objection must be filed before the first hearing or trial, including pretrial hearings, over which the judge is to preside. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 6, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 14-7. - Clerk. 
    The city secretary shall be, ex officio, the clerk of the municipal court of record and may hire, direct and remove the personnel authorized in the city's annual budget for the clerk's office. The clerk or the clerk's deputies shall keep the records of the municipal court of record, issue process, and generally perform the duties for the court that a clerk of the county court exercising criminal jurisdiction is required by law to perform for that court. The clerk shall perform the duties in accordance with statutes, the City Charter and city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 7, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 14-8. - Commencement of operation. 
(a)  The court shall commence operating as a court of record on November 1, 1999. The municipal court shall convene to hear causes on the first and third Tuesdays and the last Thursday of each month at 5:00 p.m. 
(b)  All cases filed in the court prior to such date, but not disposed of prior to that date, shall be tried in the court of record. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a case shall be deemed "disposed of" if the judge has entered a finding of guilty or the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere. 
(d)  The court shall continue to function under its previous powers and authorities as a municipal court of the city until such date as the court of record commences operation. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 8, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 14-9. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  A municipal court technology fund is hereby created. After September 1, 1999 any defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court of the city shall pay a technology fee of $4.00 as a cost of court in addition to such other costs of court that may be presently or hereafter imposed as court costs upon conviction for such misdemeanor offenses. 
(b)  A person is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on a person; 
(2)  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the municipal treasurer, or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to a municipal treasurer, for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court technology fund. 
(d)  Funds derived from the technology fees may be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the city municipal court of record, including: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticker writers; and 
(8)  Docket management systems. 
(e)  The municipal court technology fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(f)  The change in law made by this section applies only to a cost on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999. A cost on conviction for an offense committed before September 1, 1999 is covered by the law in effect when the offense was committed, and the former law is continued in effect for that purpose. For purposed of this section, an offense was committed before September 1, 1999 if any element of the offense occurred before that date. 
(Ord. No. 1090, §§ 1-5, 7, 8-31-99) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1090, §§ 1-5, 7, adopted August 31, 1999, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 14-9 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-10. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  A municipal court building security fund is hereby created. After the passage of this section any defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court of the city shall pay a security cost fee of $3.00 in addition to such other costs of court that may be presently or hereafter imposed as court costs upon conviction for such misdemeanor offenses. 
(b)  A person is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on a person; 
(2)  The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the city finance director, or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to a municipal treasurer, for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund. 
(d)  Funds derived from the municipal court building security fund fees may be used only to finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing security for buildings housing the municipal court of the city, namely: 
(1)  The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Handheld metal detectors; 
(3)  Walk-through metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)  Signage; 
(8)  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking system; 
(9)  Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices; 
(10)  The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; and 
(11)  Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1091, §§ 1-4, 8-31-99) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1091, §§ 1-4, adopted August 31, 1999, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 14-10 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-11. - Time and place for sessions. 
    The following new times, dates and place for the municipal court of record are hereby established as follows: 
Court sessions will be conducted in the Live Oak City Hall, 8001 Shin Oak Drive, Live Oak, Texas the first and third Tuesdays of the month commencing at 1:30 p.m. until adjournment and the last Thursday of each month commencing at 4:30 p.m. until adjournment. 
(Ord. No. 1154, § 1, 7-30-02) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1154, § 1, adopted July 30, 2002, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 14-11 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-12. - Issuance of citations. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Citation means an ordinance violation notice and notice to appear before the city municipal court, as provided for in this section. 
    City means the City of Live Oak, a home-rule municipality located in Bexar County, Texas. 
    Person means any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision, or legal entity of any kind. 
(b)  Administration. 
(1)  Relation to related laws. A citation issued pursuant to this section 14-12 does not relate to authority of a peace officer to issue a citation pursuant to V.T.C.A, Code of Criminal Procedure art. 14.06(d) or V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.003. 
(2)  Authority to issue citations. Pursuant to this section 14-12, and the scope of their assigned duties, a citation may be issued of the following individuals so designated by the city council: 
a.  Code enforcement officer(s); 
b.  Animal control officer(s); 
c.  Building inspector(s). 
(3)  Form and content of citation. A citation issued under this section 14-12 must be in a form approved by the municipal court clerk that includes the following information: 
a.  The name, address, date of birth, and/or driver's license number, physical description, and telephone number of the person cited; 
b.  The offense for which the person is charged; 
c.  The date and location of the offense; 
d.  A deadline to contact the municipal court; 
e.  A statement requiring the person receiving the citation to appear at municipal court on or before the deadline indicated on the citation; 
f.  A statement of the person's promise to respond to the citation, pursuant to V.T.C.A, Code of Criminal Procedure art. 27.14, by the deadline indicated on the citation, including a place for the person cited to provide the person's signature; and 
g.  The signature of the person issuing the citation. 
(4)  Pleading subsequent to issuance of citation. All pleas arising from the issuance of a citation under this section 14-12 shall be made pursuant to V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 27.14. 
(c)  Related offenses and penalty. 
(1)  Ordinance violation of promise to appear. A person issued a citation, as authorized by this section 14-12, commits an offense if the person fails to appear or enter a plea pursuant to subsection (b)(4) on or before the deadline to appear indicated on the citation as authorized by V.T.C.A., Penal Code art. 38.10. 
(2)  Interference or obstruction of issuance. A person commits an offense if the person interferes with or obstructs the issuance of a citation under this section 14-12. 
(3)  Providing false of fictitious name. A person commits an offense if the person gives a false or fictitious name, address, or other information to an individual authorized to issue a citation under this section 14-12. 
(4)  Penalty. Each violation under this section 14-12 is a misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 per offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1362, 2-13-08) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1362, adopted February 13, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 14-12 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 14-13-14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 14-20. - Adopted. 
    The city council confirms and adopts the rules, regulations, practices and procedures for the municipal court of the city now in existence and as subsequently amended and compiled by the municipal judge. These rules governing the practices and procedures for the court are codified in a manual maintained and kept by the municipal court clerk and shall be open for inspection and copying by the public during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 909, § 1, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 1097, § 1, 10-12-99) 
Editor's note- A copy of the rules and regulations adopted in § 14-20 is attached to Ord. No. 1097 and, together with the ordinance, is on file in the office of the city. 
Sec. 14-21. - Preparation of complaint. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all local law enforcement officers to turn in to the court clerk every summons written. The clerk shall then, according to instructions of the prosecutor, type the complaint, see that it is properly signed and acknowledged by the affiant, and duly filed. 
(b)  If the prosecutor is of the opinion that a case cannot be successfully prosecuted, he shall so note on the case jacket and the defendant shall forthwith be advised that no complaint is being filed. If the complaint in such case has already been filed, the prosecutor shall recommend dismissal of such case in open court, and such case shall be dismissed. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 1(1), 2-26-70) 
Sec. 14-22. - Disposition of the case; fine schedule. 
    There shall be a schedule of fines, approved by the city council for certain offenses, which shall be printed on the reverse side of the copy of the summons that is left with the defendant. The defendant may, if he shall elect, pay to the clerk such fine as is shown on the schedule and accordingly enter his plea of nolo contendere. No fine shall be accepted which is not in accord with the schedule, unless set by the judge. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 1, 2-26-70; Ord. No. 356, 7-7-78; Ord. No. 748, 8-25-87; Ord. No. 778, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 779, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 780, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 781, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 782, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 783, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 784, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 785, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 786, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 787, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 788, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 789, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 792, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 794, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 851, § 1, 11-14-89; Ord. No. 916, 10-8-91; Ord. No. 945, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 961, 8-31-93; Ord. No. 1057, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 1162, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 1348, 11-27-07) 
Editor's note- Ordinances amending the schedule of fines referred to in § 14-22 are listed in the history note enclosed in parentheses at the end of the section. 
Chapter 15 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; municipal court, Ch. 14; police, Ch. 19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Abandoned iceboxes, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to place, or allow to be placed, outside of any building or dwelling in a location accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, freezer, or any other container of any type that has an airtight snap lock or other locking device without first removing the lock or doors from such icebox, refrigerator, or container. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 3-29-94) 
State Law reference- Leaving refrigerator accessible to children, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.012. 
Sec. 15-2. - Advertising on public or private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print, stamp or indent letters, words or figures, on any fence, tree, post, building, wall, sidewalk or bridge in this city, or to post bills/notices on any fence, utility pole, building, wall, sidewalk or bridge, in this city, without having first obtained the consent of the parties owning or controlling the same. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 2, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-3. - Distributing or scattering handbills in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast or distribute or cause or permit to be thrown, cast or distributed any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard or other advertising matter whatsoever in or upon any street or public grounds or other places of the city within the corporate limits thereof; provided that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the delivery of any such matter by the United States Postal Service, or prohibit the distribution of copies of newspapers regularly sold by the copy or subscription. This section is not intended to prevent the lawful distribution of anything other than commercial and business advertising matter. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 3, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-4. - Throwing handbills in parked vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit, or cause to be thrown, placed or deposited, any circular, dodger, handbill or other advertising or printed matter of any character whatsoever, in or on any vehicle parked or standing upon or along any street or other public place within the city, without the expressed consent and permission of the owner or person in charge of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 4, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-5. - Maintenance of order. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, manager or proprietor of any theater or other place of amusement within the city to permit any vociferous language, loud hallooing, cursing or swearing, within such theater or place of amusement. Such places shall be conducted in a peaceable and orderly manner, so that no individual in the neighborhood may be disturbed thereby. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 5, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-6. - Discharges into streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to run or discharge any fluid or water containing oil, grease, lye, or excessive mud/filth, on or into any of the public streets within the city. This would include discharges from washing machines and other appliances. 
    Spots on walks or driveways may be dissolved and washed in the manner described above, but the flushing of liquid oil, grease, kerosene, naphtha, or other solvents detrimental to asphalt, into city streets shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 6, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-7. - Glue; sniffing, sale, prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein no person shall sell, offer for sale, deliver or give to any individual under the age of 17 years, any glue or cement commonly known as model airplane glue, plastic cement, household cement, cement, or any other similar substance, if such glue or cement contains one or more of the following solvents: 
(1)  Toluol; 
(2)  Hexane; 
(3)  Trichlorethylene; 
(4)  Acetone; 
(5)  Toluene; 
(6)  Ethyl Acetate; 
(7)  Methyl Ethyl Ketone; 
(8)  Trichloromethane; 
(9)  Isopropanol; 
(10)  Methyl Isobutyl Ketone; 
(11)  Methyl Cellosolve Acetate; 
(12)  Cyclohexanone. 
(b)  The provisions of paragraph (a) above shall not apply where the glue or cement is sold, delivered or given simultaneously with and as part of a kit used for the construction of model airplanes, model boats, model automobiles, model trains or other similar models. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale any glue or cement containing one or more of the solvents named in paragraph (a) hereof with the intent of altering one's physical/mental facilities and/or obtain a euphoric effect. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 7, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-8. - Lifeguards. 
    All public bathhouses having a swimming pool are required to provide an attendant (lifeguard) who is an expert swimmer as defined by state standards, who shall be required to be on guard during the hours that such swimming pool is open for the use of bathers. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 8, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, the former section 15-9, which pertained to litter, trash, and waste material, and derived from Ord. No. 976, § 9, adopted March 29, 1994, has been repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 15-10. - Missiles/projectiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to shoot with bow and arrow, or to shoot or discharge any stone or other missile with or from a sling or from an elastic spring. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air gun or spring gun within 200 yards of any development residential, business or industrial area. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 10, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, the former section 15-11, which pertained to the tormenting, beating, etc. of police dogs, and derived from Ord. No. 976, § 11, adopted March 29, 1994, has been repealed in its entirety as similar provisions are covered by state law. 
Sec. 15-12. - Soil, removal of. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut sod or sward off, or remove earth or ground from any lot, street or common area in the city, without first obtaining the consent of the parties owning or controlling the same. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 12, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-13. - Toy gun, explosive, etc.; furnishing to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell to, give to, allow access to, or place in the possession of, any person under the age of 17 years, any firearm or toy gun capable of exploding and discharging any percussion cap or blank cartridge, or any other device of any description, capable of exploding and discharging any percussion cap or blank cartridge of any description. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 13, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1565 , § I, adopted June 26, 2018, repealed § 15-14, which pertained to carrying loaded rifle or shotgun; penalty and derived from Ord. No. 976, § 14, adopted March 29, 1994. 
Sec. 15-15. - Juvenile in possession of a pocketknife-Three-inch blade or greater. 
    It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to walk, stand, or be found in a public place within the corporate city limits of Live Oak and have in his/her possession any knife having a blade three inches in length or greater. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 15, 3-29-94) 
Sec. 15-16. - Firearms; discharge restricted. 
(a)  As used in this section, "firearm" means any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use. 
(b)  The discharge of firearms on private property within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending for a distance outside the city limits for a total of 5,000 feet, but not within the corporate limits of any other municipal corporation is further declared to be a nuisance. It shall be a defense to a prosecution for unlawfully discharging firearms within this area if the firearm was discharged under circumstances as may be excused and justified under the state penal code. 
(c)  In any prosecution for any violation of this section, it shall not be necessary for the prosecution to negative any proviso or exception, but the same may be raised by the defendant by way of defense. 
(d)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city for injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent the violation of this section. 
(e)  If any activities prohibited under this section are further proscribed by the state penal code or general statute, then, and in either of such events such statutes shall supersede and be applicable, and this section shall be expressly subordinated to such statutes or penal code. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, shoot or fire any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind any place within the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
(g)  Any violation of this subsection (f) shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 1, 7-26-70; Ord. No. 386, §§ 1(g), 3, 5- 7, 1-30-79) 
Sec. 15-17. - Culpable mental state. 
    A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under any penal ordinance of the city, unless the provision defining the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 7-27-99) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1089, § 1, adopted July 27, 1999, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 15-17 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 15-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1405, § I, adopted August 25, 2009, repealed the former section 15-18 in its entirety, which pertained to hand-held mobile telephones prohibited in active school zones, and derived from Ord. No. 1385, § I, adopted October 14, 2008. 
 Section 1 of Ord. No. 1408, § 1, adopted September 8, 2009, states the following: "The City of Live Oak hereby adopts and authorizes the enforcement of Texas Transportation Code and authorizes the placement of all signs necessary for the enforcement thereof." 
Sec. 15-19. - Sexual offenders. 
(1)  Findings. Sexual offenders who prey on children are a threat to public safety. This section serves the city's compelling interest to protect children against sexual predators by prohibiting: 
(1)  Certain sexual offenders from having a residence in areas around locations where children regularly congregate; and 
(2)  Certain sexual offenders from loitering within 300 feet of locations where children regularly congregate; and 
(3)  Certain sex offenders from entering public parks. 
(2)  Definitions. In this article: 
    City means the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Child area means any lot or tract of land that is used as a: 
(a)  School, playground, youth center, or video arcade facility, as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.134; 
(b)  Public park; or 
(c)  Private recreational facility, including a park, pool, playground, skate park, or youth athletic field: 
1.  Owned by a residential property owners association; or 
2.  For which an entrance, admission, or rental fee is charged. 
    Loitering remaining within 300 feet of any child area or public park under circumstances that would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect of that behavior is to facilitate or to conceal illegal activities. 
    Public park means any land designated for public recreation or any athletic field that is owned, leased, or maintained by the city. 
    Residence means a place within the city: 
(a)  That a person registers or verifies under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 62.152, as the persons residence; or 
(b)  Where a person resides for more than seven consecutive days. 
(3)  Sexual offenders residence prohibition. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person who is required by law to register with the Texas Department of Public Safety sexual offender database because of a violation of law involving a victim or an intended victim who was 17 years of age or younger, to have a residence within 1,000 feet of any child area. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement is made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the Residence to the nearest property line of the child area. The police department will maintain a map showing the child areas on file at the police department. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person who has a residence within 1,000 feet of a child area: 
1.  Is under 18 years of age and: 
a.  Has the residence with the persons parent or guardian; or 
b.  Has not been convicted of an offense after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived that: 
i.  Requires the person to register under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 62.001(5); and 
ii.  Involves a victim or intended victim who was 17 years of age or younger; 
2.  Established the residence and complied with all the sexual offender registration laws of the State of Texas prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and has not been convicted of an offense after the effective date of the ordinance that: 
a.  Requires the person to register under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 62.001(5); and 
b.  Involves a victim or intended victim who was 17 years of age or younger; or 
3.  Established the residence and complied with all sexual offender registration laws of the State of Texas prior to the date a new child area is established, and has not been convicted of an offense after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or the date the new child area is established, that: 
a.  Requires the person to register under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 62.001(5); and 
b.  Involves a victim or intended victim who was 17 years of age or younger. 
(d)  For purposes of subsection (c), a person is considered to have established a residence at the correctional facility, as that term is defined under V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.07(14), in which the person is confined for a conviction of any criminal offense and for more than seven consecutive days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(e)  It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that a person, who is required to register as a sex offender under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, was allowed by mistake or error of the city to register or verify a residence that is within 1,000 feet of any child area. 
(4)  Property owners prohibited from renting to sexual offenders. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a property owner to rent a residential property located within 1,000 feet of a child area to a person prohibited under this section from having a residence within 1,000 feet of any child area. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the property owner conducted a criminal history check with the Texas Department of Public Safety and reviewed the sexual predator registration database that is maintained by the Texas Department of Public Safety and that at the time the property owner conducted the criminal history check and reviewed the sexual predator database, the sexual offenders criminal history did not include a record of a sexual offense or the offenders name did not appear in the database. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement is made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the residence to the nearest property line of the child area. The police department will maintain a map showing the child areas on file at the police department. 
(5)  Sexual offenders prohibited from entering public parks. It is unlawful for any person to enter a park if the person is required by law to register with the department of public safety sexual offender database because of a violation of law involving a victim or an intended victim who was 17 years of age or younger. 
(6)  Loitering. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to loiter on a public way within 300 feet any child area if the person is required by law to register with the department of public safety sexual offender database because of a violation of law involving a victim or an intended victim who was 17 years of age or younger. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement is made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the location of the person to the nearest property line of the child area. The police department will maintain a map showing the child areas on file at the police department. 
(7)  Penalty. That any person found guilty of violating this section will be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. For purposes of subsections (3)-(6), each day of said violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1440, §§ 1, 3, 10-12-10) 
Secs. 15-20-15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE NUISANCES 

Sec. 15-31. - Defined. 
    Any loud, irritating, vexing, or disturbing noise which causes distress, annoyance, discomfort or injury to, or which interferes with the comfort and repose of, any person of normal sensibilities in the vicinity or hearing thereof, is declared to be a "noise nuisance," unlawful, and is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 1, 3-31-91) 
Sec. 15-32. - Enumerated. 
    The following acts, among others not hereinafter enumerated, are declared to be noise nuisances, unlawful, and in violation of the provisions of this article when such acts are done or accomplished or carried on in such a manner or with such volume, intensity, or with continued duration, so as to annoy, to distress, or to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of, persons of normal nervous sensibilities within the vicinity or hearing thereof: 
(1)  The playing of any radio, compact disc player, tape player, phonograph, juke box, nickelodeon, musical instrument, or any device capable of emitting a musical beat. 
(2)  Any loud or vociferous language or any soliciting for, or description of, any amusement house, moving picture theatre, or other like place of amusement, or for the performance therein, in the entrance thereto, the foyer or lobby hereof, or on the sidewalks adjoining the same. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal, fowl or bird, which makes frequent or long, continued noise. 
(4)  The continued or frequent sounding of any horn, siren, or other signal device on any automobile or vehicle, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal. 
(5)  The running of any motor of any automobile or vehicle, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle so out of repair, or so loaded, or so operated, as to create loud, grating, grinding, jarring, or rattling noise vibrations. 
(6)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, automobile, motorcycle, other motor vehicle, or boat, except through a muffler or other device which prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  The erection, including excavation, demolition, alternation, or repair work, on any building or other structure other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., seven days a week, except in cases of extreme and urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and convenience, and then only by permit obtained from, and issued by, the building inspector, which permit may be renewed during the time the emergency exists. 
(8)  The crying, calling, or shouting, in person or by a mechanical device, or the use of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn, loudspeaker, or phonograph with or without an amplifier, hand organ, or other devices or instruments, musical or otherwise, for the purpose of advertising any candidates for elective office, any goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of attracting attention to or inviting persons to any political rally, meeting or gathering, to any place of amusements, to any performance or show, to any business or activity whatsoever. 
(9)  The raucous shouting, whistling, yelling, singing, hooting or crying of peddlers, hawkers, vendors, or any other persons. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 1, 3-31-91) 
Sec. 15-33. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create or cause any noise nuisance, as that term is herein defined, within the corporate limits of the city or within 5,000 feet thereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, or allow to be created or caused, a noise nuisance, as that term is herein defined, within the corporate limits of the city or within 5,000 feet thereof. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 2, 3-31-91) 
Sec. 15-34. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 3, 3-31-91) 
Secs. 15-35-15-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1347, §§ 1-4, adopted November 27, 2007, amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1129, §§ 1-5, adopted March 13, 2001. 
State Law reference- Review of curfew ordinance every three years, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002; children taken into custody for violation of juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.059. 

Sec. 15-41. - Definitions. 
    Emergency shall include but not be limited to fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or obtaining immediate medical care for another person. 
    Guardian shall mean any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court order. 
    Minor shall mean any person over nine years of age and under 17 years of age. 
    Parent shall mean a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. As used herein, "parent" shall also include a court appointed guardian or other person 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 1, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 15-42. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to purposefully remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and midnight and 6:00 a.m. on weekends. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent having legal custody of a minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 2, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 15-43. - Defenses. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under section 15-42 that: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied by his or her parent; 
(2)  The minor was accompanied by another adult approved by the parents; 
(3)  The minor was on an emergency errand; 
(4)  The minor was attending a school, government sponsored, or religious activity or was going to or coming from a school, government or religious sponsored activity without detour or stop; 
(5)  The minor was engaged in lawful employment or volunteer work at a recognized charitable institution or was going to or coming from such activity without detour or stop. 
(6)  The minor was on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides or on the sidewalk of a place where the minor has permission from his/her parent or guardian to be or on the sidewalk of a next-door neighbor not communicating an objection to the police officer; 
(7)  The minor was upon an errand directed by his or her parent; 
(8)  The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation or transportation for which passage through the curfew area is the most direct route; 
(9)  The minor was exercising his or her First Amendment Rights protected by the United States or Texas Constitution, including, but not limited to the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly. 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 3, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 15-44. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class "C" misdemeanor as defined in the state penal code and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Family Code tit. 3. 
(b)  A parent of a minor violating this article shall be guilty of a class "C" misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(c)  In assessing punishment for either a parent or a minor, the judge of the municipal court is encouraged to consider the community service program. 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 4, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 15-45. - Review. 
    The city council shall review the juvenile curfew ordinance every three years from and after the date of passage hereof to determine. 
(1)  The effects on the community and on problems the ordinance is intended to remedy; 
(2)  To conduct a public hearing on the need to continue the ordinance; and 
(3)  If necessary or appropriate to abolish, continue, or modify this article. 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 5, 11-27-07) 
Secs. 15-46-15-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING IN CITY-OWNED BUILDINGS/FACILITIES 

Sec. 15-51. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply: 
    City owned buildings/facilities shall include the City Hall/Fire Department Complex (excluding the Fire Department Apparatus Room), the police department, all buildings within the public works/utility yard, the Live Oak Civic Center (excluding the fenced patio area), the Live Oak Clubhouse, the swimming pool, its patio and apron (excluding the grassy area), and all future buildings owned and operated by the city. 
    Smoking includes: 
(1)  Carrying or holding a lighted cigar, pipe, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, or 
(2)  The combustion of any cigar, cigarette, tobacco, or similar article, or any other combustible substance in any manner, or in any form, or 
(3)  Emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 1, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 2-28-95) 
Sec. 15-52. - Restrictions on smoking. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited inside of any city-owned building/facility as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 9-13-94) 
Sec. 15-53. - Signs. 
    Signs shall be visibly placed at each entrance to a city building/facility to notify persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited. This provision does not include those exits that are used exclusively as emergency exits. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 3, 9-13-94) 
Sec. 15-54. - Offense. 
    A person commits an offense if the person smokes in a city building/facility. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 4, 9-13-94) 
Sec. 15-55. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating this article shall be guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $1.00, nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 5, 9-13-94) 
Chapter 16 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration generally, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and protection, Ch. 9; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; planning, Ch. 17; police, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; zoning regulations, App. A. 
State Law reference- Authority of municipalities to operate and maintain parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.001; park to be open for public use under rules prescribed by local governing authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.007. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 17-16 et seq. 

Sec. 16-16. - Established; membership function. 
    There is hereby established a parks and recreation commission, hereafter referred to as commission, composed of seven regular members and three alternate members, to be appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 10-14-80; Ord. No. 457, § 1, 6-30-81) 
Sec. 16-17. - Terms of office, filling vacancies, and removal of members. 
    The term of three of the regular members and two alternate members of the commission created by this article will expire on September thirtieth of each odd-numbered year and the terms of four of the regular members and one alternate member shall expire on September thirtieth of each even-numbered year. Alternate members are required to attend commission meetings, and in the absence of a regular member, the chairman will appoint an alternate to be a voting member for that session of the commission. Regular members may be appointed to succeed themselves and alternate members may be appointed to fill vacancies for unexpired terms, but, no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two years. Newly appointed regular and alternate members will be installed at the first regular commission meeting after their appointment. The city council may remove regular and alternate members of the parks and recreation commission from office for malfeasance, conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, or two unexcused absences in a calendar year from regular meetings of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 438, § 2, 10-14-80; Ord. No. 457, § 2, 6-30-81; Ord. No. 1563 , § I, 5-29-18) 
Sec. 16-18. - Qualifications of members. 
    The members of the commission created by this article shall reside within the city limits. A member of the commission shall not be an employee of the city or an elected or appointed official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 438, § 3, 10-14-80) 
Sec. 16-19. - Meetings. 
    A majority of the members of the commission created by this article shall be present to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Meetings of the commission shall be held at the city municipal building at the call of the chairman or the city manager with a written agenda being posted as required by state statutes. Meetings will be open to the public except when closed sessions are authorized by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 438, § 4, 10-14-80) 
Sec. 16-20. - Powers and duties. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to: 
(1)  Recommend plans to the planning commission and the city council for developing, establishing, locating and expanding the city's park system. 
(2)  Establish and implement procedures and methods for the operation of present and future parks with council approval. 
(3)  Interpret the attitudes and the recreation needs of the city and determine and recommend a program to satisfy those needs. 
(4)  Receive complaints on the park operation and satisfy such complaints to the satisfaction of the commission and complainant within the authority vested in the commission. 
(5)  Formulate and submit a budget for the city park to the city manager for approval as specified by charter. 
(6)  Funds earned by the commission expressly for the park shall be disbursed by the commission, up to a maximum of $500.00, without council approval, after checking with the city manager to assure that expenditures are not duplicating city fund expenditures. 
(7)  Establish and direct a youth advisory committee, consisting of a number of members as deemed appropriate between the ages of 12 and 17. 
(Ord. No. 438, § 5, 10-14-80; Ord. No. 807, § 1, 8-9-88; Ord. No. 1563 , § I, 5-29-18) 
Sec. 16-21. - Certain powers and duties reserved to city council. 
    All powers and duties not expressly granted to the parks and recreation commission created by this article are expressly reserved for the city council. 
(Ord. No. 438, § 7, 10-14-80) 
Secs. 16-22-16-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 16-36. - Hours of operation; special permission required for use at other hours. 
    All city parks shall be open from 5:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. daily, except for permitted camping, and it shall be considered a violation of this article for any person or persons to use any part of the parks or park facilities during the closed hours without prior written permission, such permission to be considered only for the following uses: 
(1)  For large group special use activities, such as fairs, etc., when approved by the parks and recreation commission at their regularly scheduled meeting which is the first Monday of each month in accordance with section 16-19. 
(2)  For special activities, i.e., scouting groups camping, when approved by the city manager. 
(3)  For other presently unforeseen special events, when approved by the city manager and only when such permission would not constitute a nuisance to residents adjacent to any park area. 
(Ord. No. 442, § I, 1-27-81; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 5-25-82; Ord. No. 687, § 1, 5-13-86; Ord. No. 1412, § 2, 9-29-09) 
Sec. 16-37. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be possessed and/or consumed in all parks and recreational areas except in Friesenhahn Park. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages may neither be possessed nor consumed in the municipal parks before 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold at any functions licensed under this article without the applicant first obtaining a permit for such sales from the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
(Ord. No. 442, II, 1-27-81; Ord. No. 517, § 1, 5-31-83) 
Sec. 16-38. - Camping restrictions. 
    Camping, both overnight and daytime, will be allowed in the city parks and recreation areas by permit only, issued out of the office of the city secretary, however, no campfires will be permitted except in the designated areas where fire pits are already in place. 
(Ord. No. 442, III(1)(D), 1-27-81) 
Sec. 16-39. - Musical groups. 
    No musical groups will be allowed to perform in the city park without prior written permission of the city council. 
Ord. No. 442, § III(1)(F), 1-27-81) 
Sec. 16-40. - Peace officers required for certain gatherings. 
    At all gatherings held in the municipal parks there shall be one certified state peace officer to monitor such activities until the termination of the function licensed hereunder where there are a minimum of 35 through 99 persons unless no alcoholic beverages are otherwise served and/or consumed. Irrespective of whether alcoholic beverages are served and/or consumed there shall be one certified state peace officer to monitor and oversee the functions licensed hereunder where there are 100 to 399 persons at such function, two certified state peace officers where there may be 400 to 699 persons, three certified peace officers where there may be 700 to 999 persons at such function and four officers where there may be 1,000 or more persons at such function. 
(Ord. No. 442, § IIIa, 1-27-81; Ord. No. 517, § 1, 5-31-83) 
Sec. 16-41. - Glass beverage containers prohibited in Live Oak City Park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry onto or to possess within the Live Oak City Park any glass beverage container. 
(b)  Any person violating this section provision shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 672, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 16-42. - Facilities' regulations adopted by reference. 
(a)  The city shall charge fees for the city's park/recreational facilities, including the clubhouse, swimming pool, pavilion rentals, disc golf course and cross county course as stated in the fee schedule adopted by the city council and amended from time to time as necessary. 
(b)  The applicable regulations of city park use and associated facilities shall be governed in accordance with any agreements entered into with the user approved by city council and other regulations as adopted by staff and/or city council. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, repealed the former § 16-42 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 16-42 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 442, § IV, adopted Jan. 27, 1981. 
Sec. 16-43. - Motorized vehicles and devices. 
    The use and regulation of motorized vehicles and devices are as follows: 
(1)  No motorized vehicles, except maintenance or emergency vehicles, will be allowed in any part of any city park, except designated parking areas and paved roadways. The city manager shall have the authority to grant authority for special events or circumstances when it will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. 
(2)  The operation of remote control model electric aircraft devices with a flying weight over 32 ounces shall be prohibited in any city park. 
(3)  The operation of remote control model sailboats over 105 inches in overall length shall be prohibited in any city park. 
(4)  The operation of any gasoline or nitro-based, remote control model aircraft device or any gasoline or nitro-based or electric non-sail craft shall be prohibited in any city park. 
(Ord. No. 442, § V, 1-27-81; Ord. No. 732, § 1, 4-28-87; Ord. No. 1135, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 1250, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 16-44. - Vehicle speed restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any type of motor vehicle at a speed greater than ten miles per hour on all roads within the municipal park and not more than five miles per hour on all parking lots within such park. 
(Ord. No. 442, § VI, 1-27-81) 
Sec. 16-45. - Non-motorized vehicles and devices. 
    The use and regulations governing the use of canoes, kayaks and other non-motorized personal watercraft on the city lake are as follows: 
(1)  Definitions. 
    City lake: Lake in the Live Oak main city park. Also referred to as Farmer's Lake as well as the lake created by Martinez Creek Dam #5. 
    Personal watercraft: Kayaks, canoes, paddleboards, paddle boats and small boats designed for personal flotation or other non-motorized personal flotation devices. This does not include individual self or manually inflatable rafts or boats. 
    State authorized personal flotation device (PFD): A life jacket or device that is approved by the United States Coast Guard that is in good, serviceable condition. 
(2)  Rules and regulations. 
a.  Swimming and willful contact with the water in the city lake is prohibited. 
b.  Each rider must wear a PFD, approve by the U.S. Coast Guard in good, serviceable condition, in an appropriate size for the intended user and in an appropriate manner. 
c.  Use of personal watercraft must be limited to daylight hours. 
d.  The personal watercraft must be removed from the lake after each day of use. 
e.  Consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages while engaging in canoe, kayak or non-motorized watercraft activities is prohibited. 
f.  The City of Live Oak makes no guarantee about the safety of water recreation activities on the city lake. Participants assume all risk and liabilities associated with participation and use of personal watercraft in the city lake. 
g.  Personal watercraft operators on the city lake are only allowed to operate his/her watercraft within the boundaries stated above and must obey all posted signage instructions. 
h.  Users must follow all state and federal laws, including but not limited to the Water Safety Act. 
i.  The city manager may temporarily prohibit operation of personal watercraft on the city lake during flood hazard times or at other times to protect the public health and safety. 
( Ord. No. 1521, § 1 , 8-11-15) 
Chapter 17 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; flood damage protection, Ch. 9; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning regulations, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 8.01. 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation commissions, § 16-16 et seq.; authority of planning and zoning commission to adopt rules and regulations, § 21-6. 
State Law reference- Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; plat approval by planning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.006. 

Sec. 17-16. - Created; purposes. 
    A planning and zoning commission is hereby created in order to accomplish the following: 
(1)  To identify community needs and to advise the city council of their short-range and long-range implications for the total development of the city; 
(2)  To recommend achievable community goals as a basis for long-range planning and development programs; 
(3)  To recommend plans, programs, and policies that will aid the entire community in achieving its defined goals; and 
(4)  To interpret the adopted plans and programs to concerned citizens so that private activities and desires may be accompanied in harmony with public needs and policies. 
(Ord. No. 111A, § 1, 11-8-77) 
Sec. 17-17. - Composition; qualifications of members. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of five regular members and at least two but no more than four alternate members who are qualified electors of the city. Appointment of both regular and alternate members will be for two-year periods. The city council will appoint to the commission only those persons who have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgement, interest in planning and zoning, and availability to prepare for and attend meetings. 
(Ord. No. 111A, § 2, 11-8-77; Ord. No. 427, 3-25-80) 
Sec. 17-18. - Terms; filling of vacancies; removal of members. 
    The term of two of the regular members and two alternates of the commission created by this article will expire on October first of each odd-numbered year and the terms of three of the regular members and two alternate members shall expire on October first of each even-numbered year. Alternate members are required to attend commission meetings, and in the absence of a regular member, the chairman will appoint an alternate to be a voting member for that session of the commission. Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves and alternate members may be appointed to fill vacancies for unexpired terms, but, no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two years. Newly appointed members and alternates will be installed at the first regular commission meeting after their appointment. The city council may remove members and alternates of the planning and zoning commission from office for malfeasance, conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, or three consecutive unexcused absences from regular meetings of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 111A, § 3, 11-8-77; Ord. No. 427, 3-25-80) 
Sec. 17-19. - Organization. 
    The commission shall hold an organizational meeting in October of each year and shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. No member currently serving as chairperson or vice-chairperson shall be nominated or serve more than two successive one-year terms. The commission shall elect a secretary and such other officers as it deems necessary either from its membership or from staff representatives assigned by the chief executive of the city to work with the commission. The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings consistent with the provisions of this article and the requirements of applicable state statutes. Regular meetings shall be on the Thursday prior to the city council meetings that are held on the second and last Tuesdays of each month, unless otherwise determined by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 4-30-85; Ord. No. 1073, § 1, 10-27-98) 
Sec. 17-20. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning and zoning commission is hereby charged with the duty and invested with the authority to: 
(1)  Inspect property and premises at reasonable hours where required in the discharge of its responsibilities under the laws of the state and of the city. 
(2)  Formulate and recommend to the city council for its adoption a city plan for the orderly growth and development of the city and its environs, and from time to time recommend such changes in the plan as it finds will facilitate the movement of people and goods, and the health, recreation, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(3)  Formulate a zoning plan as may be deemed best to carry out the goals of the city plan; hold public hearings and make recommendations to the city council relating to the creation, amendment, and implementation of zoning regulations and districts as provided in Articles 1011a to 1011k, Revised Civil Statutes, as amended, authorizing cities and incorporated villages to pass regulations; all powers granted under such statute are specifically adopted and made a part hereof. 
(4)  Exercise all the powers of a commission as to approval or disapproval of plans, plats, or replats and vacations of plans, plats or replats set out in Articles 974a and 970a, Revised Civil Statutes. 
(5)  Study and recommend on the location, extension and planning of public rights-of-way, parks or other public places, and on the vacating or closing of same. 
(6)  Study and recommend on the general design and location of public buildings, bridges, viaducts, street fixtures and other structures and appurtenances and study and recommend on the design or alteration and on the location or relocation of works of art which are, or may become, the property of the city. 
(7)  Initiate, in the name of the city, for consideration at public hearings all proposals: 
a.  For the opening, vacating or closing of public rights-of-way, parks or other public places; 
b.  For the original zoning of annexed areas; and 
c.  For the change of zoning district boundaries on an area-wide basis. No fee shall be required for the filing of any such proposal in the name of the city. 
(8)  Formulate and recommend to the city council for its adoption policies and regulations consistent with the adopted city plan governing the location and/or operation of utilities, public facilities and services owned or under the control of the city. 
(9)  Keep itself informed with reference to the progress of city planning in the United States and other countries and recommend improvements in the adopted plans of the city. 
(10)  Submit each September first a progress report to the city council summarizing its activities, major accomplishments for the past year, and a proposed work program for the coming year. The report shall contain for the year the attendance record of all members and the identity of commission officers. 
(Ord. No. 111A, § 5, 11-8-77) 
Sec. 17-21. - Quorum; attendance; compensation. 
    A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of three members of the commission created by this article. The members of the commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the commission and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 111A, § 6, 11-8-77) 
Sec. 17-22. - Motion procedures. 
    A motion may be made by any member of the commission created by this article other than the presiding officer. A motion to approve any matter before the commission or to recommend approval of any request requiring council action shall require three favorable votes of the members present. When fewer than all the members are present for the voting and when all motions to recommend on a given application fail to carry by three votes, consideration of the application shall be continued to the next regular meeting upon motion carried by a majority of those present; provided, further, that, no request or application shall be continued under this rule beyond the next regular meeting; failure of the commission to secure three concurring votes to approve or recommend approval at the next regular meeting shall be recorded in the minutes as a denial of the proposal under this rule. 
(Ord. No. 111A, § 7, 11-8-77) 
Sec. 17-23. - Members to disqualify themselves under certain conditions. 
    A member shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he finds the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  A personal or monetary interest in the property under appeal; 
(2)  He will be directly affected by the decision of the commission; 
(3)  Whenever any applicant, or his agent, has sought to influence the vote of the member on his application, other than in the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 111A, § 8, 11-8-77) 
Chapter 18 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 18-1. - 2012 International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby adopted as the official property maintenance code of the city and incorporated by reference as though fully set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 1483 , § 4, 8-13-13) 
Sec. 18-2. - Amendments. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code adopted by this article is hereby amended as set out in this section: 
Section 101 
101.1 (Insert) after Code of "City of Live Oak, Texas." 
Section 102 
102.3 (Change to read): "Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of all Codes adopted by the city in chapter 5, section 5-2 of the Code of Ordinances. Nothing in the Code adopted by this section shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the City of Live Oak's zoning regulations established by the city's Code of Ordinances. 
Section 107 NOTICES AND ORDERS 
107.1 Notice to owner or person responsible. 
Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the owner or person responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3. 
Prior to giving notice under sections 107.2 and 107.3, the code official and/or designee may, but is not required to, provide a courtesy notice by leaving a door hanger or other form of a warning stating that a violation has occurred and offering a period of time to voluntarily comply before the code official and/or designee takes further action. Failure of an owner and/or occupant to actually receive a courtesy door hanger or warning from the code official is not a defense to prosecution for any violation under this code. 
107.2 Form. 
Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  Be in writing. 
2.  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
3.  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to abate the violations, make the repairs or improvements required to bring the property, dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code. 
4.  Inform the owner or person responsible of a court date in the city's municipal court or the date of a public hearing at which the owner or person responsible must appear to answer to the complaint that a violation or violations has/have occurred. 
5.  Include a statement of the city's right to file a lien in accordance with Section 106.3. 
107.3 Method of service. 
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
1.  Delivered personally to the owner and/or occupant or to a person of suitable age and discretion residing there; 
2.  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last-known address; or 
3.  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
Section 108 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT 
108.2 Closing of Vacant Structures. (Insert) after "Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall initiate the procedures set forth in chapter 5, article IX of the city's Code of Ordinances." 
108.5 Prohibited occupancy. (Insert) before "Any": "Subject to the provisions of ch. 5, art. ix of the city's Code of Ordinances and state law, [a]ny occupied structure condemned..." 
108.6 Abatement methods. (Change) Upon a determination by the code official that a violation of the standards set forth in this Code has occurred, the code official shall initiate the procedures set forth in chapter 5, article IX of the city's Code of Ordinances to have the nuisance abated by either the owner or the city. 
109.1 (Add) after "same." Upon taking the emergency action authorized by this section, the code official shall immediately thereafter initiate the procedures set forth in chapter 5, article IX of the city's Code of Ordinances." 
109.6 Hearing. (Insert) after "affected person shall thereafter be entitled to a public hearing before the dangerous structure determination board as provided in chapter 5, article IX of the city's Code of Ordinances." 
Section 110 Demolition 
110.01 General. (Insert) after "owner's option in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 5, Article IX of the City's Code of Ordinances." (Omit remainder of section). 
110.3 Failure to comply: (Insert) after "the code official shall proceed with initiating procedures set forth in chapter 5, article IX of the city's Code of Ordinances." (Omit remainder of section). 
Section 111 Means of Appeal 
111.1 (Change) "Upon the issuance of an order by the dangerous structure determination board as provided in chapter 5, article IX of the city's Code of Ordinances, an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by said order may file a petition in district court appealing the board's order following the procedures and within the time frame set forth in chapter 5, article IX of the city's Code of Ordinances." 
111.2 - 111.8 (Omit). 
Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes: after International Mechanical Code add: 4th Edition of RSMeans Construction Dictionary 
(Add before) ventilation: Motor vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle designed for use on a public road or highway. 
(Add after) condemn: Driveway means a private drive for vehicular traffic leading from a street or other thoroughfare to a building, house, garage, or similar structure designed for human occupancy or residence this is constructed using concrete or asphalt. 
(Add after) Structure: Structural Failure means the inability of a structure or structural member to perform its intended function, perhaps caused by collapse or excessive deformation. 
Section 302 
302.1 (Add): There shall be no visible outside storage of any building materials (except where an "open building permit" has been issued), garden tools, fire wood, newspapers, indoor furniture, lawn mowers, coolers and any other discarded or worn out manufactured materials and machinery which shall include but is not limited to motor vehicles and parts of motor vehicles, tires, aircraft, farm implements, appliances and scrap metal. These items shall not be visible from the front, back or side yards from any public place including carports, patios, balconies, front and side porches and driveways. 
(ADD) 302.1.1 Barbeque Grills. Barbeque grills not in use shall be stored on the side or in the rear of the property. Barbeque Pits and Grills that are permanently mounted to trailers or vehicles are exempt from this section of the ordinance, as long as the trailer or vehicle meets all licensing and registration requirements of the state. 
302.4 (Change): 302.4 "Weeds" to "Weeds, Grass and Limbs." 
(Insert) after "in excess of": "12 inches." 
(Insert) after "as prescribed by": "Chapter 342 of the Health & Safety Code." 
(Add): Grass or weeds shall not be allowed to grow beyond the property's curb line. It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, sweep, blow or deposit any grass clippings, leaves, weeds or any other substance in or upon any street, drains, or catch basin within the City. 
(Add): Limbs that extend over a sidewalk must be trimmed to a MINIMUM height of 8 feet above the sidewalk. All limbs that extend past the curb and over the street must be trimmed to a MINIMUM height of 13.6 feet above the curb and continuing that height out over the surface of the road. 
302.5 (Add): 
302.5.1 Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply. 
1.  Business buildings shall mean any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy for transaction of business, for rendering of professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abatoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories, and all out houses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes. 
2.  Occupant shall mean the individual, partnership, or corporation that uses or occupies any building or part of fraction thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or vacant portions thereof, the owner, agent, or custodian shall have the responsibility as occupant. 
3.  Owner shall mean the actual owner, agent, or custodian of the building, whether individual, partnership, or corporation. The lessee shall be construed as the "owner" for the purpose of this article when buildings agreements hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs. 
4.  Garbage Container shall mean any object that holds something and is leak proof, covered or sealed and includes tightly closed garbage bags, etc 
5.  Rat eradication shall mean the elimination or extermination of rats within buildings by any or all of the accepted measures, such as poisoning, fumigation, trapping, clubbing, etc. 
6.  Rat harborage shall mean any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under, or outside of any structure. 
7.  Ratproofing shall mean a form of construction to prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings from the exterior or from one business building or establishment to another. It consists essentially of treatment with material, impervious to rat gnawing, all actual or potential openings in exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roof and foundations, that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing or burrowing. 
302.5.2 All buildings in the city shall be ratproofed, freed of rats, and maintained in a ratproof and ratfree condition to the satisfaction of the health inspector. 
302.5.3 Upon receipt of written notice and/or order from the Building Official, health inspector, or the city manager, the owner of any business building specified therein shall take immediate measures for ratproofing the building, and unless such work and improvements have been completed by the owner in the time specified in the written notice, in no event to be less than 15 days or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the health inspector, then the owner shall be deemed guilty of an offense under the provisions of this article. 
302.5.4 Whenever the building official, health inspector or city manager notifies the occupant or occupants of a building in writing that there is evidence of rat infestation of the building, such occupant or occupants shall immediately institute rat eradication measures and shall continuously maintain such measure in a satisfactory manner until the premises are declared by the health inspector to be free of rat infestation. Unless such measures are undertaken within five days after receipt of notice, it shall be construed as a violation of the provisions of this article and the occupant shall be held responsible therefor. 
302.5.5 Maintenance. The owners of all ratproofed buildings are required to maintain the premises in a ratproofed condition and to repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the ratproofing without a specific order of the health inspector. 
302.5.6 Closure of occupied buildings. Whenever conditions inside or under any occupied business buildings within the city provide extensive harborage for rats in the opinion of the building official or health inspector, the building official or health inspector is empowered, after due notification in accordance with this article, to close such buildings until such time as the conditions are abated by ratproofing and harborage removal including, if necessary, the installation of suitable concrete floors in basements or replacement of wooden first or ground floors with concrete or other major repairs necessary to facilitate rat eradication. 
302.5.7 Condemnation of unoccupied buildings. Whenever conditions inside or under any unoccupied buildings provide extensive harborage for rats, in the opinion of the building official or health inspector, the building official or health inspector is empowered to require compliance with the provisions of this article and, if such conditions are not corrected in a period of 60 days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the health inspector, the health inspector is empowered to institute condemnation and destruction proceedings. 
302.5.8 Occupancy of buildings where foodstuffs stored, kept, etc., not in compliance with article prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any new or existing business buildings wherein foodstuffs are to be stored, kept, handled, sold, held or offered for sale without complying with the provisions of this article; unless the provisions of this section are complied with, no city license or permit to conduct or carry on any business mentioned above will be issued. 
302.5.9 Storage of food, feed. All food and feed within the city for feeding animals shall be stored in ratfree and ratproof containers, compartments, or rooms unless stored in a ratproof building. 
302.5.10. Inspections. The building official or health inspector or his agent is empowered to make unannounced inspections of the interior and exterior of buildings to determine full compliance with this article, and the health inspector or his agent shall make periodic inspections at intervals of not more than 45 days of all ratproofed buildings to determine evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks in their ratproofing and, when any evidence of it is found, indicating the presence of rats or openings through which rats may again enter buildings, the building official or health inspector shall serve the owners or occupants with notice and/or orders to abate the conditions found. 
302.5.11. Restoration of ratproofing following repair, reconstruction, etc. It shall be unlawful under the provisions of this article for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or any other person to remove and fail to restore in like condition the ratproofing from any building for any purpose. It shall further be unlawful for any person or agent to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. 
302.8 (Add): No vehicles or trailers of any type may be parked on any surface other than a driveway defined by this Article. The surface area must encompass the entire size of vehicle or trailer. The surface must be of the like materials of stone, pavers, etc. as the existing driveway. Only motor vehicles authorized to be maintained on property by this section may be parked or stopped on a driveway. Boats and Trailers may be parked on a driveway if they meet all licensing and registration requirements of this Code and state law. Under no circumstances shall any motor vehicle, boat or trailer that are not operational as defined in this Code be permitted to be maintained on a driveway within the city limits. 
(ADD) 302.8.1 Nonconforming driveways. All existing driveways that meet the current requirements of the Code of Ordinances in effect as of the date of passage of this ordinance shall be required to be brought into compliance with this section and section 203.1 of this Code within 180 days. Compliance shall mean applying for a building flatwork work permit with the city's building inspection department and paying all applicable fees. 
(Change) 302.9 to Parking of Vehicles Boats and Trailers. Only motor vehicles authorized to be maintained on property by this section may be parked or stopped on a driveway defined by this Code. Boats and Trailers may be parked on a driveway as defined by this Code if they meet all licensing and registration requirements of this Code and state law. Under no circumstances shall any motor vehicle, boat or trailer that is not operational as defined in this Code be permitted to be maintained on a driveway within the city limits. 
(Change) 302.9 to 302.10 Defacement of Property... 
302.11 (Add): Portable Basketball goals shall be removed from city streets when not in use and at night. When removed it shall be placed away from the curb and outside the limits of the dedicated right of way. No portable recreational equipment shall be allowed on or over the paved portion of the city's streets when not in use. 
Section 303 
Add Section 303.4. It shall be unlawful to discharge any pool/spa water into any city street or drainage ditch. All drainage of pool/spa water shall be conducted into the property's sanitary sewer. 
Section 304 
304.1.1 Unsafe Conditions. (Add) after "13. Exceptions: 2.: when "authorized by the city's Code of Ordinances and state law". 
304.3 (Add): the address shall be illuminated with at least 60 illuminati of light. 
Section 308 
308.2.2 (Add after): doors: that has an airtight snap lock or other locking device. 
308.3.1 (Delete para.) Replace para. with: Garbage Container(s): The owner or operator of every dwelling shall provide and at all times cause to be utilized leak proof, covered, outside garbage container(s). 
308.3.2 (Delete para.) Replace with Recycling Container(s): The owner or operator that uses recycling container(s) shall use the ones provided by the approved waste removal company that the City of Live Oak has contracted with. 
(Ord. No. 1483 , § 4, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 1518, § 1 , § 1, 6-9-15) 
Chapter 19 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7; administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; security requirements for buildings, § 5-31 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; municipal court, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Interlocal assistance. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 999b, Revised Civil Statutes the chief of police is authorized to assign the regularly employed enforcement personnel of his department to assist any other county or municipality in this state, when a state of civil emergency in such other county or municipality has been declared by proper authority, upon request by such proper authority, and when, in opinion of such proper authority, a need exists in such county or municipality for the services of additional law enforcement officers to protect the health, life and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants, and the visitors thereto, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or threat thereof by three or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during time of natural disaster or manmade calamity. 
(b)  Whenever any law enforcement officer of any other county or municipality is assigned to this city, under authority of an order adopted by the governing body of such other county or municipality, to assist under circumstances as described in paragraph (a) of this section which may exist in this city, such officer shall be a peace officer of this city and shall be under the command of the chief of police of this city while so assigned, and he shall have all the powers of a regular law enforcement officer of this city as fully as though he were within the county or municipality where regularly employed and his qualifications, respectively, for office where regularly employed shall constitute his qualification for office in this city, and no other oath, bond, or compensation shall be made. 
(c)  When any law enforcement officer of this city is ordered by proper authority to perform peace officer duties outside the territorial limits of this city, he shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension, and all other compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or death benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within the limits of this city; and he shall also be paid for any reasonable expenses of travel, food, or lodging, as well as for damage to equipment and clothing, and medical expenses, which he may incur while on duty outside such limits, or while traveling to or from such assignment, if these expenses have not been paid by the county or municipality in which he served. 
(d)  When any law enforcement officer is assigned to this city from another county or city under the circumstances described above and upon request of the proper authority of this city that this city will, upon proper request, reimburse the county or city furnishing the services of such law enforcement officer for his actual expenses of travel, food lodging, and for such cost or damage to equipment and clothing resulting from services of such law enforcement officer in this city and for which the county or city where he is regularly employed has paid. 
(Ord. No. 145, 7-7-70) 
State Law reference- Interlocal Cooperation Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 791.001 et seq. 
Sec. 19-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1566 , § I, adopted June 26, 2018, repealed § 19-2, which pertained to police department policy manual adopted by reference and derived from Ord. No. 814, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 1988; Ord. No. 818, § 1, adopted Jan. 31, 1989; and Ord. No. 871, § 1, adopted June 12, 1990 . 
Sec. 19-3. - Fees. 
    The police department may charge fees as necessary for services such as fingerprints, accident reports, certified records and other services provided in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council and as amended from time to time as necessary. All open record request fees shall be charged in accordance with the Texas Administrative Code and Texas Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Secs. 19-4, 19-5. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 743, adopted July 14, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of the substantive provisions of such ordinance as new §§ 19-6-19-11 and as amending §§ 19-16, 19-17 and 19-19-19-21 was at the discretion of the editors. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-6. - Chief of police-Appointment; commission. 
    The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be a commissioned and licensed police officer in accordance with the laws of the state and the guidelines set forth by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1(1), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-7. - Same-Powers and duties. 
(a)  The chief of police will be the chief executive officer of the Live Oak police department. As head of this department he shall appoint all police officers and supporting personnel, will develop departmental policies and procedures, and determine and direct departmental policies with respect to personnel recruitment, processing, selections and training of all police personnel. 
(b)  The chief of police shall further determine and direct departmental policies regarding discipline, conduct and internal investigations consistent with the overall policies of the city, and shall make initial decisions in disciplinary matters which shall, however, be subject to appeal and subsequently for final determination by the city manager. 
(c)  The chief of police shall plan, organize, develop and/or direct all police department functions and support services including, but not limited to the city's reserve police force, police administrative staff and the Live Oak dispatchers. He shall further be authorized to promote personnel within the department from time to time consistent with the performance of their duties, vacancies in positions and further consistent with the table of organization for the police department. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 2(1)-(3), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-8. - Police officers-Appointment; commission; number. 
(a)  Police officers will be appointed by the chief of police and shall be commissioned and licensed police officers in accordance with the laws of the state and the guidelines set forth by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
(b)  The number of police officers shall be determined by the city council and shall be consistent with budgetary authorizations and requirements for police personnel within the department. 
(Ord. No. 743, §§ 2(4), 3(1), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-9. - Same-Powers and duties. 
(a)  Live Oak police officers shall, at all times within the city limits and outside the city's corporate limits, when authorized by law, be responsible for enforcing all federal and state laws as well as city ordinances. 
(b)  The primary mission of Live Oak police officers shall be to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, investigate, detect, and arrest offenders who are in violation of city, state and federal laws. 
(c)  Police officers shall investigate all crimes, prepare cases, preserve and protect all physical evidence that may be obtained at scenes of crime and shall be prepared to testify to such matters in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Police officer are public servants and they shall be mindful at all times that they are, as such, to assist and protect the rights of persons and property and to take no action without probable cause or due process of law. 
(e)  Police officers shall have like powers, rights, authority and jurisdiction as are by such title vested in a city marshal. Such police officers may serve all process issuing from the municipal court anywhere in Bexar County and may serve process issuing from municipal courts from other counties provided that they follow the procedures and guidelines established by state laws governing this subject. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 4(1)-(5), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-10. - Salary or fees of office. 
    The chief of police and police officers of the city so appointed shall receive a salary or fees of office, or both, as shall be fixed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 5(1), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-11. - Tenure. 
    The chief of police may be dismissed for cause by the city manager. The city's police officers shall be subject to a status of a probationary period for a term of six months from their initial appointment, during which time, pending observation of the performance of their duties, they may be terminated at will without cause. Having concluded their probationary status, police officers may be dismissed only for cause as provided for in the personnel rules and regulations now in effect for the city or as may be subsequently in vogue and shall have all appeal rights as may be provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 6(1), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-12. - Arrest warrants served and executed. 
    The city police department shall, through its offices, serve and execute all arrest warrants issued by the municipal court under the direction of the chief of police. Such warrants shall be served and executed by certified peace officers assigned to that function by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1233, § 1, adopted September 13, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 19-12 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 19-13-19-15. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVE FORCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012(a); governing authority may establish qualifications of police reserve, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012(b); qualifications for basic peace officer proficiency certificate, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 221.3. 

Sec. 19-16. - Authorization; number. 
    The chief of police is authorized to provide for the city's police reserve force, and shall be entrusted with the selection of such personnel to serve as peace officers and shall establish the number of such officers to serve the city in this capacity. 
(Ord. No. 222, 4-10-73; Ord. No. 743, § 2(5), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-17. - Qualifications; training standards. 
    The chief of police shall establish qualifications and standards of training for such members of the police reserve force. 
(Ord. No. 222, 4-10-73; Ord. No. 743, § 2(5), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-18. - Recommendation by chief, approval by council prerequisites to carrying weapon, acting as peace officer. 
    No person appointed to the police reserve force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until he has been recommended for approval by the chief of police. After approval he may carry a weapon only when authorized by the chief of police and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer according to regulations established for the reserve police force by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 222, 4-10-73) 
Sec. 19-19. - Members serve at discretion and call of chief. 
    The members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief a police and may be called into service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(Ord. No. 222, 4-10-73; Ord. No. 743, § 2(6), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-20. - Remuneration; fringe benefits. 
(a)  Compensation. Reserve police officers may serve without compensation except that the city council may provide uniform compensation for members of the police reserve force. 
(b)  Hospital, medical, disability, etc. The city council may provide hospital and medical assistance to members of the police reserve force who sustain injuries in the course of performing official duties in the same manner as provided by the governing body for fulltime police officers, and reserve officers shall be eligible for death benefits as set out is Chapter 86, Acts of the 60th Legislature, regular session 1967 as amended (Article 6228f, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes); provided, however, that members of such police reserve force shall not be eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute to which regular officers may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 222, 4-10-73; Ord. No. 743, § 2(6), (7), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-21. - Officers to serve in supplementary capacity to regular force. 
    Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the fulltime duties of regular police officers without first complying all requirements for such regular police officers. 
(Ord. No. 222, 4-10-73; Ord. No. 743, § 2(8), 7-14-87) 
Sec. 19-22. - Article not to limit mayor's power to summon special police force. 
    This article does not limit the power of the mayor to summon into service a special police force, as provided by Article 995, Revised Civil Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 222, 4-10-73) 
Secs. 19-23-19-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED, STOLEN, IMPOUNDED OR RECOVERED PROPERTY 

Sec. 19-36. - Sale-Authorized. 
    All abandoned, stolen or recovered property of any kind, except vehicles, which shall remain unclaimed with the police department for a period of four months without being claimed or reclaimed by the owners, whether known or not, may be sold and disposed of at public auction, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 12-14-71) 
Sec. 19-37. - Same-Notice. 
    Thirty days notice of the time and place of sale of all property, except motor vehicles, and a descriptive list of the property to be offered for sale shall be posted on the bulletin board located in the city hall and a copy thereof shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of the owner in the event the name of the owner is known to the police chief Thereafter, such property shall be offered for sale at public auction to the highest bidder for each piece of property, or assembled in lots, whichever, in the discretion of the police chief, shall offer the best price obtainable for such property. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 3, 12-14-71) 
Sec. 19-38. - Same-Conduct. 
    The public auction provided for in section 19-36 of this article shall be conducted at the place and hour designated in the Notice and all sales shall be for cash. Such property shall be sold as is, and a bill of sale, if requested, shall be given to the purchaser but no title transfer or title papers of any nature shall be furnished. No person who is delinquent in the payment of city property taxes shall be permitted to bid on any of the items provided for in section 19-36 of this article, nor shall any sale of such items be made to any such person. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 4, 12-14-71) 
Sec. 19-39. - Same-Accounting for proceeds. 
    Within five days after any such sale has been completed, the chief of police shall make a record thereof under oath, to the director of finance and shall account for the money received at all such sales in the same manner as is prescribed for him to account for all other monies that may come into his custody as chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 6, 12-14-71) 
Sec. 19-40. - Unclaimed property may become property of city for exclusive use of police department. 
    Any unclaimed property eligible to be auctioned may become property of the city for exclusive use of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 5, 12-14-71) 
Secs. 19-41-19-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-56. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    Alarm site: A premises or location served by an alarm system. 
    Alarm system: A device or system that transmits a signal intended to summon police of a municipality in response to a burglary. The term includes an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. The term does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is used for a habitation at a permanent site, or an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants within the premises. 
    Burglar alarm notification: A notification intended to summon the police which is initiated or triggered manually or by an alarm system designed to respond to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
    Police department: The police department of the city. 
    False alarm: A response is made by an agency of the municipality within 30 minutes of the alarm notification and the agency determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false. 
    False fire alarm notification: A fire alarm notification to the fire department, when the responding fire department personnel finds no evidence of a fire having occurred or of a need for the fire department service. 
    False holdup alarm notification: A robbery alarm notification to the police, when the responding police officer finds no evidence of a robbery. 
    Fire alarm notification: A notification to the fire department intended to summon firefighting forces, which is initiated or triggered manually by an alarm system designed to react to any of the visual or physical characteristics of fire. 
    Governmental political unit: Any entity in which federal, state or local taxes are used to finance the operation of such institution. 
    Holdup alarm notification: A notification intended to summon the police by means of an alarm system designed to be purposely activated by a human when a robbery occurs. 
    Local alarm: An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and has as its purpose the summoning of aid from a city department. 
    Police chief: The chief of police of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Special permit: A permit issued to an alarm user required by federal, state, county or municipal statute, regulations, rule or ordinance to install, maintain and operate an alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 1(1)-(11), (13), (14), 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 1(1-15), 9-24-91; Ord. No. 1451, § I, 5-31-11) 
Sec. 19-57. - Permitted types. 
    A person shall not install or maintain an alarm system except for the purpose of eliciting responses to burglaries, robberies, or fires unless specifically authorized by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 3(1), 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 3(1), 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-58. - Authority to promulgate regulations for innovations. 
    If innovations in alarm systems or other types of alarm devices adversely affect emergency services of the city, the city may promulgate rules and regulations in order to protect the city's emergency services. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 3(2), 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 3(2), 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-59. - Automatic devices calling department prohibited. 
    No person shall use or operate, or attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program, or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by any other automatic means, initiate a telephonic or recorded message to any telephone number assigned, or any additional telephone numbers assigned, to the city police department. Within 30 days after the effective date of this article, all existing automatic dialing devices referred to above shall be reprogrammed or disconnected. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 3(3), 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 3(3), 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-60. - Penalties for false alarms. 
    An alarm user shall be subject to fines for the signaling of a false alarm by a burglar alarm system during a 12-month period in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council and as amended from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, repealed the former § 19-60 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 19-60 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 601, § 5, adopted Oct. 30, 1984; Ord. No. 915, § 5, adopted Sep. 24, 1991; Ord. No. 1451, § I, adopted May 31, 2011; and Ord. No. 1460, § I, adopted Jan. 10, 2012. 
Sec. 19-61. - Reporting of alarm signals through relaying intermediary restricted. 
    A permit holder shall not report his alarm signals through a relaying intermediary that does not meet the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the city or is not licensed by the state board of private security agencies. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 6, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 6, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-62. - Operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder shall: 
(1)  Cause an adjustment to be made to the sensory mechanism of his alarm system in order to suppress false indications; and 
(2)  Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that insures proper operation of the alarm system. 
(b)  A person in control of a local alarm shall: 
(1)  Adjust the mechanics so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than 30 minutes on residential alarms and 60 minutes on commercial alarms. 
(2)  Provide personnel, within 30 minutes after being notified by the police department, to reset the alarm system and provide access to the premises; and 
(3)  Display in a prominent exterior location an identification notice provided by the police department. The sticker shall be placed on or adjacent to the most commonly used front entrance of the premises and must be visible and legible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 7, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 7, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-63. - Manual reset required. 
    A person in control of a local alarm or an alarm system that causes an alarm notification to be sent directly to the police department shall adjust or cause the adjustment of the mechanism so that upon activation the system will transmit only one alarm signal and will not transmit another alarm signal without first being manually reset. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 8, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 8, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-64. - Inspection. 
    Upon reasonable notification, the police chief, or his designated representative, may inspect an alarm site and alarm system of a permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 9, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 9, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-65. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
    A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the police department shall: 
(1)  Send notification of an alarm to the police department by a human operator; 
(2)  Allow an inspection of his business premises by the police chief, fire chief or authorized agent of the city at any time; 
(3)  Report alarms only over a special telephone number or numbers designated by the chief of police; and 
(4)  Send alarm notifications to the police department in a manner and form determined by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 12, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 12, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-66. - Direct alarm reporting. 
    A holder of a permit issued under division 2 of this article whose alarm system transmits automatic alarm notifications, other than alarm notifications from financial institutions, directly to the city over the normal telephone system shall: 
(1)  Transmit in the form and content specified by the police department; 
(2)  Transmit over special telephone lines designed for such use as specified by the police department; 
(3)  Design his system so that it will notify the permit holder, or his designated agent identified on the permit application, when an alarm is transmitted to the police department; 
(4)  Furnish the police department, upon request, with satisfactory copies of the alarm operation procedures, maintenance procedures, and up-to-date circuit diagram of the components of the alarm system; and 
(5)  Furnish the name, address and telephone number of an alarm company licensed by the state board of private investigators and private security agencies, responsible on a 24-hour, seven-days-a-week basis for correcting any malfunction that may occur. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 13, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 13, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-67. - Protection of financial institutions. 
(a)  A financial institution required to have an alarm system pursuant to the provisions of the Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C., section 1882) may install, with the permission of the chief of police, a signal line directly to the police department for the purpose of reporting burglaries and robberies. If such an arrangement is made, all other requirements of this article must be met. The financial institution shall execute a letter of agreement with the city permitting the installation of all necessary equipment on an indicator panel monitored in the communications division of the police department. The installation must be accomplished at the institution's expense. 
(b)  The financial institution shall pay an annual fee of $50.00 for services rendered by the city police department. The police chief shall have the right, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to inspect the alarm system at the alarm site and require necessary repairs or improvements. If the police chief finds that the alarm system continually fails to operate or be operated to his satisfaction, he may terminate the privilege to have equipment and indicators in the communications center of the police department and require prompt removal of same at the expense of the financial institution. 
(c)  The financial institution, at its expense, shall make arrangements to provide maintenance service for the alarm system at the insistence of the financial institutions or the chief of police on a 24-hour basis, seven days a week. In no event shall the city become liable for the service charges for repairs and maintenance of any such signaling device. 
(d)  The financial institution may cancel its agreement with the city at any time by giving the city written notice through the chief of police, whereupon such institution, at its expense shall have its equipment and indicators promptly removed from the monitor panel in the communications center. 
(e)  The police chief has the right to require any change, modernization or consolidation of alarm signaling equipment that he deems advisable. In no event shall the city become liable for charges for such change. 
(f)  Instead of a direct line, a financial institution may instead choose to report burglaries and robberies by transmission through an alarm reporting service using a telephone number designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 14, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 14, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-67.1. - Violations-Generally. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, business entity, its agent, servant or employee who knowingly and intentionally violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 915, § 16, 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-68. - Duties of alarm system companies. 
(a)  Notification to occupant. On the installation or activation of an alarm system, an alarm systems company shall distribute to the occupant of the alarm system location information summarizing: 
(1)  The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the potential for penalties and revocation of suspension of a permit; 
(2)  How to prevent false alarms; and 
(3)  How to operate the alarm system. 
(b)  Notification to municipality. An alarm systems company shall notify the municipality in which the alarm system is located of an installation or activation of an alarm system not later than the thirtieth day after the date of the installation or activation. The alarm systems company shall provide to the municipality: 
(1)  The alarm systems company name; 
(2)  The alarm systems company license number; 
(3)  The name for the occupant of the alarm system location; 
(4)  The address of the alarm system location; and 
(5)  The date of installation or activation. 
(c)  Operation of central stations or answering service. Any alarm systems company which operates a central station and any telephone answering service shall: 
(1)  Responding to alarm. Have sufficient personnel trained in the procedures to be followed in receiving and relaying notice of the activation of any alarm system on duty at all times to ensure that emergency messages or alarm signals received by such business can be relayed immediately to the city. Notification to the city of the activation of an alarm system shall include: 
a.  The street address of the alarm site, including the particular suite or apartment number, if applicable; 
b.  The name of the permit holder and the permit number; 
c.  The type of alarm activated; and 
d.  The names and local telephone numbers of the persons to notify, if so authorized by the permit holder. 
(2)  Notification. Notify the person in control of the property or his designee of the activation of the alarm system within 24 hours of the time the alarm was activated, not to include weekends and holidays, by telephone or by placing written notice in the mail, addressed to the person in control of the premises. 
(3)  Records. Keep a written record of the date and time each notification of the activation of an alarm system is received and the date, time and method by which the person in control of the property was notified. Such records shall be retained for at least two years and shall be made available for inspection by the city during regular business hours. 
(4)  Periodic testing for correction of defects. Test or cause to be tested all equipment used by the central station or telephone answering service relating to the receipt of notifications of the activation of any alarm system and the equipment used in relaying those notifications of the activation of any alarm system and the equipment used in relaying those notifications to the city at least one time in every 12-month period and, where a test result is unsatisfactory, correct or cause to be corrected within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed seven days from the date of testing the cause of the unsatisfactory test result. 
(5)  Evidence of test results. Product evidence of the results of tests conducted pursuant to this section upon the request of the city. The requirements of this section shall be satisfied if such results are made available at the central station or telephone answering service on the next regular business day after a request is made. 
(6)  Providing service [to] licensed businesses only. Not provide answering service for any alarm system company which is not licensed by the state. A violation under this subsection shall only be enforceable according to state law and the remedies, policies and procedures provided for therein. 
(Ord. No. 1451, § I, 5-31-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1451, § I, adopted May 31, 2011, repealed § 19-68 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 19-68 pertained to violations-corporations, partnerships and associations and derived from Ord. No. 601, § 15, adopted Oct. 30, 1984; and Ord. No. 915, § 15, adopted Sept. 24, 1991. 
Secs. 19-69-19-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 19-81. - Required. 
    A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
    Any person with an alarm system on the effective date of this article must apply for a permit within 60 [days] after such date. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 2(1), 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 2(1), (2), 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-82. - Application contents. 
    Each application for a permit required by this division must contain the name, address and telephone number of the individual or alarm user representative who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees or charges levied under this article. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 2(4), 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 2(4), 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-83. - Fee. 
    Each applicant for a private residential, commercial business or financial institution permit shall be charged a nonrefundable fee for each permit or renewal permit required by this section in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council and as amended from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, repealed the former § 19-83 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 19-83 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 601, § 4(1), adopted Oct. 30, 1984; Ord. No. 915, § 4, adopted Sep. 24, 1991; Ord. No. 1451, § I, adopted May 31, 2011; and Ord. No. 1460, § I, adopted Jan. 10, 2012. 
Sec. 19-84. - Issuance. 
    Upon receipt of the required fee and completed application form for a permit required by this division, the city shall issue a permit unless there is cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained and operated in accordance with this article or the applicant will not comply with each provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 2, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 2(3), 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-85. - Transferability. 
    An alarm permit issued under this division cannot be transferred to another person. However, the individual designated to respond to or relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder shall inform the police department of any change that alters information listed on the permit application. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 2(5), 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 2(5), 9-24-91) 
Sec. 19-86. - Denial or suspension. 
(a)  The city may suspend or refuse to renew an alarm system permit for any violation of this article. 
(b)  The city may revoke or refuse to renew the permit of an alarm system that has had eight or more false alarms during the preceding 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 2(6), (10), 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 2(6), (10), 9-24-91; Ord. No. 1451, § I, 5-31-11) 
Sec. 19-87. - Appeal from denial or suspension. 
(a)  If the city revokes or refuses to renew a permit required by this division, the applicant or permit holder shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten days after receipt of the notice. If the filing of a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action is final. 
(b)  The city manager or his representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider evidence offered by an interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing; the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within 15 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the action for the city, and his decision is final unless the applicant or permit holder files a written request with the city council for a hearing within ten days after receipt of notice of the action of the hearing officer. A written request to the city council stays the action of the hearing officer in suspending a permit until the city council renders a final decision. 
(c)  If a request for an appeal hearing with the city council is filed within the ten-day period, the city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by an interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing before the city council. The city council shall decide the appeal on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The city council shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the hearing officer by a majority vote; failure to reach a majority decision on a motion shall leave the hearing officer's decision unchanged. The result of an appeal hearing before the city council is final. The city council must render a decision at the next regular scheduled city council meeting after the appeal is filed. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 11, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 11, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 1451, § I, 5-31-11) 
Sec. 19-88. - Duration; renewal. 
    All permits issued under this division shall be valid for a full year from the date of issuance and no permit shall be issued for more than one year. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to pay the renewal fee prior to the expiration date. However, an alarm user which is a governmental political unit must abide by the terms set forth by this article but is exempt from any permit user fees. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 4, 10-30-84; Ord. No. 915, § 4, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 1451, 5-31-11) 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, § 19-88 has been amended to change the expiration date of permits issued under this division to reflect the intent of Ord. No. 1451, adopted May 31, 2011. 
Chapter 20 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency preparedness, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention and protection, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; municipal court, Ch. 14; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; planning, Ch. 17; police, Ch. 19; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; zoning regulations, App. A. 
State Law reference- General authority of home-rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001 et seq.; general authority regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq.; local authorities may regulate parades and assemblages on highways, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(3); municipal management of public rights-of-way used by telecommunications providers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Trenching and street subsurface restoration specifications. 
    Any person, partnership, association of individuals, firm or corporation, its agents, servants and employees, who shall alter or repair the surface or subsurface of any city street, alley, right of way or utility easement in the course of repairing or installing underground utilities, shall restore such street, alley, right of way or utility easement to its original state of usefulness and expected life span by strict adherence to the specifications attached hereto as a part hereof, and identified by the heading "City of Live Oak Trenching and Street Subsurface Restoration Specifications." 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 8-28-79) 
Editor's note- The specifications referred to in this section are not printed in this volume, but are on file in the city offices. 
Sec. 20-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 976, adopted March 29, 1994, repealed Ord. No. 166, adopted January 5, 1971 from which § 20-2, pertaining to discharges into streets and damage to road surfaces as amended by Ord. No. 835, § 1, adopted July 25, 1989 was derived. 
Sec. 20-3. - Overhanging of trees interfering with public use or rights-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied, improved or unimproved, within the city, to permit the protrusion or overhang of trees, bushes, shrubs and structures over a street between curb to curb to a height of 13 feet six inches. Where a side of the street is not curbed, the prohibited area shall start at the edge of the designated pavement width. Protrusion or overhang is prohibited over other easements and rights-of-way used for vehicular access to a height of 13 feet six inches. 
(b)  Protrusion or overhang in street rights-of-way is prohibited to a height of eight feet from the property line to the edge of the street. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 944, 1-26-93) 
Secs. 20-4-20-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-16. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    Parade is any parade, demonstration, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park, or other public place in the city. 
    Parade permit is a permit as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 1, 2-26-70) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 20-17. - Public conduct. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  No driver of any vehicle whatsoever shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 15, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-18. - Parking on route. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 16, 2-26-70) 
Secs. 20-19-20-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits, and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 20-31. - Required; exceptions. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police, except only that this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school, classes, or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 2, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-32. - Application. 
(a)  Required. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer not less than five days, nor more than ten days, before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(b)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for or on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and the animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area of areas; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(13)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 4, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-33. - Late applications. 
    The chief of police where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this division which is filed less than five days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 5, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-34. - Fee. 
    There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade permit a fee of $10.00. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 6, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-35. - Issuance-Standards therefor. 
    The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for under this division when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment enroute to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute; 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 7, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-36. - Same-Notice to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  Mayor; 
(2)  City secretary; 
(3)  City attorney; 
(4)  Fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 11, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-37. - Contents. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 12, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-38. - Chairman or person leading to have on person during parade. 
    The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 14, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-39. - Duties of permittee. 
    A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 13, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-40. - Denial; notice of rejection. 
    The chief of police shall act upon an application for a parade permit within ten days after the filing thereof. If he disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within ten days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 8, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-41. - Appeal from denial. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within ten days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal within 30 days after its receipt. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 9, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-42. - Alternative. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within ten days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this division. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 10, 2-26-70) 
Sec. 20-43. - Revocation. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit under this division upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 17, 2-26-70) 
Secs. 20-44-20-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, ETC. 

Sec. 20-71. - Permit-Required. 
(a)  Any individual, corporation or association wishing to perform excavation, installation, repair or maintenance of any underground facility, whether mains, feeders, drain pipe, channels or conduits within the city, other than emergency repairs, shall secure a permit from the city before the work shall commence. In cases of emergency immediate notification shall be given the city so that appropriate measures may be taken. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to require underground boring or other such alternatives during installation and repair of underground utilities located in city rights-of-way. If the city determines that a street, curb, walk, drive or concrete channel must be open cut, any repairs caused by such work shall be made in accordance with the applicable specifications on file with the planning department and provided with the permit. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 1, 7-12-88) 
Sec. 20-72. - Same-Filing of application; fees. 
    A permit application must be filed with the planning and permit section of the city, accompanied by plans and other required information. The fee for such permit will be $25.00 to cover the cost of the permit, administration and inspection of the work to be done. Any reinspection shall cost $15.00. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 2, 7-12-88) 
Sec. 20-73. - Same-Evaluation of application. 
    The permit application shall be evaluated on merit and reviewed on an individual basis. The application shall be subject to review by the public works department, city planning department, police department, fire department and other emergency service departments with regard to necessity for street cut, to potential interference with other utilities, traffic hazards, detouring or rerouting for emergency vehicles. Issuance of a permit or written disapproval of the application shall be made within five working days following the initial submittal. If additional information is requested, approval or disapproval shall be made within five working days after the applicant has provided the requested information. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 3, 7-12-88) 
Sec. 20-74. - Same-Refusal to issue permit; appeal procedure. 
    No permit shall be issued if the applicant is not in compliance with these provisions, if there is no necessity to cut a street or public property, of if the consensus of the review places a high risk of hazard to the public and property. Appeal of a disapproved application can be made to the city manager and a meeting will be scheduled with those parties making the review. If no reconciliation can be reached, appeal may be made to the city council and the decision of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 4, 7-12-88) 
Sec. 20-75. - Work performed by permit holder. 
    All work shall be performed by the grantee at the expense of the grantee in accordance with the specifications provided with the permit. The grantee shall also be responsible for any damage to, maintenance and protection of existing utilities during construction. Grantee shall also be responsible for restoring to its original condition or better, any damages to existing fences, curbs, drives, pavement, concrete structures or yards caused by the construction. All work performed shall be guaranteed for a period of one year from the date of acceptance by the city. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 5, 7-12-88) 
Sec. 20-76. - Work performed by city. 
    Where the city agrees to perform the work for the grantee a charge shall be made of the actual cost of labor, materials, rentals or services plus 50 percent of the total costs to cover the cost of supervision, city equipment, tools, fuel, insurance, accounting and other miscellaneous costs. The permit application shall be submitted with the estimated cost which shall be adjusted after completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 6, 7-12-88) 
Sec. 20-77. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any individual, corporation, association or grantee who shall violate a provision of this article or fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof, or who shall excavate, install, alter or repair in violation of the issued permit requirements shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $1,000.00. In each event, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 7, 7-12-88) 
Secs. 20-78-20-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANAGEMENT OF THE RIGHT-OF-WAY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, adopted Nov. 8, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Art. IV, §§ 20-78-20-81, 20-83-20-97, 20-98-20-152, 20-154-20-158. To preserve the style of this Code and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. IV, §§ 20-101-20-104, 20-106-20-111, 20-113-20-120, 20-141-20-143, 20-145-20-184, 20-201-20-203, 20-221-20-227, 20-241, 20-242, 20-261, 20-263-20-266, 20-281. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20-101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on, under or over the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, deterioration, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(4)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(5)  Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways; 
(6)  Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(7)  Keep track of the different entities using the public rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; 
(8)  Assist in scheduling common trenching and street cuts; 
(9)  Protect the safety, security, appearance and condition of the public rights-of-way, and 
(10)  Prolong the life of surfaces and maintain the safe condition of city streets. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-102. - Authority and scope. 
    This article applies to all utility companies that place facilities in, on, under or over public rights-of-way. Compensation for use of the public rights-of-way shall be paid in accordance with all applicable law, including but not limited to cable providers, in accordance with the Federal Cable Act, 47 USC 5241 et seq., Texas Utilities Code Chapter 66 and Texas Local Government Code Chapter 283 for certificated telecommunication providers, Texas Tax Code §182.025 and Texas Utilities Code §33.008 for distributors of natural gas and electricity or as otherwise applicable; and in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(1), all as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-103. - Administration. 
    The director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the city rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, the regulation of same and ordinances related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. 
(a)  The director of the public works department shall have the same duties, responsibilities and authority as specified for the director stated herein. 
(b)  The director shall supervise utility construction projects and utility inspections. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-104. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply in this article of the city Code. The terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the same meanings herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely permissive. 
    Abandoned facilities means facilities no longer in service or physically disconnected from the operating facilities, or from any other facilities that are in use or that still carry service. 
    Administrative fee means the fee charged by the city to recover its costs incurred for right-of-way management; including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration improvements; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; revoking right-of-way permits and other costs the city may incur in implementing the provisions of this article. 
    Applicant means an owner or authorized agent of an owner, who submits an application for a permit under these provisions of the city Code. 
    Area of influence means that area around a utility excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by the excavation and is subject to more rapid deterioration due to the trench excavation. 
    Certificated telecommunications provider or CTP means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility Commission or to offer local exchange telephone service as defined by Chapter 283 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
    City means the City of Live Oak. 
    Contractor means any public or private person or organization, other than the city. 
    Day means business day unless otherwise specified. 
    Department means the department of public works or a successor department that is responsible for management of the right-of-way and roadway infrastructure. 
    Director means the director of the city department of public works, or his or her designee. 
    Emergency operations are defined as those operations and repairs necessary to prevent damage or injury to the health or safety of the public or any person and the work necessary to address a service interruption. upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood improvement projects are not emergency operations. 
    Excavation means an activity that removes or otherwise disturbs soil, pavement, driveways, curbs, or sidewalks in the right-of-way including Micro-trenching and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity removes or disturbs the paved portion of the right-of-way. 
    Facilities means the plant, equipment, and property, including but not limited to lines, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, ducts, cables, and wires located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the right-of-way and valves, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of utility services. 
    Governing body means the mayor and the city council of the city. 
    Governmental entity means any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road district, drainage or levee district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasi-municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State of Texas or of any other state of the United States and any agency or instrumentality of the State of Texas or of any other state of the United States or of the United States. 
    Permit means a permit issued under this article authorizing excavation in the right-of-way. 
    Permittee means any person or right-of-way user to whom a permit is issued to excavate a right-of-way. 
    Person means any person, company, partnership, agency or other public or private entity, excepting the city. 
    Registration means the application process of a ROW user to use any portion of the right-of-way. 
    Repair means the temporary or permanent construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable. 
    Repair area means that area around an excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by an excavation. 
    Restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition, or better, than existed before the commencement of the work. 
    Right-of-way or public right-of-way means the surface of, and the space above and below, any street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, drainage way, channel, fee interest, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, boulevard, parkway, drive, or roadway easement now or hereafter held by the city or over which the city exercises any rights of management or control and shall include but not be limited to all roadway easements now held, or hereafter held, by the city but shall specifically exclude private property. 
    Right-of-way (ROW) user means a person, its successors and assigns, that uses the Right-of-way for purposes of work, excavation, provision of services, or to install, construct, maintain, repair facilities thereon, including, but not limited to, landowners and service providers. 
    Routine service operation means a work activity that makes no material change to the facilities and does not disrupt traffic. 
    Service means a commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery system that is comprised of facilities located or to be located in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, telecommunications, cable television, video services, Internet services, open video systems, alarm systems, steam, electricity, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines, or sanitary sewage. 
    SICFA holder means a person that has received a state issued certificate of franchise authority from the Texas Public Utility Commission to provide cable or video service pursuant to the authority of Chapter 66 of the Texas Utilities Code. 
    Street means the pavement and sub-grade of a city residential, collector or arterial roadway. 
    Supplementary application means an application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend a permit that has already been issued. 
    TMUTCD shall mean Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
    Utility shall mean any privately or publicly owned entity which uses public rights-of-way to furnish to the public any general public Service, including, without limitation, sanitary sewer, gas, electricity, water, telephone, telecommunications, Internet access, cable service, video service, data services, petroleum products, telegraph, heat, steam, or chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances belonging to such entity and located within and near the right-of-way. Poles are regulated herein only as specifically set forth in this article. 
    UECM means Utility Excavation Criteria Manual, current edition. 
    White lining means marking the excavation site with white washable marking paint or flags prior to requesting a utility locate in order to further identify the site. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-105. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-106. - Field utility coordination. 
    The ROW user shall notify the department at each of the following times during a project: a) 48 hours before the start of construction; b) upon completion of the initial backfill; and c) upon completion of the project. The ROW user shall mark the site of the proposed excavation with white lining and/or flags prior to making a request for locates and actual excavation. White lining is not required for Excavations of more than 60 feet long unless the excavation is located in pavers, cobblestone, pavements, sidewalks, or other public flatwork. 
    The ROW user shall make a request for a utility locate not more than 14 days and not less than 48 hours prior to the commencement of the proposed excavation. Such request shall be made to the state one-call center and to the city public works department. Such requests shall be made by telephone or facsimile and shall include the date, location, extent and reason for such proposed excavation. 
    The use of markers, stakes, poles, barricades or other devices shall be used in such a way to avoid damage to adjoining property. The use of "non-washable" markers is prohibited. 
    The ROW user shall mark the proposed excavation site with paint and/or flags in colors established by the one-call system. The markings shall be placed a distance of not less than five feet in all directions from the outside boundary of the site to be excavated. 
    All excavations shall commence within 14 days of the date of the utility locate. In the event that the excavator fails to commence work within 14 days or the utility locate marks are not visible at the time the excavation is scheduled to commence, the ROW user is required to request a new utility locate. 
    Compliance with the Texas Utilities Code is required at all times. 
    All barricades, plates, cones, traffic directional equipment, and all other traffic control devices owned by the ROW user and used on or near any excavation shall be clearly and visibly marked with the name of the permittee and/or ROW user, as applicable, at all times such equipment is used on or near the right-of-way. An exception to the marking requirement may be made in the event the traffic control equipment is not owned by the permittee or ROW user. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-107. - Maps and records of registrants. 
    Each ROW user must maintain accurate maps and records of its facilities. The information shall be made available to the department within five days of request by the department. The maps and records must depict horizontal and vertical locations, all facilities in and near the right-of-way. The information shall be provided in electronic format compatible with city software or shall be subject to a conversion fee. Maps and records shall indicate horizontal location and a description of the facility for the area involved in the permit application and two-block radius. The department may have facilities located if the ROW user does not provide the requested information. In such event the ROW User shall reimburse the cost to the city to locate the facilities. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-108. - Notice. 
    Notice for purposes of this article shall be made to city via electronic message (E-mail), overnight courier (generally used carrier with tracing available), or hand delivery with signed receipt, facsimile to the department, or United States mail return receipt required. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-109. - Registration. 
    All ROW users must register with the city within 30 days of the effective date of this article. Any person who is not an existing ROW user prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to become a ROW user must first register with the city. All ROW users shall report all changes in its registration information within 30 days of such change. No ROW user shall be authorized to utilize the right-of-way in any capacity or manner without registering and obtaining the necessary right-of-way permit from the city. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-110. - Registration information. 
    The information required for registration includes the following: 
(1)  Identity and legal status of ROW user and names of all operators of any facilities on the right-of-way. 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address of officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration information. 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address of the local representative of the ROW user who shall be available at all times to act on behalf of the ROW user in the event of an emergency. 
(4)  If applicable, certification number issued by public utilities commission. 
(5)  General description of services to be provided. 
(6)  Insurance and bonding information. 
(7)  Employee safety certification information. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-111. - Employee safety certification. 
    The ROW user operating facilities or constructing facilities in any public right-of-way is responsible for the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic through the construction area. The ROW user shall obtain certification through a city approved training organization for a sufficient number of employees working within the right-of-way such that a certified employee is present at the job site during construction activities. The ROW user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic control as specified in the TMUTCD. Alternative training programs may be submitted to the director for city certification. Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic control practices and have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and regulations, including those in TMUTCD, as evidenced by certification, shall place and maintain the traffic control devices in the construction area. Employee certificates shall be maintained current by ROW user at all times. An employee shall produce, upon request of an inspector or certified police officer, proof of a valid training certificate. ROW users engaged in aerial construction obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the right-of-way shall comply with applicable TMUTCD regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-112. - Reserved. 
    This section reserved for utility coordination. 
Sec. 20-113. - Reporting obligations. 
    All ROW users shall provide on demand, proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the city, state or federal government, including a description of the ROW user's intended use of the right-of-way, information sufficient to determine whether the ROW user is subject to franchising or licensing by the city, and information to determine whether the ROW user has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the PUC. The information provided shall be sufficient to determine that the ROW User has applied for and received any permit or other approvals required by all applicable federal, state and local laws. ROW users shall provide all such other information as may be reasonably required by the city to complete the registration statement. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-114. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to dig, plow, blast, make cuts, openings, bore, excavate or use the right-of-way for any purpose without first having made application and obtained a permit therefore. It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any right-of-way for the installation, repair or removal of any facilities, or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the director a permit in compliance with this article. 
(a)  Before issuing a permit, the director shall have been provided a written application on a form furnished by the director, setting forth the name and residence or business address of the applicant; the location and approximate area of the excavation, including its approximate length and width, and, if the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse to the direction of the travel lanes; and, the purpose of the excavation. The application form shall include plans prepared in accordance with city specifications. 
(b)  At the time the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee in an amount as provided for in this article. CTP's, SICFA holders, entities with exemptions as stated in a franchise agreement with the city, and municipally owned utilities are exempt from paying permitting fee. The exemptions are not applicable to any work done after hours or from any penalties incurred for violations of this article and Users are required to pay the city permitting fees for work done after hours. 
(c)  The proposed location, depth and other characteristics of any facilities for which the permit is issued shall be subject to approval of the director, and all backfilling, compaction and pavement restoration performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  No fee or requirement authorized or imposed pursuant to this article shall be construed to affect or alter in any way any obligation of public and private utilities with facilities installed in any right-of-way to relocate the facilities at no cost to the city, subject to state law, if applicable, in the event that relocation is required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of the right-of-way. 
(e)  Combinations of permits shall be permitted at the discretion of the director. Fees shall be assessed based on the excavations permitted. 
(f)  Subdivision monuments, historical markers, and any other signs or structures with foundations in the right-of-way, excluding billboards, are subject to this article. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-115. - Excavation permit application. 
    Application for a permit shall be addressed to the director on a form furnished for that purpose, stating tile extent, dimensions, character and purpose of the cut or excavation to be made, the location, by street and number if possible, where the work is to be done, and the time in which it is to be completed. The application form shall be accompanied by maps of the existing facilities in the area, to the extent available, and the location of the proposed facilities, methodology of construction; proposed start and completion dates. 
(a)  Joint applications. Applicants may apply jointly for permits to excavate the right-of-way at the same time and place. Applicants who apply jointly for a right-of-way permit may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall pay. The city will recognize only one point of contact. 
(b)  Supplementary applications. A permit shall only be valid for the area of the right-of-way specified within the permit. No permittee may cause any work to be done outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee who determines that an area greater than that which is specified in the permit must be excavated must: (a) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby; and (b) receive a new right-of-way permit or permit extension. 
    Permits will be issued or denied within ten days of application. Unless granted for a longer period, an excavation permit shall be valid for 30 days and for the dates specified in the permit. The applicant may request the permit be valid for such longer period as may be necessary in the circumstances, in advance, as part of the application. City may approve or deny the application for such extended permit period. No permittee may commence work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, may continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not complete the work by the permit end date, the Permittee must apply for and may receive a new right-of-way permit or a permit extension for additional time. This supplementary application must be submitted to the city prior to the permit end date. 
    An expedited permit may be requested, and shall be issued within two days of application upon a showing of good cause. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-116. - Issuance of permit. 
    Every person making application for a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article and having complied with such provisions shall be entitled thereto, and, upon filing such application with the director, it shall be his duty to issue the permit, when the provisions of this article shall have been complied with. 
(a)  Upon receiving a written application for an excavation permit and a plan prepared in accordance with city specifications, the director's designee shall set forth all requirements, approve or disapprove the application, sign and return it to the applicant. Excepting only emergency excavations, at least one working day prior to the start of work, the applicant shall telephone the city department of public works and request a permit number, informing the city the date the work will commence. A permit number shall then be assigned to the job and a permit shall be sent to the applicant. 
(b)  No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the Excavation to be made pursuant thereto is commenced within the time stated therein and the work diligently completed. 
(c)  Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done thereunder. The director may grant extensions of time. 
(d)  No person in violation of any requirement of this article shall be issued an excavation permit, nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued an excavation permit on the person's behalf, until the outstanding violation is corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the director. The foregoing requirement is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be imposed or sought by the city at law or equity. 
(e)  No work shall be done under any permit issued under this article except as stated in the permit. If the permit is allowed to expire, the ROW user shall procure a new permit, paying the applicable tee therefor as before, before proceeding with any such work. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-117. - Excavation to be under supervision of the director. 
    Any ROW user engaged in making or backfilling any excavation in any right-of-way shall at all times while such work is in progress keep at the job location the permit, or a copy thereof, and shall, on demand, exhibit the permit to the director, or any police officer. At all times while the work is in progress the ROW user shall also maintain at the job location, a sign, barricade, or other device bearing the ROW user's name. 
    The ROW user shall protect from damage, utility conduits, sewer conduits, water conduits, lawns, shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, or other property at, near or encountered in his work. The ROW user shall determine the boundary of the right-of-way. 
    All excavations and other construction in the streets shall be conducted so as to interfere as little as practicable with the use of rights-of-way and with the use of private property, in accordance with any lawful and reasonable direction given by or under the authority of the governing body of the city under the policy and regulatory powers of the city necessary to provide for public convenience. The ROW user shall reasonably protect from damage, utility facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, lawns, shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, or other property encountered in his work. The ROW user shall not trespass upon private property. The ROW users shall determine the boundary between public Right-of-way and private property. 
    All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment and facilities erected by a ROW user within the city shall be located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets. 
    The city reserves the right to lay, and allow to be laid, electricity, sewer, gas, water and other pipe lines or cables and facilities, as well as drainage pipes and channels and streets and to perform, and allow to be performed, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the governing body of the city, in, across, along, over or under any right-of-way or public place occupied by a ROW user and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street and to maintain all of the city's facilities. In allowing such work to be performed by others, the city shall not be liable to a ROW user for any damage caused by those persons or entities. Nothing herein shall relieve any third party from responsibility for damages caused to a ROW user by such third party. 
    If the city requires a ROW user to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any way or manner to alter, relocate or change its property to enable any other corporation or person, except the city, to use, or to use with greater convenience, any right-of-way or public place, the ROW user shall not be required to make any such changes until such other corporation or person shall have undertaken, with solvent bond, to reimburse a ROW user for any loss and expense which will be caused by, or arise out of such removal, change, adaptation, alteration, conformance or relocation of a ROW user's facilities; provided, however, that the city shall never be liable for such reimbursement. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-118. - Additional excavation permit. 
    Subsequent to issuance of a permit, if it is necessary to excavate a larger area than originally estimated, the permittee shall at once pay to city the amount necessary to obtain the additional permit necessary. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-119. - Appeal. 
    A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) that has been denied a permit; (3) has had a permit revoked; or (4) believes that fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request as follows: 
(1)  Appellant shall provide, within five days of denial, a written notice of appeal filed with the director of the department. The notice must state the alternatives available and routes explored, hardship encountered, cost comparison of other alternatives and a statement of any other significant factors. The right-of-way manager shall provide a written decision within five days of receipt of the appeal. Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial. 
(2)  If a further denial is given, the appellant may thereafter file a written notice of appeal with the director within five days. The notice must state the alternatives available and routes explored, hardship encountered, cost comparison of other alternatives and a statement of any other significant factors. The director shall provide a written decision within the ten business days. Failure to render a decision within ten days shall constitute a denial. 
(3)  If a further denial is given, the appellant may thereafter file a written notice of appeal to the city council with the city secretary within five business days of receipt of the directors written decision. The city secretary shall notify the director and the appellant of the placement of the appeal on the first available city council agenda in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings law. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-120. - Denial of permit. 
    A Permit may be denied or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to provide proof of a surety bond or liability insurance acceptable to the city. 
(2)  Failure to secure a contractor's license or other required license. 
(3)  Failure to perform in accordance with the requirements of the UECM or in accordance with these provisions. 
(4)  The proposed warning or other traffic control procedures or equipment do not comply with the requirements of the TMUTCD or the requirements of the director. 
(5)  The proposed activity would violate a city ordinance or state or federal statute. 
(6)  The permit application contains false or misleading information. 
(7)  The activity would cause a public health or safety hazard. 
(8)  The ROW user is not authorized within the city. 
(9)  The ROW user is in violation of this article relative to work in progress. 
    Denied permits may be appealed as set forth in this article. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Secs. 20-121-20-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 20-141. - Energy, electric and gas standards. 
    Technical standards for energy, electric and gas are defined in the UECM. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-142. - Water and sewer regulations and standards. 
    Water and sanitary sewer providers shall work to provide a connection service point beyond the pavement to all commercial and residential tracts in their service area as streets are constructed either by connection or conduit, for existing development. Technical standards for water and sanitary sewer are defined in the UECM. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-143. - Storm sewer standards. 
    Technical standards for storm sewer are defined in the UECM. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-144. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-145. - Compliance with safety regulations. 
    The permittee and ROW user shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local safety regulations and requirements, including, by example and not limitation, the Occupational Safety and Health Standards for the construction industry. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-146. - Commencement and completion. 
    After obtaining the permit and prior to commencing the work, the permittee shall notify the director, and shall commence and complete all work within the time specified in the permit unless an extension of time is granted by the director. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-147. - Safe conduct of work. 
    Every permittee and ROW user shall prosecute its work diligently and in a good, safe, and workmanlike manner, and shall safeguard and protect the public using the street or right-of-way where the work is being performed from accidents or damage by placing barriers, lights and other sufficient safeguards around all cuts, openings, and excavations. All material, implements and tools stored upon the premises and used in connection with the excavation shall be stored in a safe and non-hazardous manner. All work must be performed only within the hours and days as set forth in the UECM and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. Work in residential areas may only occur during daylight hours. Certain commercial areas and hospital districts are subject to noise controls and other limitations. Details are available in the UECM and from the department. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-148. - Emergency excavations. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit, or duct in or under any street, or right-of-way by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for compliance with law or for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided that the person making the excavation shall notify the director within 24 hours. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this article, excavations authorized by this section shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-149. - Traffic control safety. 
    In the event of non-compliance with the TMUTCD, the ROW user shall be notified in writing of the violation. In the event of continued non-compliance, the director may revoke the permit, in addition to any other remedies available to the city. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-150. - Excavation in streets in good condition. 
    The permittee shall complete pavement restoration of the excavated area within 30 days on major arterial, minor arterial and collector streets and within 30 days on residential and alley streets after final backfill is completed and accepted by the director. The permittee shall conduct the work with a minimum disturbance to existing utilities and shall coordinate all work in or near the existing utilities with the utility owners. 
(a)  Excavation in Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is PCC, the concrete shall be cut first with a saw to a minimum depth of half the thickness of the concrete which shall also cut the reinforcing steel. The concrete can then be broken out with an air chisel or pavement breaker. No more than six inches of PCC shall be broken back beneath the saw cut. Further criteria is set forth in the UECM. The guidelines for jacking and boring are set forth in the UECM. 
(b)  Responsibility of excavated area maintenance. A permittee or ROW user shall maintain their repairs in the right-of-way for the life of the street as defined in this article. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-151. - Lawful use of right-of-way. 
(a)  The use of the right-of-way in any manner which violates federal, state, or local laws, or city codes and regulations, including, without limitation, those relating to health, safety, noise, environmental protection, waste disposal and water and air quality, is prohibited. All permittees shall provide satisfactory evidence of compliance with the foregoing upon request of the city. 
(b)  Permittee shall dispose of all material removed from the right-of-way and any waste created by permittee in compliance with all state, federal and local laws and requirements. 
(c)  If a permittee discovers any contaminated, regulated, or hazardous materials in the right-of-way, permittee shall be responsible for environmental assessment, excavation, testing, transportation, and disposal of any such contaminated or regulated material in accordance with applicable law, or the permittee may elect to abandon the contaminated area of the right-of-way and reroute around the contaminated area. The permittee shall promptly notify the city in writing of the condition. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-152. - Tree trimming and graffiti abatement. 
    Permission is granted to a ROW user, subject to the requirements of the city's landscaping and tree preservation requirement ordinance, which may be amended from time to time, to trim trees upon and overhanging the public right-of-way, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming i n contact with a ROW user's facilities. When so directed by the city, the tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city. The city shall report damage or vandalism to the ROW user's facilities as soon as practicable after City discovers or learns of such event. The ROW user shall make the necessary repairs or restoration, including cleaning of graffiti, within 48 hours after the ROW user discovers or learns of any misuse, destruction, damage, or vandalism to its facilities. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-153. - Conformance with major thoroughfare plan. 
    A ROW user shall consult the city's major thoroughfare plan ("MTP") prior to the acquisition of any interest in real property in the City for the installation or relocation of service lines or other equipment or facilities along or adjacent to any street, right-of-way, thoroughfare, highway, or any proposed street, right-of-way, highway or thoroughfare to attempt to minimize any future conflict regarding the location of such facilities. All ROW users are charged at all times with constructive notice of the MTP subsequent to the effective date of this article. The city shall have no liability for the value of or loss by a ROW user of any improvements constructed in the area shown in the MTP subsequent to the effective date of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-154. - Rights in the event of abandonment. 
    In the event the city closes, vacates, abandons or conveys any right-of-way containing facilities of the ROW user, any such closure, vacation, abandonment or conveyance of land shall be subject to the rights of the ROW user. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-155. - Supervision by city of location of poles and conduits. 
    All poles in the rights-of-way shall be of sound material and straight, and shall not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and shall be placed so as not to unduly interfere with neither vehicular nor pedestrian travel. The location and route of all conduits, fiber, cables, and utilities, and facilities placed and constructed by a ROW user in the construction and maintenance of its system in the city shall be subject to the reasonable and proper control, direction and approval of the city. Any "non-standard" placement of poles, stubs, guys and anchors is subject to all provisions of this article. Any "standard" placement of poles, stubs, guys, and anchors is exempt from this article. "Standard" is defined by the provisions of the UECM. These regulations do not apply to the installation of any type of structure intended to support wireless facilities authorized under the city's zoning regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-156. - Attachments to poles. 
(a)  Nothing shall obligate or restrict a ROW user from exercising its rights to enter into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power companies or with other wire-using companies authorized to operate within the city. 
(b)  A ROW user shall utilize existing poles, conduits, and other facilities whenever reasonably and/or economically possible. Prior to the utilization of any right-of-way for the placement of any of its Facilities, the ROW user shall make available to the director any utility pole usage agreement with each utility within the city currently owning poles, conduits, and other facilities, whose poles, conduits and facilities are to be used. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-157. - Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires. 
    The ROW user shall rearrange its transmission media temporarily as necessary to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The requesting parties shall pay the reasonable and necessary expense of such temporary rearrangements. The ROW user may require payment in advance. The ROW user shall be given not less than five days advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements. The ROW user shall remove its transmission media in connection with the demolition of unsafe structures, including emergency or ordered demolitions at no cost to the city. The ROW user may invoice third parties for the cost of this work where applicable. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-158. - Utility Excavation Criteria Manual adopted. 
    The director is authorized to develop the Utility Excavation Criteria Manual (UECM), First Edition which shall be approved and adopted as the city department of public works' official technical and policy manual no later than the effective date of this article. Three copies of the UECM shall be placed on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city secretary. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-159. - Backfill of excavated area. 
    Open trenches may be temporarily backfilled for the convenience of the permittee or the public safety. At least one hour prior to beginning permanent backfill operations, the permittee shall notify the director of the time the backfill will begin. 
    All excess water and mud shall be removed from the trench prior to backfilling. Any backfill placed during a rainy period or at other times, where excess water cannot be prevented from entering the trench, will be considered temporary and shall be removed as soon as weather permits. All disturbed base material or any base that has been undermined shall be removed and discarded. The new roadway base material shall be a minimum depth of six inches asphalt treated base or other approved roadway base material, as detailed in the UECM. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-160. - Restoration of pavement. 
    Unless otherwise specified in the permit, restoration of the asphalt pavement of any street, alley right-of-way or other public place shall be performed by the permittee or by the city, upon request by the permittee. Nothing in this section shall relieve the ROW user from the responsibility to maintain the excavation or installation in a safe condition until it is repaved by city or otherwise restored. In addition to all other applicable fees or charges, if the ROW user or permittee making the excavation requests repaving by the city, the ROW user shall pay for repaving at a rate to be established by the city. 
(a)  No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more than 400 feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, other than with the prior written consent of the director. 
(b)  All excavations shall comply with the standards and requirements established from time to time by the director for compaction, backfill and pavement restoration. 
(c)  Any excavated pavement, debris and other rubble shall be removed, together with any surplus material, within one working day from the time such material is placed upon the street. After backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the ROW user shall remove all loose paving material and trim the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the director. 
(d)  Whenever any caving occurs in the sidewalls of any excavation, the pavements above such caving shall be cut away, trench backfilled and pavement restored in accordance with the UECM. In no case shall any side or lateral tamping fill any void under a pavement. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-161. - Excavation specifications. 
    All excavations shall be made in accordance with plans submitted with the permit application and in accordance with specifications set forth in the UECM. All plans shall be prepared in accordance with all city specifications and the UECM. All excavations shall be repaired in such a way so as not to become depressed, cracked, broken, or in any way fail during the remaining "life of the street." The remaining "life of the street" for this purpose shall be until the PCI Index drops to below 50 or until the subject area is repaved by the city or other entity. Additional specifications may be contained in the UECM. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-162. - Cleanup of right-of-way. 
    In every case and at all times, the work of removing from the right-of-way all obstructions, surplus materials, debris and waste matter of every description caused by and accumulated from the excavation shall be the responsibility of the ROW user. Streets shall be cleaned by use of a regenerative air or vacuum street sweeper. The ROW user shall clean the surrounding area, as outlined above, within one day upon completion and approval of all trench work and pavement restoration unless the director, sufficient reason therefore having been given to his satisfaction, grants an extension of time. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-163. - Substandard repair of pavement or right-of-way. 
    In case the pavement or the surface of the street, alley, or right-of-way in, over or near any excavation should become depressed, cracked, or broken any time or fails in any way at any time after the Excavation has been made and during the remaining life of the street, the ROW user shall comply with any applicable obligations of this article, including, without limitation, reimbursement to city of the cost to restore the street or right-of-way as set forth in this article. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-164. - Failure to complete work within specified time. 
    In the event any work governed by this article is not completed by the ROW user within the time required or in accordance within the specifications required herein or by the director, the director may cause such work to be performed as is necessary to secure the work area to a safe and passable condition. The ROW user shall reimburse the city for the costs of securing the site. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-165. - Permanent pavement repairs. 
    All permanent pavement repairs shall be made under one of the two following methods: 
(1)  Permanent pavement repairs by city. If the city is to make the permanent pavement repairs, the ROW user shall maintain the excavated area for a period of two (2) weeks after acceptance by the director. After the two-week period, the city will be responsible for maintaining the excavated area until final restoration is made. Backfill failures shall remain the responsibility of the ROW user. The ROW user shall reimburse the city for all costs of any backfill failure before and/or after permanent pavement repair. 
(2)  Permanent pavement repairs by ROW user. If the ROW user is authorized to make permanent pavement repairs, the ROW user will maintain the excavated area until permanent pavement restoration of the excavated area is complete. The ROW user shall make final repairs within 30 days on arterial and collector streets and within 30 days on residential, local and alley streets after the director makes final inspection. Backfill failures shall remain the responsibility of the ROW user. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-166. - Responsibility for signs, barricades and warning devices. 
    The ROW user working in any right-of-way is responsible for the safe movement of traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, through the construction area. The ROW user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic control as specified in the TMUTCD. 
(a)  Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic control practices and have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and regulations, including those in TMUTCD, may place and maintain the traffic control devices in a construction area. 
(b)  The ROW user must either (i) subcontract the barricading to a firm specializing in traffic control, or (ii) submit the qualifications and name(s) of employees to the director for approval prior to the work commencing. They must also submit a traffic control plan for review. All signs and barricades must conform to the requirements of the TMUTCD. 
(c)  All barricades, plates, and other traffic control equipment must conform to TMUTCD specifications and must be inspected and approved by the director if not provided by a traffic control firm. 
(d)  All barricades, plates, and other traffic control equipment must display accurate and sufficient information including the name of the ROW user. 
(e)  Non-compliance with the TMUTCD shall be cited in writing. In the event of non-compliance after citation, the director may place the necessary devices as required and the ROW user shall pay the charges therefor. The ROW user shall reimburse the city for all such expenses as well as $500.00 for non-compliance. Failure to comply with this provision may result in denial of application for future permits. 
(f)  All traffic control devices must be removed immediately upon completion of work. 
    Prior to commencement of any excavation, or any work relative to a permit, the ROW user shall install at the work site informational sign in conformance with the requirements of the UECM. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-167. - Duty to barricade. 
    At all times during construction activity, the contractor and/or ROW user, as applicable, shall place and maintain all necessary and proper barriers and other safeguards, including watchmen certified in accordance with the safety training described in this article, if necessary, upon and around the work for the prevention of accidents, and after daylight hours, shall place, maintain and keep suitable sufficient lights, in accordance with the TMUTCD. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-168. - Inspection. 
    The permittee shall make the work-site accessible to the city, and others as authorized by law, for inspection at all reasonable times during performance of the work. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-169. - Materials testing. 
    The department may require testing of materials used in construction in or near the right-of-way to determine conformance to required specifications, including, but not limited to, compaction tests on backfill materials, subgrade, aggregate base course, Portland concrete (rigid pavement), asphaltic concrete (flexible pavement) and other construction materials as deemed necessary by the department. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-170. - Duties of persons making excavations or creating obstructions. 
    Any person who shall cause to be made any excavation or obstruction in any street or right-of-way may not suffer the same to remain there beyond a time reasonably sufficient for the completion of the work and/or removal of the obstruction, and shall repair the subject portion of such street, or right-of-way so as to restore the same to its condition previous to the making of such cut or obstruction. It shall be the duty of such excavators to protect the area while such condition exists and promptly to repair the same so as to leave the street or right-of-way in as good condition as before the excavation. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-171. - Cease work. 
    At any time, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. The director may revoke the permit of any permittee in any instance where there is a threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-172. - Requirements. 
    The director may issue a written notice to the permittee indicating work that does not conform to the terms of the permit, applicable standards, conditions, or codes, or other applicable regulation. Within ten days after issuance of written notice, the permittee shall present proof to the director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-173. - Reporting. 
    When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish the director a completion certificate. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-174. - Revocation of permit. 
    The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any permits, without refund of the permit fee, in the event of a breach by the permittee of the terms and/or conditions of the Permit or of this article or any city ordinance. A breach of the terms of the Permit shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The violation of any provision of the permit; 
(2)  An evasion or attempt to evade any provision of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens; 
(3)  Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit application; 
(4)  The failure to meet insurance, surety bond, or indemnification requirements; 
(5)  The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; 
(6)  The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article; 
(7)  Repeated traffic control violations; 
(8)  Failure to repair facilities damaged in the right-of-way; or 
(9)  Violation of any part of this article. 
    If the director determines that the permittee has committed a breach of any law or condition of the right-of-way permit, the director shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. Continued violation may be cause for revocation of the permit, or legal action, or both. The director may revoke the permit, provide specifications to cure the breach, or both. Within five calendar days of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the director with a plan, acceptable to the director, for correction of the breach. Permittee's failure to do so or permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan shall be cause for revocation of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-175. - Work done without a permit. 
    No cut, excavation, grading or disturbing of the right-of-way in any way shall be made other than excavations necessary for emergency work without first securing a permit. No person or ROW user shall at any time open or encumber more of the right-of-way than shall be reasonably necessary to complete a project in the most expeditious manner. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-176. - Right-of-way restoration requirements. 
    The work to be done pursuant to the permit and any repair and subsequent restoration of the right-of-way must be completed within the dates specified in the permit. In the event of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work is prohibited by unseasonable or unreasonable conditions, the director may extend the dates on receipt of a substantiated supplementary application for a permit extension. 
    All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossing, or improvements of any kind which are owned or possessed by city and damaged, disturbed, or removed by a ROW User shall be fully repaired promptly by the ROW user at its sole expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the director. 
    After any excavation, the ROW user shall, at its expense, restore the right-of-way, trench envelope, pavement structure and the surrounding area, to the same or better condition than it was prior to the excavation. The restoration shall be made in accordance with specifications set forth in the UECM and the repair shall endure without failure for the remaining life of the street, as such period is described in this article. 
    In the event the ROW user fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required herein, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration, the city may, at its option, serve written notice upon the ROW user that, unless within five days after serving of such notice a satisfactory arrangement can be made for the proper restoration of the right-of-way by the ROW user, the city may take over the work and prosecute same to completion, by contract or otherwise, at the expense of the ROW user, and the ROW user and its surety shall be liable to the city for any and all cost incurred by the city by reason of such prosecution and completion, including, without limitation, the applicable public inconvenience penalty. Nothing contained herein shall limit any other remedies available to the city. 
    If any excavation cannot be back-filled immediately, the ROW user shall securely and adequately cover the excavation and maintain proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of the opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel. 
    In all right-of-way restoration, the ROW user guarantees its work and shall maintain it for the remaining "life of the street" following completion of the restoration. During the period following completion, the ROW user shall, in the event of any failure of the restoration, upon notification from the director, reimburse city for pavement restoration costs. Additionally, the ROW user in the event of such failure, shall within 48 hours of notice from city, repair the subject trench envelope. 
    The "life of the street" guarantee period shall be applicable to failure of the pavement surface as well as failure of the trench envelope. Notwithstanding remediation of the pavement structure by city, the ROW user retains repair responsibility at all times during the guaranty period for the trench envelope. 
    A right-of-way user whose work is completed by the city shall, on completion of the work and according to the certified bill of the cost thereof to be prepared by the director, pay to the city, on its order, the amount of the certified bill as reimbursement for such work. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-177. - Excavations not in accordance with permit declared unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made, any excavation, or to install, cause or allow to be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance in or under the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place, at any location, other than that described in the application for the permit and as shown on the plans filed with the director, and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the circumstances appearing after the excavation is commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the director may grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account. 
(b)  Failure to comply with requirements set forth in the chapter on any permit shall be cause for revocation of the subject permit and of any other permits held by the same permittee until the violations have been corrected or the director has approved alternative requirements. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-178. - Removal and reconstruction where work defective. 
    All construction work in the streets, right-of-way, sidewalks and public places of the city is declared to be subject to the exclusive control of the city, and whenever, in the opinion of the director, any such work shall not have been duly completed within a reasonable time or shall have been executed in a defective manner, whether because of bad workmanship or materials or because not true to the lines or grades or specifications therefor given to him by the director, then upon written demand or notice from the director, such ROW user or contractor shall promptly remedy, complete or remove and reconstruct such incomplete or defective work all as the director may require, and these provisions shall also apply to all repair and maintenance work. If the contractor or ROW user shall fail or refuse to do so within a reasonable time to be specified by the director, then, if the director shall so order, such work shall be completed or corrected or removed and wholly or partially reconstructed by the city, in such manner as in the opinion of the director may be necessary to make such work as good as originally required, and such work may be done by contract or otherwise, under the direction of the director. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-179. - Location and relocation of facilities. 
    Subject to applicable federal, state, and local law, the ROW user shall, upon the request of the city, locate and/or relocate its facilities situated within any right-of-way, at no expense to the city, where reasonable and necessary to accommodate street construction, widening, or public improvement projects of the city. When relocation is necessitated by federal government requirements, and includes reimbursements, the city will reimburse applicant for its proportionate share from funds provided the city in such reimbursements. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-180. - Pre-excavation facilities location. 
    The ROW user shall contact the one call center and the city utilities, so long as that center is in existence and utilized by the city, or such other center at the time utilized by city, at least 48 hours prior to excavation. The ROW user shall protect and support all utility facilities during construction. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-181. - Relocation facilities for city. 
    In the event the city finds it necessary to move a ROW user's equipment to protect it, city shall notify the local representative of the ROW user. ROW user shall promptly move or facilitate the relocation of the subject facilities at ROW user's expense. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-182. - Right-of-way vacation and reservation of right. 
    In the event of vacation of a right-of-way requiring the relocation of facilities, the ROW user being relocated shall pay the costs of the relocation where the ROW user does not own an easement or other real property interest. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-183. - Abandoned facilities. 
    A ROW user owning abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall: 
(a)  Remove its facilities and repair, at its expense, any damage caused by the removal. The director may allow some or all facilities to remain if the director determines same is in the best interest of the public to do so; or 
(b)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the ROW user's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way have been lawfully assumed by another authorized ROW user. 
    The facilities of a ROW user who fails to comply with this section, and those facilities which remain unused for two years, shall be deemed to be abandoned unless, within the aforesaid two-year period, the city receives written confirmation and reasonable evidence that the ROW user intends to use the facilities. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, taking possession of the abandoned facilities or requiring the removal of the facilities by the ROW user. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-184. - Routing and spatial assignment. 
    The city reserves the right, in the permit or otherwise, to restrict or determine the route (pathway) and/or spatial location, whether horizontal, vertical or depth, of any facility and/or structure or improvement in the right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Secs. 20-185-20-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COSTS, FEES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 20-201. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit application fee. There is a permit application fee of $25.00. Permits shall be issued or denied within ten days. There is an expedited application fee of $250.00 for permits which shall be issued or denied within two days. The fees are paid by an applicant when a permit is issued. The fees are charged for administration and input of permit data. An expedited permit may be requested upon a showing of good cause, including but not limited to a pending order for service that cannot be met by means of existing facilities of the ROW user, an expedited permit may be requested and shall be issued or denied within two days of application. 
(b)  Inspection fee. The work allowed by each permit shall be subject to inspection as determined by the director. There is an inspection fee of $200.00 per inspection. The department shall collect the fee from an Applicant for each inspection by the department for any excavation. The fee shall be paid at the time of application for a permit. Inspections may be performed on any and all excavations, at the discretion of the director, based on previous performance of the utility owner, location of excavation, type of work and/or construction methodology. Overtime inspection fees are incurred at a rate of $40.00 per hour and $70.00 per hour on Sundays and holidays. 
(c)  Permit expiration fee. A fee of $30.00 will be charged for any permit that has not been extended before its expiration date and for any permit wherein work has not been completed by the expiration date provided for in the permit. The 30-day period begins with the date of issuance of the permit. 
(d)  Electronic maps submittal fee. A fee of $40.00 per hour will be charged for each hour of labor necessitated by information submitted to city in hard copy format in lieu of submittals to city in electronic format. There is a minimum of two hours. 
(e)  Registration fee. There is a fee of $35.00 per right-of-way user per year for processing registration information, which fee will be collected upon registration. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-202. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
    This is not a traffic ordinance authorized under the Texas Motor Vehicle Statutes, and is not governed by the penal provisions there under. Any violation of the provisions of this division is hereby declared to be a health and safety related misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-203. - Clean up costs. 
    The ROW user shall maintain the area on and around the excavation and related work in a clean, safe and orderly fashion at all times during conduct of the excavation and shall clean the same area upon completion of work. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Secs. 20-204-20-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE, BONDING, AND LIABILITY 

Sec. 20-221. - Liability of right-of-way user. 
    To the extent allowed by law, the right-of-way user shall be liable to the city for any damage or loss occasioned by any act or omission occurring in connection with his excavation, and subject to state law, the ROW user shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend city, its officers and employees from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its officers or employees may be subjected for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act or omission. City shall promptly notify a permittee, or ROW user, at the address set forth in the permit, or last known address, of any claim or suit served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee or ROW user in connection with an excavation. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-222. - Insurance. 
(a)  Right-of-way users shall furnish an original completed certificate of insurance or the city's standard certificate of insurance form to the city's finance department, city secretary's office, and public works department, which shall be completed by an agent authorized to bind the named underwriter(s) and their company to the coverage, limits, and termination provisions shown thereon, and which shall furnish and contain all required information referenced or indicated thereon. The original certificate(s) or form must have the agent's original signature, including the signer's company affiliation, title and phone number, and be mailed directly from the agent to the city. The city shall have no duty to pay or perform under this article until such certificate shall have been delivered to the city's finance department, city secretary's office, and public works department, and no officer or employee, other than the city attorney, shall have authority to waive this requirement. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements of this section to modify insurance coverage and their limits when deemed necessary and prudent by the city attorney based upon changes in statutory law, court decisions, or circumstances surrounding this article, but in no instance will the city allow modification whereupon the city may incur increased risk. 
(c)  Subject to the right-of-way user's right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such amounts as are approved by the city, right-of-way users shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration of the permit, and any extension thereof, and/or duration of time it maintains facilities in the public right-of-way, at the right-of-way user's sole expense, insurance coverage written on an occurrence basis, by companies authorized and admitted to do business in the State of Texas and rated A- or better by A.M. Best Company and/or otherwise acceptable to the city, in the following types and amounts: 
_____ 
TYPE AMOUNT Workers' compensation Statutory Employer's liability $500,000/$500,000/$500,000 Commercial general (public) liability insurance to include coverage for the following:  (a) Premises/operations Bodily injury and  (b) Independent contractors Property damage of $2,000,000 per occurrence  (c) Products/completed operations $5,000,000 General  (d) Contractual liability Aggregate or its equivalent in umbrella or excess liability coverage  (e) Personal injury  (f) Explosion, collapse, underground  (g) Broad form property [damage] to include fire legal liability Business automobile liability Combined single limit for bodily injury and  (a) Owned/leased vehicles Property damage of $1,000,000 per occurrence or its equivalent.  (b) Non owned vehicles  (c) Hired vehicles Professional liability (claims made from) $1,000,000 per claim to pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages by reason of any act, malpractice, error or omission in professional services. Contractor's pollution liability coverage $1,000,000 written on a claims made form with a two-year extended reporting period Pollution liability motor carrier and trucker coverage endorsing the upset, overturn and remediation of a load in transport $1,000,000 per occurrence written on an occurrence form, combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. If applicable  
_____
(d)  The city shall be entitled, upon request and without expense, to receive copies of the policies and all endorsements thereto as they apply to the limits required by the city, and may make a reasonable request for deletion, revision, or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions (except where policy revisions are established by law or regulation binding upon either of the parties hereto or the underwriter of an such policies). Upon such request by the city, the rights-of-way user shall exercise reasonable effort to accomplish such changes in policy coverage, and shall pay the cost thereof. 
(e)  Right-of-way users shall ensure that all insurance contracts and certificate(s) of insurance contain the following required provisions. 
  Name the city and its officers, employees, volunteers, agents, and elected representatives as additional insureds with respect to the operations and activities of, or on behalf, the named insured performed in the right-of-way under provision of this article, with the exception of the professional liability, workers' compensation and liability policy; and 
  Right-of-way user's insurance shall be deemed primary with respect to any insurance or self-insurance carried by the city; and 
  Provide for an endorsement that the "other insurance" clause shall not apply to the City of Live Oak where the city is an additional insured shown on the policy; and 
  Workers' compensation and employers' liability will provide for a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city. 
(f)  Right-of-way user shall notify the city in the event of any notice of cancellation, non-renewal or material change in coverage and shall give such notices not less than 30 days prior to the change, or ten days' notice for cancellation due to non-payment of premiums, which notice must be accompanied by a replacement certificate of insurance. All notices shall be given to the city at the following address: 
City of Live Oak 
City Secretary 
8001 Shin Oak Dr. 
Live Oak, Texas 78233 
(g)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the Right-of-way User may be held responsible for payments of damages to persons or property resulting from the Right-of-way User's or its subcontractors' performance of the work performed in the Public Right-of-way. 
(h)  The city owned utilities shall not be required to provide the insurance specified herein. 
(i)  With respect to the right-of-way user's obligation to comply with the requirements for commercial general (public) liability insurance coverage, the city acknowledges and shall allow a self-insured governmental entity with ability to maintain excess insurance coverage to satisfy its obligation to comply with the insurance requirements stipulated herein through self-insurance upon annual production of evidence in the form of a self-insured letter provided by the right-of-way user that is satisfactory to the city attorney. For any other self-insured entity, the city may allow the right-of-way user to self-insure upon annual production of evidence that is satisfactory to the city attorney. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-223. - Performance/assurance bond. 
    Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant therefore shall execute and deliver to the city, to be kept on file in the city secretary's office, a good and sufficient bond of or assurance, in the sum of $10,000.00 to be approved by the public works director and conditioned that the person making the application shall promptly adjust, pay and settle all legitimate claims for damages that may result by reason of carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing such work or by reason of any defects therein caused or arising from careless, negligent or imperfect construction thereof, and to hold the city free and harmless from liability on all such claims for damages to the performance or assurance bond shall cover the cost of repairs in or upon the street, sidewalk or other public place where the work is to be done that may become necessary by reason of such cut or excavation having been made. The bond shall be maintained until the work is accepted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-224. - Optional continuing bond and deposit. 
    In lieu of a bond of performance or assurance required for each permit issued under the performance/assurance bond section of this article, the applicant may maintain a one-time bond of performance or assurance with the director the sum of $100,000.00 for the purposes specified in section 20-145, and shall have on file, in the city secretary's office, an approved bond of performance or assurance in like amount, being then in full force and effect, against which claims shall not have been presented aggregating more than $100,000.00; provided, further, that section 20-146 shall not apply to applications for permits to make cuts, openings or excavations in any street, plaza or other public place paved under contract with the city, unless the contract of maintenance and the maintenance bond therefor shall have expired. The bond shall be maintained until the applicant is no longer working in or on city streets. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-225. - Liability of contractor and sureties for maintenance and repair work. 
    Any defects of workmanship or material relating to work done by an excavator during the initial project or becoming known or which should have been known during the guarantee period (the life of the street) shall be known as maintenance or repair work and both the excavator and the sureties and/or the contractor's bond shall be fully liable for any default of such contractor under this section. In the event of a failure in the restoration of an excavation, the ROW user shall have one opportunity to repair, in a timely manner, the section of the restoration that has failed at its expense, which repair shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. In the event of any subsequent failure of that section of the restoration, the city retains the right and option to terminate the ROW user's guaranty, upon written notice to the ROW user. In such event, the ROW user shall reimburse the city for its direct costs associated with the repair of the failure of the restoration work. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-226. - When additional security required. 
    In the event the director reasonably believes the contractor or ROW user's solvency is threatened, the director may, at any time, make written demand on a contractor or ROW user for bonds and the contractor or ROW user shall immediately furnish such additional bond or bonds. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-227. - Decision of director binding on contractor, row user, and sureties. 
    In any question as to when any work was actually begun or other specific dates, the decision of the director shall be conclusive on the contractor, ROW user, and the sureties on all such bonds. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Secs. 20-228-20-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES AND EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 20-241. - Variances/exemptions. 
    A permittee or ROW user may request a variance from any of the requirements of this article by filing a written request with the director stating the requirement and the basis for the variance. Incomplete variance requests may be rejected. The applicant shall bear its own expenses of the application process. 
(a)  Any request for a variance from any right-of-way restoration requirement shall be made in writing in advance of any contemplated work and shall be accompanied by digitally formatted detailed plans of the substituted reconstruction and/or repair of the excavated area, if applicable. 
(b)  Any request for an exemption from any penalty or fee other than as provided in this, shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a written detailed request stating the reasons therefor. 
(c)  Any request for an exemption from any permit, or any other requirement of this article shall be made in writing, by detailed written request therefor, stating all pertinent reasons. 
(d)  The department shall grant or deny an application for a variance within ten days of receipt of the application for variance. 
(e)  Denial of the variance may be appealed in accordance with the appeal section of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-242. - Exception for irrigation, sprinkler and residential purposes. 
    This article shall not be applicable to excavations which are not in pavement and are solely for the purpose of creating a sprinkler system for one or more residential units located in Bexar County. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Secs. 20-243-20-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CERTIFICATED TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDERS AND SICFA HOLDERS 

Sec. 20-261. - Certificated telecommunications provider and SICFA holder authority required/non-exclusive use. 
    A CTP or SICFA holder must provide evidence that the CTP or SICFA holder has acquired authorization from the Texas Public Utility Commission pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use public rights-of-way. The CTP's right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way shall not be exclusive and CTP or SICFA holder recognizes the city's right to exercise its police powers and manage its public rights-of-way, based on applicable local, state and federal laws. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-262. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-263. - Transfer and notice. 
    A CTP or SICFA holder shall notify the director and the city secretary of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a CTP's business within at least 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A CTP or SICFA holder shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the director at all times during which the CTP or SICFA holder uses the right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-264. - Exemption from fees. 
    Municipally owned utilities, CTP's and SICFA holders are exempted from the following fees provided for in this article: 
  Permit application fee, including expedited application fee, and permit expiration fee. 
  Additional excavation permit fee. 
  Inspection fee. 
  Registration fee. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-265. - Waiver of bonds. 
    Unless determined otherwise by the director a CTP will be exempt from the bonding requirements of this article, however, in the event that the director determines, based upon reasonable grounds, that a bond is necessary to protect the public assets, or the health and safety of the public, then the Director may require that a CTP post a reasonable bond not to exceed $100,000.00. The director shall consult with the city's risk manager prior to imposing a bond on a CTP. Factors to be considered in determining reasonable grounds may include, but not limited to, a conviction for violation of this article, a general pattern of sub-standard adherence to the provisions of this article or the failure to comply with this article. If three years pass from the date that the director requires a bond of a CTP and it has not been necessary for the city to seek performance under the bond, then a bond will no longer be required pursuant to this section. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Sec. 20-266. - CTP indemnity and SIFCA holder. 
    A CTP and SIFCA holder shall indemnify the city as specified by Section 283.057 of the Texas Local Government Code and Section 66.012 of the Texas Utilities Code, as may be amended. A CTP or SICFA holder shall be exempt from all indemnity requirements of this article that are inconsistent with Section 283.057 and Section 66.012. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Secs. 20-267-20-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 20-281. - Exemption for walk done under contract with city. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any sidewalk or curbing construction or repairs done under contract with the city, except to the extent which may be specified in such contract or ordinance passed pursuant thereto, or as further described herein. 
( Ord. No. 1541 , § 1, 11-8-16) 
Secs. 20-282-20-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY NETWORK NODE REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A, the City's Design Manual, as adopted by § V of Ord. No. 1580 , is not setout herein at length, but is available for review in the office of the city secretary. 

Sec. 20-301. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for the placement of node support poles in the right-of-way and network nodes in the public right-of-way and on service poles within the city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefits and will be consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city public right-of-way and the city as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this chapter, the city is establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by network nodes, including without limitation, ensuring that network nodes or node support poles do not adversely affect: 
(1)  Use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  The operation of facilities lawfully located in public right-of-way or public property; 
(4)  The ability of the city to protect the environment, including the prevention of damage to trees; 
(5)  The character of residential and historic areas, and city parks, in which network nodes may be installed; and 
(6)  The rapid deployment of network nodes to provide the benefits of wireless services. 
(c)  Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters, parts of chapters or rules adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-302. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the definitions found in the city design manual for the installation of network nodes and node support poles ("the design manual") are hereby incorporated into this article and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The following definitions as found in the design manual are specifically applicable to this article: 
    Abandon and its derivatives means the facilities installed in the public right-of-way (including by way of example but not limited to: poles, wires, conduit, manholes, handholes, cuts, network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof) that have been left by provider in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than 90 consecutive calendar days unless, after notice to provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the applicable facilities, or portion thereof, are still in active use. 
    Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of Wireless Services. 
    Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Adopted building codes detailed in chapter 5, of the City of Live Oak Code of Ordinances; and 
(2)  City amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with chapter 284. 
    Application means a small cell application or transport application. 
    City means the City of Live Oak, Texas, or its lawful successor. 
    Chapter 284 means Tex. Local Government Code ch. 284. 
    Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    Concealment or camouflaged means any wireless facility any other applicable equipment that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged or otherwise concealed such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive as allowed as a condition for city advance approval under Chapter 284, Sec. 284.105 in historic or design districts. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility also includes any wireless facility conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility is located and may include, but is not limited to hidden beneath a façade, blended with surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree or plant features. 
    CPS energy pole means a utility pole owned and operated by CPS energy, a municipally owned utility, as defined by Section 11.003, Utilities Code, and located in a public right-of-way. 
    Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes. 
    Disaster emergency or disaster or emergency means an imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city is threatened, and includes, but is not limited to any declaration of emergency by city, state or federal governmental authorities. 
    Design district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city Code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
    Distributed antenna system or DAS shall be included as a type of "network node." 
    Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
    Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
    Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
    Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designed as a historic district under city, state, or federal law. 
    Infrastructure provider shall be included as a type of network provider. 
    Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
    Local means within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
    Location means the city approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node. 
    Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by [Tex. Local Government Code] § 284.103 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
    Manager means the city manager for the City of Live Oak, Texas, or designee. 
    Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
    Municipal park means an area that is designated as a public space for the purpose of recreational or community activity. 
    Municipally owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by section 11.003, Utilities Code, and located in a public right-of-way. 
    Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. Such equipment is also referred to as "small cell equipment". The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
    Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. Such a person is also referred to as an "infrastructure provider." 
    Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    Permit means a written authorization granted pursuant to a small cell application or transport facility application for the use of the public right-of-way from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the city has police power authority. 
    Pole means a service pole, CPS energy utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
    Preliminary site survey means a field survey applicable to the proposed installation of a network node or node support pole attended by CPS energy and the network provider, prior to the submission of an application to the city, conducted for the purpose of determining the general engineering requirements for providing electricity at the proposed location. 
    Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
    Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Public right-of-way management ordinance means the City of Live Oak Code of Ordinances. 
    Residential area means single-family residential lots or undeveloped land that is designated for single-family use of the City of Live Oak zoning regulations or private deed restrictions. 
    SCADA or supervisory control and data acquisition systems means a category of software application programs and hardware used by the city for process control and gathering of data in real time from remote locations in order to monitor equipment and conditions of the city public water and wastewater utility facilities. These systems may utilize both cable and wireless communications. 
    Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by a municipality and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
    Small cell application means a written request submitted to the city for a permit for the collocation of a network node or node support pole in public right-of-way. A small cell application must include all the information required by the city at the time of submission in order to be considered complete at submission. 
    Small cell equipment shall be included as a type of "network node." 
    Street means only the paved portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while the public right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements, a "street" does not. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
    SWPPP shall mean storm water pollution prevention plan. 
    TAS means Texas Accessibility Standards. 
    Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated attached to a service pole by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    Underground compliance area shall mean means an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground pursuant to city ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way. 
    User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, or under depending on the context. 
    Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Tex. Local Government Code ch. 284 and section 51.002 of the Utilities Code. 
    Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in Tex. Local Government Code Ch. 284. 
    Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-303. - Governing law. 
    This chapter shall be construed in accordance with Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code ("the Code") to the extent not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-304. - Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way. 
    Pursuant to this chapter and subject to the design manual and the Code, a wireless network provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities. 
    The terms of this chapter shall apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of annexation or the date the city provides the company written notice, whichever date occurs later. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-305. - Compliance with design manual and applicable codes. 
    All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this right-of-way management ordinance, city applicable codes, laws, including regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission, and the terms and conditions of the city's design manual. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-306. - Permitted use; application. 
(a)  Permitted use. Collocation of network nodes and the placement of node support poles, meeting the parameters set forth in this division and in applicable law, shall be a permitted use. No zoning or land use review shall apply. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall place a network node, transport facility or node support pole in the public right-of-way, without first filing a permit application and obtaining a permit therefore, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(c)  Permit application. All permit applications filed pursuant to this article shall be on a form, paper or electronic, provided by the city. The applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(d)  Application requirements. The permit application shall be made by the network provider or its duly authorized representative and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address. 
(2)  The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the filing of the application. 
(3)  Construction and engineering drawings and information confirming that the construction will be consistent with city Code and design manual. 
(e)  Routine maintenance and replacement. A permit application shall not be required for: (i) routine maintenance; or for (ii) the replacement of a node with another node that is substantially similar. 
(f)  Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(g)  Application fees. See City of Live Oak Fee Schedule. 
(h)  CPS energy coordination . Network providers are strongly encouraged to complete a preliminary site survey with CPS energy before submitting any Application for the installation of network nodes or node support poles in city rights-of-way. The CPS energy preliminary site survey will coordinate the safe and efficient supply of electrical power to proposed network node installations with minimal disruption to existing infrastructure in the rights-of-way. Conducting the preliminary site survey will guide Network Providers in selecting the sites that are most cost-effective from the perspective of incurring expenses for installation of line extensions necessary to provide electric service to the proposed network node. More importantly, by completing the preliminary site survey in advance of submitting an application, the network provider would rule out the possibility that a proposed network node site is later found as not eligible for such installation based on technical, engineering or cost considerations. This would avoid unnecessary delays in the city's permitting process and streamline the coordination of electric service for the network node installation. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-307. - General construction and maintenance requirements. 
    A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes, network support poles and transport facilities described in the Code in a manner that does not: 
(a)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(b)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(c)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(d)  Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; or 
(e)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-308. - Action on right-of-way permit applications. 
(a)  Application review and fees. The city shall review applications for network nodes, node support poles and transport facilities in light of their conformity with applicable law, and the requirements of the city Code and design manual; charge reasonable application fees as permitted by law; and issue permits to network providers for the use of city rights-of-way on nondiscriminatory terms and conditions as outlined in the following table and subject to other requirements herein: 
Network 
Node Activity One-Time 
Application Fees Shot Clock Timelines 
for Review of Application Network Node on Node Support Pole $1,000 per Application 10 days completeness review and 90 days to approve or deny Application. If Application is incomplete, the shot clock timeline will be reset to 90 days upon submission of a complete Application. Network Node on City-Owned Pole $500 for up to 5 Network Nodes per Application and $250 for each additional Network Node 10 days completeness review and 90 days to approve or deny Application. If Application is incomplete, the shot clock timeline will be reset to 90 days upon submission of a complete Application. Network Node on Electric or Telephone Utility Pole $500 for up to 5 Network Nodes per Application and $250 for each additional Network Node 10 days completeness review and 90 days to approve or deny Application. If Application is incomplete, the shot clock timeline will be reset to 90 days upon submission of a complete Application. Transport Facility No Application Fee 10 days completeness review and 21 days to approve or deny Application. If the Application is incomplete, the shot clock timeline will stop running on the date of notification until such time that a complete Application is submitted. Micro Network Node Notice of installation required. No Application Fee Not Applicable  
(1)  Within ten days of receiving an application for a network node, node support pole or transport facility, the city will notify the applicant if the application is incomplete and identify the missing information. There shall be no additional fee charged for resubmittal of a complete and revised application. 
(2)  The city shall advise the applicant in writing of its final decision, and, if denied, the basis for that denial, including specific provisions of city Code, design manual or applicable law on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies the application. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within 90 days of receipt of the amended application. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial. 
(3)  If the city fails to act on an application within the shot clock review period specified in this section, the application shall be deemed approved. 
(4)  An Applicant may file a consolidated application and receive permits for up to 30 network nodes. Provided, however, that the city's denial of any network node within a single application shall not affect other network nodes submitted in the same application. The city shall grant permits for any and all network nodes in a single application that it does not deny, subject to the requirements of this section. 
(5)  A network provider proposing to install a micro network node in city rights-of-way shall provide the city notice, prior to installation, of the GIS coordinates of the proposed site, along with proof that such micro network node will not interfere with municipal wireless systems that utilize licensed or unlicensed frequencies in city operations. 
(b)  Review of eligible facilities requests. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city shall approve and may not deny applications for eligible facilities requests within 60 days according to the procedures established under 47 CFR 1.40001(c). 
(c)  Exempted work from review. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a network provider is not required to submit an application, obtain a permit, or pay a rate for work described under Texas Local Government Code § 284.157. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-309. - Network nodes in the public right-of-way; maximum height; other requirements. 
(a)  Maximum size of permitted use. Collocation of permitted use network nodes in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the size limitations specified in Tex. Local Government Code § 284.003. 
(b)  Compliance with undergrounding requirements. In accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 284.107, a network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. 
(c)  Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, written consent of the city manager if the public right-of-way is located in a municipal park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is 1) not more than 50 feet wide; and 2) adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. A network provider shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions when installing network nodes in parks and residential areas. 
(d)  Zoning. A network provider seeking to construct, replace or modify a pole or node in the public right-of-way that exceeds the height or size limits contained in this section, shall be subject to applicable zoning requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-310. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Time of installation. A network provider shall begin the installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final approval and shall diligently pursue the installation to completion. Provided, however, the city may place a longer time limit on completion or grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. 
(c)  Right to occupy. Once a network provider has collocated a network node or placed a node support pole pursuant to a permit, the provider shall be permitted to continue to maintain such collocation or such pole unless required to remove or relocate under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-311. - Removal, relocation or modification of network nodes in the ROW. 
(a)  Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a network provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any network node or node support pole within the public right-of-way whenever the city has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to disconnect or move any network node located within the public right-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall notify the network provider and allow the network provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to the city disconnecting or removing a facility and shall notify the network provider after disconnecting or removing a network node or node support pole. 
(c)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a network node or node support pole within the public right-of-way, the network provider shall notify the city within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice, the city may direct the network provider to remove all or any portion of a network node or node support pole if the city, or any of its departments, determines, subject to city Code, that such removal is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-312. - Public right-of-way rate. 
(a)  Annual rate. See City of Live Oak Fee Schedule. Once a network provider has installed and made operational a network node in the public right-of-way, network provider shall pay to the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way annually per node in the city public right-of-way as authorized by state law. If fee is increased by state law, this fee shall be adjusted to reflect state law. 
(b)  Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from the public right-of-way and cease paying the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way following removal and notification to the city of such removal. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-313. - Attachment to service poles in the public right-of-way. 
    A network provider shall be permitted to attach network nodes to city-owned service poles, consistent with applicable law and city Code and subject to the requirements specified herein. 
(1)  Permits. A network provider shall obtain a permit, pursuant to the terms of this chapter, prior to collocating network nodes on service poles. 
(2)  Make ready. Network provider shall be responsible for costs for make ready work on city service poles to which provider seeks to place a network node. 
(3)  Technical limitations. In the event the city determines, based upon technical grounds, that inadequate space exists on a service pole to accommodate the proposed network node, such pole may be replaced by network provider, at the network provider's expense, with a service pole with adequate space to accommodate the proposed network node. 
(4)  Facilities rearrangements. If another provider would have to rearrange or adjust any of its facilities to accommodate a new network node, the city shall use reasonable efforts to work with the affected providers to coordinate such activity. The applicant shall not be responsible for any third-party costs, including those of other network providers, to adjust existing attachments. 
(5)  Service pole attachment fee. See City of Live Oak Fee Schedule. 
(6)  Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from a service pole in the public right-of-way and cease paying the attachment fee to the city upon notification to the city that the facilities have been removed. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-314. - Transport facilities. 
    Installation of transport facilities, including applicable compensation to the City for such facilities, shall be governed by Tex. Local Government Code § 284.055. See City of Live Oak Fee Schedule for fees detailed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-315. - Design manual. 
    A network provider shall comply with the city's design manual, included as attachment A to this article, in place on the date a permit application is filed in relation to work for which the city has approved a permit application. The city's design manual may not conflict with applicable law and must be competitively neutral. The design manual is on file with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-316. - Fee schedule. 
    City of Live Oak Fee Schedule, of the City of Live Oak Code of Ordinances, Appendix C, is hereby amended to include the network providers' access to public rights-of-way fees to read as follows: 
Network Providers' Access to Public Rights-of-Way Fees Colocation fee for network nodes on service poles:  Annual fee for each service pole $20.00 Network nodes application fee:  For each application containing up to five network nodes $500.00  For each additional network node beyond five $250.00 Network node annual site rental fee:  For each network node not attached to city-owned pole: 
Note: Adjusted on an annual basis, by an amount equal to one-half of the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index  For each network node attached to city-owned pole: 
Note: Adjusted on an annual basis, by an amount equal to one-half of the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index $270.00 Node support pole application fee:  For each node support pole $1,000.00 Transport facility application fee:  For each application containing up to five network nodes $500.00  For each additional network node beyond five $250.00 Transport facility monthly rental fee:  For each network node site Note: Not to exceed the monthly aggregate per-note fee $28.00  
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-317. - Indemnity. 
    As provided in Section 284.302 of the Code, a wireless network provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of the network provider. The city shall promptly notify the network provider of any claims, demands, or actions ("claims") covered by this indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network provider shall have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The foregoing indemnity obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of city; however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider and the city; provided that in such cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Sec. 20-318. - Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers. 
    Nothing in this division shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers. 
(Ord. No. 1580 , § I, 4-30-19) 
Chapter 21 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1403, § 1, adopted October 11, 2009, repealed and reenacted chapter 21 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 21 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 524, Art. I(§§ 1-9.3), Art. II(§§ 1-4.2), Art. III(§§ 1-4, 6-9), Art. IV(§§ 1.3, 2-6), Art. V(§§ 1-3, 5), adopted May 31, 1983; Ord. No. 547, § 1, adopted September 13, 1983; Ord. No. 578, §§ 1-3, adopted March 29, 1984; Ord. No. 586, § 1, adopted July 10, 1984; Ord. No. 612, § 1, adopted February 26, 1985; Ord. No. 648, § 1, adopted October 8, 1985, and Ord. No. 682, § 1, adopted March 25, 1986. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; emergency preparedness, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; flood damage and protection, Ch. 9; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; planning, Ch. 17; zoning regulations, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter along with its attachments, exhibits, and amendments, shall be known as the "Subdivision Ordinance" of the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 1), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-2. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the state, including particularly V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212 (subdivisions), ch. 242 (subdivisions in ETJ), and ch. 42 (extraterritorial jurisdiction). 
(b)  All land subdivided or platted into lots, blocks and streets within the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as provided by state law, shall comply in full with the requirements of this chapter. No plat shall be filed in the office of the county clerk for a tract within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction unless it is approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 2), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-3. - Purpose. 
    The purposes for which this chapter is created are to: 
(1)  Provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the city and within the area surrounding the city and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  Establish orderly policies and procedures to guide development of the city; 
(3)  Provide for establishment of minimum specifications for construction and engineering design criteria, to maintain land values, reduce inconveniences to residents of the area and to reduce related unnecessary costs to the city for correction of inadequate environmental conditions; 
(4)  Ensure that development of land and subdivisions shall be of such nature, shape and location that utilization will not impair the general welfare and to ensure against dangers of fires, floods, erosion, landslides, or other such menaces; 
(5)  Provide proper utilities and services for adequate drainage, water supply, and disposal of sanitary and industrial waste; 
(6)  Provide streets that ensure safe, convenient and functional systems for vehicular and pedestrian circulation; to furnish adequate sites, convenient to schools, parks, playgrounds, and other community services, representing topography and existing vegetation so that the natural beauty of the land shall be preserved. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 3), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-4. - Adoption of legislative grant of power. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city to encourage and promote quality development within the city consistent with the atmosphere and quality of life currently enjoyed by residents. 
(b)  Development proposals shall be reviewed for conformance with the city's comprehensive plan and development policy(ies). 
(c)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided lots as subject to the control of the municipality pursuant to the comprehensive plan of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the municipality. 
(d)  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be developed until available public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewage, roadways and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreation facilities, and transportation facilities and improvements. 
(e)  The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the comprehensive plan or adopted development policies, and the capital budget and program of the municipality. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, the comprehensive plan, adopted development plans, the zoning ordinance, and the capital improvements program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 4), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-5. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations, it is the intention of the city council that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the platting and developing of subdivisions in the city, and where other ordinances of the city are more restrictive in their requirements, such other ordinances shall control. The interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 5), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-6. - Authority of planning and zoning commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have the final approval authority for consideration of all plats and plans authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 6), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-7. - Appeal of planning and zoning commission action. 
    Any applicant, property owner, or other party aggrieved by a finding or action of the planning and zoning commission may appeal said action to the city council within 30 days from the date of such finding or action, and not thereafter. Nothing in this section shall prevent a right of review by a court of competent jurisdiction. An appeal to the city council is conditional to any filing in court. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 7), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-8. - Enforcement. 
    In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city and its officers shall have the right to enjoin any violation of this chapter by injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 8), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-9. - General provisions. 
(a)  The owner of a tract of land located within the city limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city who divides the tract in two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the city, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares parks or other parts must have a plat of the subdivision prepared. A division of a tract under this section includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. 
(b)  No person shall create a subdivision of land within the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction without complying with the provisions of this chapter, and all plats and subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued by the city for the installation of septic tanks on any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, or any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. Each plat for a subdivision in which septic tanks shall be utilized shall bear the approval signature block for approval by Bexar County. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been complied with in full. 
(e)  The city shall not authorize any person nor shall the city itself repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(f)  The city shall not authorize any person nor shall the city itself sell or supply any water or sewer service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(g)  Disapproval of a plat by the planning and zoning commission shall be deemed a refusal by the city to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. Approval of a plat shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning the maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the city have actually appropriated the same by entry, use, or improvement. Any such dedication, before or after actual appropriation may be vacated by the city in any manner provided by law. 
(h)  On behalf of the city, the city attorney shall, when directed by the city council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within any area subject to all or part of the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  In addition thereto any abutting owner or lessee or other person prejudicially affected by the violation of the terms of this chapter may resort to any court of competent jurisdiction for any writ or writes, or to obtain such relief, either in law or equity, as may be deemed advisable in these premises. 
(j)  If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, the city council shall pass a resolution reciting the fact of such noncompliance of failure to secure final plat approval. Reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure the final plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of this chapter apply to the subdivision and lots herein, the city secretary shall, when directed by the city council, cause certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the city to be filed in the deed records of Bexar County. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the city secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed records of Bexar County stating such. 
(k)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits for any lots upon which a residential building exists and was in existence prior to passage of this chapter nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance, or installation of any street or public utility services for, to or abutting any lot, the last recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of this chapter was by metes and bounds, and/or any subdivision, or lot therein, recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision was in existence prior to the passage of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 9), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-10. - Waivers. 
(a)  General. The planning and zoning commission may authorize waivers from the provisions of this chapter, when in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a waiver, the planning and zoning commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest. In making their findings, the planning and zoning commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved and existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such waivers upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity. Waivers shall not be granted unless the planning and zoning commission finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved, such that the strict application of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(2)  That the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area. 
(3)  That the granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such findings of the planning and zoning commission, together with the specified facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the planning and zoning commission meeting at which such waiver is granted. Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and justice done. Financial hardship to the subdivider alone shall not be deemed to constitute hardship. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission may establish a time period for execution of each granted waiver. 
(c)  Planning and zoning commission shall not authorize a waiver under this subsection that would be applicable to any other code or ordinance of the city. 
(d)  Any decision of the planning and zoning commission regarding waivers to the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the city council pursuant to section 21-7. When considering an appeal, the city council shall consider the same standards as the planning and zoning commission as outlined above. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. I, § 10), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-11. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this article. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the singular number include the plural number; and words used in the plural number include the singular number. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory while the word "may" is discretionary. 
    Administrative officers mean any office referred to in this chapter by title, i.e. mayor, city attorney, city secretary, city planner, city engineer, etc., shall be the person so retained in this position by the city, or that person's duly authorized representative. 
    Alley means a minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Approved plat means a plat of subdivision which has been approved in accordance with requirements of these regulations and which has been filed for record with the county clerk of Bexar County. 
    Arterial street means one that is primarily used for through traffic. 
    Building setback lines mean the lines within a property defining the minimum allowable horizontal distance between a building and the property line. 
    City refers to the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    City engineer shall be a registered, professional engineer employed or designated by the city to provide professional engineering services for and in behalf of the city. 
    City of Live Oak standards refer to the standards for streets and alleys, stormwater lines, storm sewer lines and appurtenant structures, which are set forth herein, and such additional standards as may be amended from time to time. 
    Commission shall refer to the planning and zoning commission of the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Council shall refer to the city council of the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Crosswalk way means a public right-of-way, six feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Dead end street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet, which is programmed to be continued at a later date. Dead end streets standing alone shall be prohibited. 
    Engineer means a person duly authorized and properly registered under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), within the terms of the Texas Municipal Annexation Act, the term extraterritorial jurisdiction means the unincorporated area, not a part of any other city, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the city, the outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the city, outward for such distances as may be stipulated in the Texas Municipal Annexation Act, in which area. 
    LGC means the Texas Local Government Code. 
    Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which is, or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record. 
    Lot depth refers to the distance of a line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines, which line shall be at right angles to the front and rear lot lines, which line shall be at a right angle to the front lot or radial to a curved lot line. 
    Lot width is the distance of a line (drawn perpendicular to the lot depth line) connecting the side lot lines at the building setback line or at a point no farther than 25 feet from the front lot line. 
    Major street means a street designed to convey relatively heavy volumes of traffic. 
    Pavement width means the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the face of curbs. 
    Person means any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency or political subdivision. 
    Plat means a complete and exact plan for the subdivision of a tract of land into lots, which, if approved, may be submitted to the county clerk for recording. 
    Street means a public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land. 
(1)  A "secondary street" primarily provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the city. 
(2)  A "collector street" primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas. 
(3)  A "marginal access street" is a street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, which primarily provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(4)  A "minor street" is one used primarily for access to abutting residential property. 
    Street width means the shortest horizontal distance between the lines which delineate the right-of-way of a street. 
    Subdivider means any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided. 
    Subdivision means a division of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits, or within or partly within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, for layout lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys, or parts or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. Subdivision includes re-subdivision, but It does not include the division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels or tracts of five acres or more and not involving any new street, alley or easement of access. 
    Surveyor is a licensed state land surveyor or registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
    Technical manual means the manual adopted as Exhibit "A" to this chapter providing requirements, specifications and design standards. 
    Utility easement means an interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over and under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. II), 10-11-09) 
Secs. 21-12-21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 21-26. - Pre-application conference. 
    Prior to the official filing of an application for approval of a plat or plan for a subdivision, the subdivider, at their option, may consult with and present a proposed plan for the subdivision to the city for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications, and standards required by the city for the subdivision of land. At such a meeting the city staff will be able to make any suggestions that would direct the proposed subdivision toward desirable objectives and possibly prevent unnecessary work and expense if objectives are not met. This step does not require formal application or fee. No vesting shall occur under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 1), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-27. - Application required. 
    Any proposed plan for subdivision or development of a property under this chapter shall be accompanied by a completed application for the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 2), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-28. - Determination of completeness. 
(a)  Every application shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the city. 
(b)  No application shall be deemed complete and accepted for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. For a determination of completeness to be issued, an application must include the following: 
(1)  An application signed by the property owner; 
(2)  Payment of the appropriate fee; 
(3)  An accurate metes and bounds description of the subject property (or other suitable legal description); 
(4)  A survey or other appropriate exhibits as identified in this chapter for the individual permit; and 
(5)  A copy of the most current tax certificate showing that there are no unpaid taxes on the property; 
(6)  Any additional documents, forms or other materials required by the city or identified in this chapter for the processing of a specific development permit. 
(c)  The city may from time to time identify additional requirements for a complete application that are not contained within but are consistent with the application contents and standards set forth in this chapter. 
(d)  A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Not later than the tenth business day after the date an application is submitted, the city shall make a written determination whether the application constitutes a complete application. This shall include a determination that all information and documents required by this chapter for the type of permit being submitted or other requirements have been submitted. A determination that the application is incomplete shall be mailed or e-mailed to the applicant within such time period by United States Mail at the address listed on the application. The determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state that the application will be rejected if the documents or other information are not submitted within 45 days after the date the application was submitted. 
(f)  An application filed on or after the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed complete on the 11th business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete. For purposes of this section, the applicant shall be deemed to have been notified if the city has mailed a copy of the determination as provided in subsection (e). 
(g)  The processing of an application by any city employee prior to the time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the city as the official acceptance of the application for filing. The incompleteness of an application shall be grounds for denial of the application regardless of whether a determination of incompleteness was mailed to the applicant. 
(h)  A development permit application shall be deemed to be rejected on the 45th day after the application is submitted to the city for processing if the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter or other requirements as specified in the determination provided to the applicant. Upon rejection, the application shall be returned to the applicant together with any accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new application must be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 3), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-29. - Proportionality requirements-Appeal for relief from apportionment of municipal infrastructure costs. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of an appeal for relief from a dedication, reservation, construction, payment of fees, or payment of construction cost requirement is to assure that the application of uniform apportionment of municipal infrastructure costs to a proposed master plan or plat is roughly proportionate to the proposed development, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed development on municipal infrastructure. 
(2)  Applicability. An appeal for relief under this section may be filed only to contest the roughly proportionate nature of any apportionment that is imposed under this chapter to a general development plan or plat application or to any other development application authorized under this chapter, whether the requirement is pursuant to uniform standards, or attached as a condition to approval of the application. An appeal under this section shall not be used to seek variation from a standard on grounds applicable to a petition for a waiver under section 21-10. Relief under this provision may not be sought for a recorded plat. 
(3)  Effect. If the relief requested under the petition is granted in whole or in part by the city council, the requirement initially imposed shall be modified accordingly, and the standards applied or the conditions attached to initial approval of the application shall be thereafter applied in accordance with the relief granted and the property owner will not be required to resubmit the application in order to get the benefit of the relief granted. 
(b)  Appeal procedures. 
(1)  Roughly proportionate analysis; who may appeal. If an applicant for master plan or plat approval disagrees with the roughly proportionate nature of the apportionment at any time in the master plan's or plat's review process, he should so advise the city engineer in writing no later than two weeks before such master plan or plat would be considered by the planning commission. The city engineer or other professional engineer who holds license issued under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1001, retained by the city shall prepare a roughly proportionate analysis prior to consideration of the master plan or plat by the commission. If the city or retained engineer's analysis shows the apportionment of the municipal infrastructure costs to the applicant's development do not exceed the amount that is roughly proportionate to the development's impact and the applicant disagrees with such analysis, the applicant may appeal in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission may not approve a master plan or plat for which an appeal in accordance with this section has been applied until the city council has made its decision on the appeal. The petitioner shall agree in writing that the time for plat approval is stayed until such time as the appeal is completed. 
(3)  Form of appeal. The appeal for relief from an apportionment requirement shall be in the form of a petition to city council and allege that application of the standard or the imposition of conditions relating to the apportionment is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on municipal infrastructure. 
(4)  Evidence. The petitioner shall demonstrate that the apportionment requirement that was applied is not roughly proportional to the proposed development's impact on municipal infrastructure. Written evidence presented on behalf of an appellant at any appeal hearing may include evidence that addresses any of the following information that may be pertinent to the circumstances and any other information the appellant deems necessary to the appeal: 
a.  Total capacity of the particular municipal infrastructure system to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed. 
b.  Total capacity to be supplied to the particular municipal infrastructure system by the proposed apportionment. If the development application is part of a phased development, the information may include any capacity supplied by prior apportionments. 
c.  Comparison of the capacity of the municipal facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed apportionment. In making this comparison, the impacts on the municipal infrastructure system(s) from the entire development shall be considered. 
d.  The effect of any credits against any impact fees due the petitioner as a result of the apportionment in accordance with the city's requirements. 
e.  The effect of any city participation in the costs of oversizing the capital improvement to be constructed. 
(5)  Time for filing petition and study. The petition shall be filed with the planning department within 90 days of the initial decision on the application. Where the apportionment requirement is applicable to more than one requirement, the petition may be filed following a decision on any application in which the requirement is applied. The study and any evidence in support of the petition shall be filed within 90 days of the date the petition was filed, unless the petitioner seeks an extension in writing. The city engineer may extend the time for submitting the study or other evidence for a period not to exceed an additional 60 days for good cause shown. If the petition for relief impacts SAWS, the city engineer must provide the chief executive officer of SAWS a copy of the petition for relief and any supporting study or other evidence upon the city engineer's receipt thereof. 
(6)  Land in extraterritorial jurisdiction. Where the subject municipal infrastructure are located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and are to be dedicated to the applicable county pursuant to an inter-local agreement under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242, a petition and evidence in support of the petition shall not be accepted as complete for filing by the city engineer unless the petition or study or other evidence is accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to the applicable county in which the facilities are to be located. 
(c)  Processing of petitions and decision. 
(1)  Administrative official. The city engineer is the administrative official responsible for processing an apportionment. Where the petition is for the appeal from an apportionment in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction that is to be dedicated to a county pursuant to an inter-local agreement under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242, the city engineer shall coordinate a recommendation with the appropriate county official responsible for reviewing plats in the applicable county. If the petition for relief impacts SAWS, the city engineer shall coordinate with the appropriate SAWS official. The city engineer shall evaluate the petition and supporting study and other evidence, and shall make a recommendation to the city council based upon the information contained in the study, any comments received from the county, SAWS and the city planning department. In evaluating the petition and other evidence, the city engineer shall take into account the maximum amount of any impact fees to be charged against the development for the type of municipal infrastructure improvement that is the subject of the petition, and any credits due the petitioner against impact fees, as well as any traffic impact, drainage or other adequate facilities studies evaluating the impacts of the development or similar developments on municipal infrastructure. The city engineer must utilize generally accepted methodology in evaluating the petitioner's study, including but not limited to impact fee methodologies. 
(2)  Decision-maker. The city council shall decide the appeal for relief based on the criteria set forth in subsection (d). 
(3)  Appeal hearing and decision time frames. 
a.  The city council shall consider the request after an appeal hearing on the subject is held. 
b.  The city council shall hold the appeal hearing and consider the petition within 30 days of the submission of the study and any other evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant in support of the appeal. 
c.  The city council shall make a final decision within 30 days following the final submission of any testimony or evidence by the developer at the appeal hearing. 
(4)  Decision. The city council shall consider the petition for relief, the analysis prepared by the city in accordance with subsection (b)(1), and the evidence presented, and based upon the criteria set forth in subsection (d), and shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the appeal for relief, and impose the standard or condition in accordance with the initial decision; 
b.  Deny the appeal for relief, upon finding that the proposed requirements are inadequate to offset the impacts of the development on the municipal infrastructure, and either deny the application or require that additional apportionments for municipal infrastructure be made as a condition of approval of the application; 
c.  Grant the appeal in part and add such conditions of approval to the application as it deems appropriate; 
d.  Grant the appeal for relief, and waive in whole or in part any apportionment requirement necessary to meet the criteria for approval; or 
e.  Grant the appeal for relief, in whole or in part, and direct that the city participate in the costs of the particular municipal infrastructure pursuant to standard participation policies. 
(5)  Notification of decision on appeal. The petitioner shall be notified in writing of the decision on the appeal for relief by the city engineer within ten days following the decision. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. In deciding the appeal for relief from an apportionment, the city council shall determine whether the petitioner has demonstrated that the city apportionment is not roughly proportional to the proposed development's impact on municipal infrastructure. In making such determination, the city council shall consider the evidence submitted by the petitioner, the staff's report and recommendation and, where the property is located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, any recommendations from the applicable county. 
(e)  Implementation of appellate decision. 
(1)  When appeal for relief is granted. When the city council grants the appeal for relief, the date of the final decision will be deemed the date of approval of the application, and the city must process the application consistent with the relief granted. 
(2)  When appeal for relief is denied. When the city council denies the appeal for relief, the date of the final decision will be deemed the date of denial of the application, and the petitioner must either withdraw the application or be prepared to make the required apportionment pursuant to the decision, as appropriate. 
(3)  Where approval of the appeal was conditioned. The city engineer require the applicant to submit modified master plans, plats, construction plans, or supporting materials consistent with the relief granted and condition(s) imposed by the city council on the petition. 
(4)  Period of relief. The relief granted on a petition shall remain in effect for the period that the master plan or plat approval is in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of the master plan or plat approval. Extension of the master plan or plat approval also shall result in extension of the relief granted on the petition. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 4), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-30. - Overall layout master plan. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of an overall layout master plan is to review and approve a general plan for the development of property, including the layout of streets, lots, open space, sites for public facilities and utilities. 
(b)  Applicability. An overall layout master plan shall be required as a condition precedent to approval of any application for a plat, except where the director of planning determines that: 
(1)  The subdivision will result in no more than one new street and sufficient information exists to begin preparation of the preliminary plat; or 
(2)  A concept plan, preliminary site plan or final site plan for the property provides sufficient information for the preparation of a preliminary plat. 
(c)  Contents. The overall layout master plan shall include: 
(1)  A proposed layout drawn to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or larger. 
(2)  True north shall be clearly indicated and located to the top and left of the study. 
(3)  Arrangement and connection of streets with adjacent properties. 
(4)  The names of adjacent additions or subdivisions or the name of record of owners of adjoining parcels of unplatted land. 
(5)  General location and size of school sites, park and recreation areas, and other public areas. 
(6)  Location of proposed shopping centers, multifamily residential and other land uses. 
(7)  Proposals for water, sewer, and drainage systems in relation to master plans where they exist for these facilities. 
(8)  Proposals for services furnished by private utility companies. 
(9)  Summary of uses by type, number, and acreage. 
(10)  Identification of any floodprone areas and general proposals for such areas. 
(11)  Identification of any tree cover containing six or more trees with a caliper of six inches or more that are outside the floodplain which may be disturbed by proposed streets or alleys in order to reduce the destruction of trees. 
(12)  The overall layout master plan shall demonstrate compliance with the city's tree ordinance. 
(13)  Tree loss mitigation plan which identifies species, location, and schedule for planting replacement trees. 
(14)  A concept plan submitted for the purpose of securing zoning approvals may be accepted as an overall layout master plan if it meets the requirements of this section. 
(15)  The plan shall include existing driveways within 200 feet of the site. 
(16)  The plan shall include existing or proposed median openings within 500 feet of the site. 
(17)  Hike and bike trails. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. The planning and zoning commission in considering final action on an overall layout master plan should consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The overall layout master plan is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property or any development regulations approved as part of a development agreement; 
(2)  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities is adequate to serve each phase of the subdivision; 
(3)  The schedule of development is feasible and prudent, and assures that the proposed development will progress to completion within the time limits proposed; 
(4)  If the land is part of an approved development agreement, the proposed overall layout master plan is consistent with the incorporated conceptual plan or any development regulations contained in the approved development agreement; 
(5)  The location, size and sequence of the phases of development proposed ensure orderly and efficient development of the land subject to the plan. 
(e)  Acceptance of overall layout master plan. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall review the overall layout master plan for consistency with the comprehensive plan, the major thoroughfare plan, zoning regulations and other requirements of this Code. The commission may permit the development to be platted in phases, provided each phase satisfies the requirements of this Code. The commission may also impose conditions such as temporary street and alley connections or temporary culs-de-sac to assure orderly development. 
(2)  The commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove a overall layout master plan. The approval of an overall layout master plan constitutes authorization by the city for the property owner to submit application for a preliminary plat, subject to compliance with any conditions attached to the approval of the overall layout master plan. 
(f)  Lapse of approval. The approval of any phase or phases of a overall layout master plan shall automatically expire unless such phase or phases have been submitted and approved by the commission as a preliminary plat within five years of the date of its approval. 
(g)  Extension or reinstatement of approval. Applicant may request one extension of approval provided such application is filed not less than 60 days prior to expiration. Any extension shall not extend beyond six months from the time that the overall layout master plan would otherwise have expired. The request for extension shall be filed with the department of planning and development and presented to the commission at the next regular meeting. The application for extension shall include an explanation for the reasons for the delay. The commission shall consider reasons for the delay, the effect of any new regulations on the proposed development plan, and the ability of the property owner to comply with the original conditions in determining whether to approve the extension. The commission's disapproval of an extension for an overall layout master plan shall be final. 
(h)  Changes. 
(1)  Minor changes in the design of the subdivision subject to a general development plan may be incorporated in an application for approval of a preliminary plat without the necessity of filing a new application for approval of an overall layout master plan. Minor changes shall include adjustment in street or alley alignments, lengths, and paving details, and adjustment of lot lines that do not result in creation of additional lots, provided that such changes are consistent with any approved prior applications. 
(2)  All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved overall layout master plan shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a revised general development plan before approval of a preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 5), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-31. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Applicability. A preliminary plat is required to determine the general layout of the subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development and the overall compliance of the land division with applicable requirements of this chapter. A preliminary plat may be submitted for any phase of development consistent with an approved overall layout master plan. Where a overall layout master plan is not required and the area to be platted is part of a larger tract of land, the preliminary plat must encompass the entire tract of land under ownership of the subdivider and shall provide a preliminary layout of streets, lots, blocks, utilities and drainage for the larger tract. 
(b)  Application processing and decision. 
(1)  An application for a preliminary plat shall be submitted to the city who shall review the application for completeness in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. City staff shall forward a copy of the proposed plan to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation and shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, city staff shall forward a written recommendation to the planning and zoning commission for consideration. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission shall receive the written recommendation of city staff and shall consider the proposed preliminary plat. The planning and zoning commission shall act on the plat within 30 days after the date a complete application is filed. The planning and zoning commission may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed preliminary plat. The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning and zoning commission to the city council for consideration. The city council shall act on an appeal within 30 days after the date of the planning and zoning commission's action. 
(3)  Approval of a preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission shall be considered as approval of the layout submitted on the master plan as a guide to the final design of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of a preliminary plat in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Preliminary plat specifications. An application for a preliminary plat shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  Location/vicinity map with north arrow. 
(2)  Title block located in lower right corner including subdivision name, acreage, complete legal description including survey name and abstract number, city, county and preparation date. 
(3)  Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used. 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant, and surveyor. 
(5)  Graphic and written scale (minimum 1"=100'). 
(6)  Surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances. 
(7)  Legal metes and bounds description with calls matching boundary bearings and distances. 
(8)  Lot dimensions including bearing and distances. 
(9)  Provide lot and block numbers for every lot (numbers only). 
(10)  List the total number of buildable lots. 
(11)  Front building setback lines along roadways (provide typical detail of setbacks, including corner lots). 
(12)  Provide existing zoning. 
(13)  Location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water courses and wooded areas. 
(14)  Location of significant manmade features, including railroads, buildings, utilities, or physical features. 
(15)  For residential subdivisions, a minimum of two points of public access to existing public streets. 
(16)  Areas to be dedicated or reserved for right-of-way including dimensions, area and providing bearings and distances of centerline. 
(17)  Provide recording information for any existing easements (water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electric, telephone, gas, cable television, fire lanes, etc.) and rights-of-way. Provide all bearing and distance information on proposed easements including easements filed by separate instrument. 
(18)  Location of existing and proposed FEMA 100-year floodplain limits with elevations or a note stating "There is no FEMA floodplain within 100 feet of any lot or right-of-way created by this plat." 
(19)  Existing and proposed topography at five-foot contour intervals including drainage channels and creeks 
(20)  Identify all boundary survey monumentation on the plat. Tie proposed tract to the parent tract monumentation with bearings and distances. 
(21)  Boundary lines and acreage of the land to be dedicated to the city for public parkland. 
(22)  Boundary lines and acreage of land proposed for a private park including note indicating ownership and maintenance responsibility. 
(23)  Land use, zoning, subdivision name, owner name and address, and recording information for all adjacent properties. 
(24)  Location of city limits boundary and/or county boundary if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision or are contiguous to such boundary. 
(25)  For preliminary plats exempt from requirements for subdivision master plan, designation of each phase of development and the proposed order of development. 
(26)  Provide the location of proposed water, wastewater and storm drainage facilities to serve the development including sizes. 
(27)  Show proposed street names. 
(28)  Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed development. 
(29)  Provide the following notes: 
a.  The thoroughfare alignments shown on this preliminary plat are for illustration purposes and do note set the alignment. Alignment is determined at time of final plat. 
b.  Notice: Selling a portion of this addition by metes and bounds is a violation of city ordinances and state law and is subject to fines and withholding of utilities and permits. 
c.  According to flood insurance rate map, panel _______, dated _______, a 100-year floodplain (does or does not) exists on this site. 
d.  If floodplain exists on the property, provide a note stating that the finished floor elevation (FFE) of any structures shall be two feet above the 100-year flood elevation. 
e.  All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage easement etc. are the responsibility of the developer or its successors and/or assigns. 
f.  CPS Energy utility note (where applicable). 
g.  Any applicable notes required by TxDOT. 
h.  State any and all waivers requested for the plat. 
i.  State any and all approved or requested waivers. 
(30)  Provide the following acknowledgements and certificates: 
a.  Owner's acknowledgement. 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I (we) the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as the ___________ subdivision to the City of Live Oak, Texas and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate for the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared _______, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for purposes and considerations therein stated. 
Given under my hand and seal of office this _______ day of ________ 20___ 
(Seal) ___________ 
Notary Public, 
_______ County, Texas 
b.  Certification by city engineer. 
I, the undersigned, City Engineer of the City of Live Oak, Texas hereby certify that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City as to which this approval is required. 
_______ (Seal) 
City Engineer 
c.  Approval of city planning and zoning commission. 
This plat of the ___________ subdivision has been submitted to and considered by the City Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Live Oak, Texas and is hereby approved by such Commission. 
Dated this ___ day of ________, 20___ 
By: Chairman _____ 
Secretary _____ 
d.  Certificate of platting surveyor. 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I, the undersigned, a registered professional land surveyor in the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
(Surveyor's Seal) _____
Registered Professional Land Surveyor  
e.  Certificate of platting engineer. 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I, the undersigned, a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas, hereby certify that proper engineering consideration has been given to this plat. 
(Engineer's Seal) _____
Registered Professional Engineer  
f.  Utility provider certification. 
This proposed subdivision plat has been reviewed and approved by the applicable utility provider for wastewater treatment plant capacity. All fees due for impact to the system at time of connection will be calculated at submittal of building permit application at the then current fee schedule. 
___________ 
Agent for applicable utility provider 
This subdivision plat of the ___________ subdivision has been submitted to and approved by City Public Service for easements. 
___________ 
City Public Service 
(d)  Criteria for approval. The planning and zoning commission in considering final action on a preliminary plat, should consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property or any approved development agreement; 
(2)  The plat conforms to the general layout of the subdivision master plan (if applicable) and is consistent with the phasing plan approved therein; 
(3)  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities conform to the master facilities plans for the facilities, including without limitation the water facilities, wastewater facilities, transportation, drainage and other master facilities plans; 
(4)  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities, and easements and rights-of-way are adequate to serve the subdivision. 
(e)  Expiration and extension. 
(1)  The approval of a preliminary plat shall remain in effect for a period of two years from the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the planning and zoning commission, during which period the applicant shall submit and receive approval for a final plat for any portion of the land subject to the preliminary plat. If a final plat has not been approved within the two-year period, the preliminary plat approval, unless extended, shall expire and the plat shall be null and void. 
(2)  At the request of the property owner or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a preliminary plat may be extended by the planning and zoning commission for a period not to exceed six months. A preliminary plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 6), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-32. - Final plat. 
(a)  Applicability. A final plat is required to assure that the division or development of the land subject to the plat is consistent with all standards of this chapter pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities, that public improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the city or that provision for such installation has been made, that all other requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided for to allow the plat to be recorded, and to assure that the subdivision or development meets all other standards of this chapter to enable initiation of site preparation activities for any lot or tract subject to the plat. Approval of a final plat shall be required prior to any non-exempt division of land and prior to any site preparation activities for a lot or tract of land that requires installation of public improvements on or adjacent thereto. A final plat may be submitted for any phase of development consistent with an approved preliminary plat. 
(b)  Application processing and decision. 
(1)  An application for a final plat shall be submitted to the city who shall review the application for completeness in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. City staff shall forward a copy of the proposed plan to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation and shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, city staff shall forward a written recommendation to the planning and zoning commission for consideration. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission shall receive the written recommendation of city staff and shall consider the proposed final plat. The planning and zoning commission shall act on the plat within 30 days after the date a complete application is filed. The planning and zoning commission may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed final plat. The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning and zoning commission to the city council for consideration. The city council shall act on an appeal within 30 days after the date of the planning and zoning commission's action. 
(c)  Final plat specification. An application for a final plat shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  Location/vicinity map with north arrow. 
(2)  Title block located in lower right corner including subdivision name, acreage, complete legal description including survey name and abstract number, city, county and preparation date. 
(3)  County recording block. 
(4)  Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used. 
(5)  Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant, and surveyor. 
(6)  North arrow. 
(7)  Graphic and written scale (minimum 1"=100'). 
(8)  Surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances. 
(9)  Legal metes and bounds description with calls matching boundary bearings and distances. 
(10)  Lot dimensions including bearing and distances. 
(11)  Provide lot and block numbers for every lot (numbers only). 
(12)  List the total number of buildable lots. 
(13)  Front building setback lines along roadways (provide typical detail of setbacks, including corner lots). 
(14)  Show proposed street names. 
(15)  Location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water courses and wooded areas. 
(16)  Provide recording information for any existing easements (water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electric, telephone, gas, cable television, fire lanes, etc.) and rights-of-way. Provide all bearing and distance information on proposed easements including easements filed by separate instrument. 
(17)  For residential subdivisions, a minimum of two points of public access to existing public streets. 
(18)  Areas to be dedicated or reserved for right-of-way including dimensions, area and providing bearings and distances of centerline. 
(19)  Location of existing and proposed FEMA 100-year floodplain limits with elevations or a note stating "There is no FEMA Floodplain within 100 feet of any lot or Right of Way created by this plat." 
(20)  Identify all boundary survey monumentation on the plat. Tie proposed tract to the parent tract monumentation with bearings and distances. 
(21)  Boundary lines and acreage of the land to be dedicated to the city for public parkland. 
(22)  Boundary lines and acreage of land proposed for private park including note indicating ownership and maintenance responsibility. 
(23)  Subdivision name, owner name and address, and recording information for all adjacent properties 
(24)  For residential subdivisions, a one foot non-access easement where the rear, front, or side of the property abuts a major or minor arterial. 
(25)  Location of city limits boundary and/or county boundary if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision or are contiguous to such boundary. 
(26)  Provide letter from TxDOT regarding drainage and access adjacent to TxDOT right-of-way. 
(27)  Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed development. 
(28)  Provide the following notes: 
a.  Notice: Selling a portion of this addition by metes and bounds is a violation of city ordinances and state law and is subject to fines and withholding of utilities and permits. 
b.  According to flood insurance rate map, panel _______, dated _______, a 100-year floodplain (does or does not) exists on this site. 
c.  If floodplain exists on the property, provide a note stating that the finished floor elevation (FFE) of any structures shall be two feet above the 100-year flood elevation. 
d.  All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage easement etc. are the responsibility of the developer or its successors and/or assigns. 
e.  CPS Energy utility note (where applicable). 
f.  Any applicable notes required by TxDOT. 
g.  Note stating that proposed parkland to be dedicated to the city will be dedicated by a general warranty deed upon acceptance of the subdivision by the city. 
h.  State any and all waivers requested for the plat. 
i.  State any and all approved or requested waivers. 
(29)  Provide the following acknowledgements and certificates: 
a.  Owner's acknowledgement. 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I (we) the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as the ___________ subdivision to the City of Live Oak, Texas and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate for the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for purposes and considerations therein stated. 
Given under my hand and seal of office this ___ day of _______ 20___ 
(Seal) _______ 

Notary Public, 
_______ County, Texas 
b.  Certification by city engineer. 
I, the undersigned, City Engineer of the City of Live Oak, Texas hereby certify that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City as to which this approval is required. 
___________ (Seal) 
City Engineer 
c.  Approval of city planning and zoning commission. 
This plat of the ___________ subdivision has been submitted to and considered by the City Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Live Oak, Texas and is hereby approved by such Commission. 
Dated this ___ day of _______, 20___ 
By: Chairman _____ 
Secretary _____ 
d.  Certificate of platting surveyor. 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I, the undersigned, a registered professional land surveyor in the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
(Surveyor's Seal) _____
Registered Professional Land Surveyor  
e.  Certificate of platting engineer. 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I, the undersigned, a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas, hereby certify that proper engineering consideration has been given to this plat. 
(Engineer's Seal) _____
Registered Professional Engineer  
f.  County recording block. 
State of Texas 
County of Bexar 
I ___________ County Clerk of said County, do hereby certify that this plat was filled for record in my office on the ___ day of _______ AD _______ at ___ ___M, and duly recorded the ___ day of _______ AD _______ at ___ ___M, in the records of Bexar County, in book volume ___ page ___ in testimony whereof, witness my hand and official seal of office, this ___ day of _______ AD, 20___. 
County Clerk, Bexar County, Texas 
By: ___________ 
g.  Utility provider certification. 
This subdivision plat of the _______ subdivision has been submitted to and approved by applicable utility provider for sewer service availability. 
___________ 
Agent for applicable utility provider 
This subdivision plat of the _______ subdivision has been submitted to and approved by City Public Service for easements. 
___________ 
Agent for City Public Service 
(d)  Criteria for approval. The planning and zoning commission in considering final action on a final plat, should consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, except for minor changes that may be approved without the necessity of revising the approved preliminary plat; 
(2)  The plat is consistent with the phasing plan approved with the preliminary plat (where applicable); 
(3)  The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in this chapter; 
(4)  The public infrastructure improvement plans have been approved by the city's engineer and the department of public works. 
(e)  Expiration and extension. 
(1)  The approval of a final plat shall remain in effect for a period of two years from the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the planning and zoning commission, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and recordation of the plat. If the final plat has not been recorded within the two-year period, the final plat approval, unless extended, shall expire and the plat shall be null and void. 
(2)  At the request of the property owner or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a final plat may be extended by the planning and zoning commission for a period not to exceed six months. A final plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
(f)  Plat recordation. 
(1)  Where public infrastructure improvements have been installed prior to recording of the plat, the property owner shall submit a maintenance bond from each contractor, three sealed sets of "as built" plans or record drawings, one sealed set of "as built" mylars, and one CD containing a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the city), together with a letter stating the contractors' compliance and bearing sealed certification by the design engineer that all public improvements have been constructed in compliance with all city construction standards. The property owner also shall submit copies of the approved final plat with any required revisions on mylars and in the format and number required by the city, together with all certifications required. 
(2)  Where public improvements have yet to be completed in connection with an approved final plat, the property owner shall submit in the format and number required by the city, copies of the approved final plat with any required revisions on mylars and in the format and number required by the city, together with all certifications required. Where an agreement is to be executed for the installation of public infrastructure improvements, the final plat shall be accompanied by the security in lieu of construction of improvements. 
(3)  Upon notification of acceptance of required public improvements or filing of security in lieu of infrastructure construction, the city manager or his/her designee shall procure the signature of the chair of the planning and zoning commission on the plat and shall promptly cause the plat to be recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 7), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-33. - Minor plat. 
(a)  Applicability. A minor plat may be submitted for approval where the proposed division of land involves four or fewer lots fronting onto an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. 
(b)  Application processing and decision. 
(1)  An application for a minor plat shall be submitted to the city and shall be reviewed for completeness. City staff may, at its option, forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation. City shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. 
(2)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0065, the city manager or his/her designee may approve a minor plat. The city manager or his/her designee may, for any reason, elect to present the plat for approval to the planning and zoning commission. The city manager or his/her designee shall not disapprove a minor plat and shall be required to refer any plat for which approval is refused to the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Specifications. An application for a minor plat shall include the same information and documents required for approval of a final plat in accordance with section 21-32. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. The city manager or his/her designee in considering final action on a minor plat should consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The minor plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all other requirements of this chapter that apply to the plat, and any regulations contained in an approved development agreement; 
(2)  All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by all required city utilities and infrastructure; 
(3)  The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision; 
(e)  Expiration and extension. 
(1)  The approval of a minor plat shall remain in effect for a period of two years from the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the city manager or his/her designee or the planning and zoning commission on appeal, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and recordation of the plat. If the minor plat has not been recorded within the two-year period, the plat approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void. 
(2)  At the request of the property owner or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a minor plat may be extended by the planning and zoning commission for a period not to exceed six months. A minor plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
(f)  Plat recordation. The property owner shall submit the approved minor plat, following any required revisions, to the city manager or his/her designee, who shall cause the plat to be recorded in the property records of the county in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 8), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-34. - Replats. 
(a)  Applicability. A replat is any plat that complies with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 212.014, 212.0145, and 212.015, as amended, which is generally submitted to replat a subdivision or part of a subdivision without vacation of the original plat. Replatting a portion of a recorded lot is not permitted. A replat does not itself constitute approval for development of the property. 
(b)  Application processing and decision. 
(1)  An application for a replat shall be submitted to the city and shall be reviewed for completeness in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. City staff shall forward a copy of the proposed plat to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation and shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, city staff shall forward a written recommendation to the planning and zoning commission for consideration. 
(2)  An application for a replat requires notification and a public hearing in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 212.015 and 212.014. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall receive the written recommendation of city staff and shall hold a public hearing and consider the proposed replat plat. The planning and zoning commission shall act on the plat within 30 days after the date a complete application is filed. The planning and zoning commission may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed final plat. The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning and zoning commission to the city council for consideration. The city council shall act on an appeal within 30 days after the date of the planning and zoning commission's action. 
(c)  Contents of replat. An application for a replat shall include the same information and documents required for approval of a final plat in accordance with section 21-32. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. The planning and zoning commission in considering final action on a replat should consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The replat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all other requirements of this chapter that apply to the plat, and any regulations contained in an approved development agreement; 
(2)  The replat is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
(3)  A public hearing was held and parties in interest and citizens have had an opportunity to be heard; 
(4)  The replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions. 
(e)  Protests. If the replat application requires a variance and is accompanied by a protest in accordance with this subsection, approval of the replat shall require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members of the planning and zoning commission present at the meeting. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the replat application and extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the commission prior to the close of the public hearing. In computing the percentage of land area under this section, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
(f)  Expiration and extension. 
(1)  The approval of a replat shall remain in effect for a period of two years from the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the planning and zoning commission, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and recordation of the plat. If the replat has not been recorded within the two-year period, the plat approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void. 
(2)  At the request of the property owner or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a replat may be extended by the planning and zoning commission for a period not to exceed six months. A replat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
(g)  Plat recordation. The property owner shall submit the approved replat, following any required revisions, to the city manager or his/her designee, who shall cause the plat to be recorded in the property records of the county in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 9), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-35. - Amending plats. 
(a)  Applicability. An amending plat may be filed in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.016 and may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat and without notice and hearing, if the amending plat is signed and acknowledged by the owners of the property being replatted and is solely for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat; 
(2)  To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; 
(3)  To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat; 
(4)  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments; 
(5)  To show the location or character of a monument which has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat; 
(6)  To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; 
(7)  To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if: 
a.  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  Neither lot is abolished; 
c.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
d.  The amendment does not have a materially adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the subdivision; 
(8)  To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement; 
(9)  To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; or 
(10)  To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
a.  The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality; 
b.  The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the commission or city council has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or 
(11)  To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
d.  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
(b)  Application processing and decision. 
(1)  An application for an amending plat shall be submitted to the city and shall be reviewed for completeness. City staff may, at its option, forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation. City shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. 
(2)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0065, the city manager or his/her designee may approve an amending plat. The city manager or his/her designee may, for any reason, elect to present the plat for approval to the planning and zoning commission. The city manager or his/her designee shall not disapprove an amending plat and shall be required to refer any plat for which approval is refused to the planning and zoning commission. If an amending plat is referred to the planning and zoning commission, the commission shall act on the plat within 30 days after the date of the city manager or his/her designee's determination. 
(c)  Contents of amending plat. An application for an amending plat shall include the same information and documents required for approval of a final plat in accordance with section 21-32. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. The city manager or his/her designee in considering final action on an amending plat should consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The amending plat makes only those changes to the recorded plat that are allowed under section 21-1. 
(2)  If a correction in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots is proposed: 
a.  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  Neither lot is abolished; 
c.  The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions or easements; and 
d.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the owners in the plat. 
(3)  If relocation of one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots is proposed: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions or easements; and 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots. 
(4)  If six or fewer lots are proposed to be added to a subdivision: 
a.  The changes do not affect compliance with applicable zoning and other regulations of the city; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions or easements; and 
c.  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the city council has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area. 
(5)  If lots fronting on an existing street are to be replatted: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
d.  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
(e)  Expiration and extension. 
(1)  The approval of an amending plat shall remain in effect for a period of two years from the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the city manager or his/her designee or the planning and zoning commission on appeal, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and recordation of the plat. If the amending plat has not been recorded within the two-year period, the plat approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void. 
(2)  At the request of the property owner or their representative, the expiration date for approval of an amending plat may be extended by the planning and zoning commission for a period not to exceed six months. An amending plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
(f)  Plat recordation. The property owner shall submit the approved amending plat, following any required revisions, to the city manager or his/her designee, who shall cause the plat to be recorded in the property records of the county in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. III, § 10), 10-11-09) 
Secs. 21-36-21-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 21-51. - General design principles and objectives. 
(a)  Conformity with comprehensive plan. All subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan for orderly and unified development of streets, utilities, neighborhood design, and public land and facilities, as well as other provisions of this and other present ordinances and codes. Standards and design criteria contained herein and in any other ordinances used for the enforcement of this chapter represent minimum values considered necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the community. The design engineer and developer are required to meet or exceed the requirements of these standards by providing a more conservative design criteria. However, they shall not permit their design to fall below the standards of this chapter. Where there is a conflict between the regulations contained within this chapter and regulations or standards contained within any other ordinance or code of the city, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. The city engineer shall be responsible for determining which regulation is more restrictive and will therefore be applicable. Approval of plans and specifications by the city shall not be construed as relieving the design engineer/developer of responsibility for compliance with this chapter, nor with any other local, county or state authority having jurisdiction. The planning and zoning commission shall approve no plat, and no completed improvements shall be accepted unless they conform to standards and detailed specifications as contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Achieving desirable neighborhood development. Residential subdivisions shall be designed to take advantage of the principles and general designs for neighborhood development as established by the comprehensive plan and the city planning and zoning commission in order to achieve the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood unit in which the subdivision is located. 
(c)  Provision for future subdivision. The subdivision shall be so arranged as to allow logical further subdivision and the opening of future streets. 
(d)  Standards for site improvements. All streets, alleys, sidewalks, utility installation and other site improvements required to be installed by the subdivider under the provisions of these regulations shall conform to the requirements of this section, the technical manual and to any other then current policies, specifications, and regulations of the city or other approved agencies responsible for design, construction methods and standards, payment, refunds, credits and other financial arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. IV, § 1), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-52. - Streets. 
(a)  Street layout. The arrangement, extent, character, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the thoroughfare plan and the comprehensive plan. Minor residential streets shall provide adequate circulation within the neighborhood and yet discourage through traffic. The street layout shall be arranged to achieve the most desirable development of the entire neighborhood unit with appropriate consideration of creeks, drainage channels, wooded areas and other topographical features which lend themselves to special treatment. Where appropriate to the neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued and tied into the street layout. All streets shall have a minimum slope requirement of one percent unless otherwise approved by the director of public works or the city engineer. 
(b)  Projection of street. When adjoining areas are not yet subdivided, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the proper projection of streets into the adjoining unsubdivided areas as will be required to complete the neighborhood pattern or conform to the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Private streets. Private streets which serve more than one residential lot, or one or more multi-family structures owned by more than one person or corporation are prohibited. All such streets shall be dedicated to the public in accordance with these regulations. All subdivisions shall have a minimum of two public accesses to existing public streets. Private streets within and outside of a planned unit development will be approved in advance of development by the city council. 
(d)  Dead-end streets and culs-de-sac. 
(1)  Dead end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs to the rear line of adjacent lot projected to be continued in future subdivision in conformance with subsection 2.3 above and in accordance with approved subdivision master plan or when designed as culs-de-sac. Temporary turnarounds shall be provided on projected streets until such time as they are extended. A note shall be provided on the final plat when a temporary turnaround is used which reads. "Crosshatched area is temporary easement for turnaround until street is extended by an accepted street dedication." 
(2)  Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 500 feet in length and shall have a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter in single family residential areas, 150 feet in diameter in multi-family areas and not less than 200 feet in diameter in commercial and industrial areas. 
(e)  Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning and zoning commission may require a marginal access street, or may impose such other requirements as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning and zoning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with the due regard for the requirements of approach grade and future grade separations. 
(f)  Alignment. The alignment of all arterial and collector streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and thoroughfare plan and the requirement of the technical manual. Minor street alignment shall meet the requirements of the technical manual and in no case shall street jogs be offset less than 150 [feet] on centerline. 
(g)  Intersections. All intersections on major and collector streets shall be at 90 degrees. The curb radius at street intersections shall conform to the technical manual. The intersection of more than two streets at one point shall be prohibited. 
(h)  Right-of-way and pavement widths. All street and pavement widths shall conform to the requirements of the technical manual and this chapter. 
(i)  Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate names of existing streets within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction unless the new street is a continuation of or part of a future continuation of such existing street. Street names shall be chosen to avoid similarity or confusion with existing street names. Names of all new streets shall be in accordance with the US Postal Service guidelines for street name request and verifications for duplications. In addition, street names shall be subject to the approval of the city planning and zoning commission and be coordinated on an area wide basis. The city will advise the subdivider as to the street addresses. 
(j)  Other minimum improvements. Additional improvements such as street lights and street name signs shall be installed in accordance with minimum requirements of the technical manual and then current policies of the planning and zoning commission. The director of public works will coordinate the placing of street signs and other improvements. All street signs shall be furnished and installed at the expense of the subdivider per the color and type designated by the city. 
(k)  Construction design standards. All streets shall be constructed to conform to base, surfacing, curbs, grades, horizontal curves and intersection curve radius in accordance with the standards prescribed in the technical manual and the current specifications of the city. 
(l)  Reserve areas are prohibited. There shall be no reserve areas controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. 
(m)  Temporary right-of-way. When deemed necessary or appropriate by the planning and zoning commission, temporary right-of-way shall be provided for certain uses or locations, such as the provision of turn-arounds on projected streets. Such temporary right-of-way shall revert to the abutting property owners when no longer required for its original purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. IV, § 2), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-53. - Alleys. 
(a)  Limitations. 
(1)  Commercial and industrial districts. Paved alleys not less than 24 feet wide shall be provided in all commercial or industrial districts, except that the city planning and zoning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off street loading, unloading and parking consistent with an adequate plan for the uses proposed. 
(2)  Residential district. Where residential districts are designated by the developer to require rear ingress/egress a 20-foot paved alley shall be provided. 
(3)  Intersections and turns. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but when two alleys intersect, or an alley turns at an angle, a cut-off of not less than ten feet from the normal intersection of the property lines shall be provided. 
(4)  Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Construction. All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the technical manual. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. IV, § 3), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-54. - Easements. 
(a)  Utility easements. In residential areas, easements shall be provided for installation of utilities. The size, type, location, and delineation of all utilities shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. 
(b)  Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, natural channel or stream, there shall be provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such watercourse (100-year floodplain), plus additional width to accommodate future needs. Such easement or right-of-way requirements shall be determined by the use of the criteria set out in the technical manual. Easements for earth channels shall extend a minimum of two feet on one side and 15 feet (or 17 feet when utilities are installed) on the opposite side of the extreme limits of the channel, when such channel does not abut an alley or roadway. An administrative waiver to the requirements of this section may be approved by the director of public works on a case by case basis. 
(c)  Erection of fences in easements. Erection of fences in easements shall be limited to gates or drop fences or any other type of fence that will not interfere with the access to utility lines nor restrict the movement of utility personnel or vehicles needed to service any utilities. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. IV, § 4), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-55. - Pedestrian circulation. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets in a subdivision, unless the subdivider does not control one side of a street or if the street is a marginal access street parallel to a major street. Construction of the sidewalks on each street is not necessary until the construction of the first house begins on that street. However, to avoid undue costs and damage to sidewalks, the developer or builder may construct the sidewalk on each lot as it is developed. In no case will a certificate of occupancy be issued for a building until the required sidewalks have been constructed. Sidewalks shall be five feet in width in business and commercial districts and four feet in width in residential districts and located contiguous to the property line, unless otherwise approved by the planning director. The standards for construction shall be in accordance with the technical manual. No work shall begin until a permit is secured from the city. 
(b)  Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks (or elevated walkways) not less than six feet wide shall be dedicated to the public in subdivisions where deemed necessary by the city planning and zoning commission to provide access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other neighborhood facilities. The entire crosswalk or elevated walkways shall be paved. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. IV, § 5), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-56. - Blocks-General layout. 
    The lengths, widths, and shape of blocks shall be in accordance with the technical manual and will be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. IV, § 6), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-57. - Lots. 
(a)  General layout. The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the neighborhood in which the subdivision is located and for the type of development and use contemplated, to assure provision of proper open space, to prevent overcrowding, and shall be approved in accordance with the technical manual. 
(b)  Lot dimension. 
(1)  Lot dimensions shall conform to the zoning ordinance or the following requirements, if more restrictive: 
a.  Depth and width of properties laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
b.  Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit the required building setback and proper orientation to both streets. Lots abutting on crosswalks shall be treated as corner lots. 
c.  Where a residential lot backs up to a railroad right-of-way, high pressured gas line, industrial area or any other land use which may have a depreciating and/or potentially dangerous effect on residential property, and where no marginal access street or other street is provided at the rear of such lot, additional depth shall be required, not to exceed a total of 150. A setback of 25 feet will be required where a lot sides to any of the above, appropriate additional width shall be required along with the 25-foot setback. A planting screen or no vehicular access easement of at least ten feet shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other similar land use. 
d.  Residential lots on cul-de-sacs shall be at least 50 feet wide at the building line and a minimum of 20 feet at the front property line. 
(c)  Orientation. 
(1)  Residential lots shall be oriented to take advantage of topography and the best relationship to the overall design of the neighborhood and to minimize the effects of any surrounding depreciating land uses. 
(2)  The placing of residential lots facing directly upon a major street shall be avoided, unless lots face a marginal access parallel to such major street. Residential lots shall not back to any publicly dedicated street. 
(d)  Access. Every improved lot shall front onto an approved private drive. 
(e)  Building setback lines. Minimum front and side building setback lines at streets and crosswalks shall be shown on all plats and shall conform to the restrictions if any, imposed on the subdivision by the subdivider but in no event shall such setback lines be less than required by the zoning ordinance. The front lot setback shall be measured from the point where the public right-of-way ends to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. IV, § 7), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-58. - Protection of natural features. 
    The planning and zoning commission may decline approval if due regard is not shown for the preservation of natural features such as large trees, water courses, scenic points, historical spots and similar community assets, which if preserved, will add attractiveness, stability and value to the property. See technical manual for specific tree preservation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. IV, § 8), 10-11-09) 
Secs. 21-59-21-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 21-76. - Compliance. 
(a)  Improvements required to comply. Improvements are required to comply with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(b)  Construction plans. 
(1)  Three complete sets of construction plans, specifications and contracts including performance, payment and maintenance bonds covering said construction, for or other satisfactorily written descriptions shall be filed with the appropriate staff as designated by the city manager upon filing of final plat. These shall show such features as roadways, cross sections and longitudinal slope for drainage, full description of proposed pavement or street improvement, its grade and slope, dimensions and specifications concerning public utilities to be installed showing proposed position on the ground, specifications of materials and construction, and profile maps of all sanitary and storm sewers showing both ground surface and flow line, and other pertinent information of similar nature. These plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following. 
(2)  Street plans, drain plans, sanitary sewer plans, water lines plans and overall utility layout. All such plans shall comply with specifications and design standards as shown in the technical manual. 
(c)  Inspection of improvements. 
(1)  All construction, such as street grading, site grading, erosion control measures, street paving, drainage structures, curb and gutter, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and water mains shall be subject to inspection during the construction period by the director of public works of the city, and shall be constructed in accordance with the approved engineering plans and the standard specifications governing such work. 
(2)  Upon completion of construction the director of public works may request the engineer for the city to make a final inspection of the work and to file a report of the results of such inspection. 
(3)  Before work may begin, the subdivider shall furnish the city with an inspection fee equal to five percent of the total amount estimated for the project, as agreed to by city and developer, including all bonds. No person shall be granted notice to proceed to construct, reconstruct, cut or repair any street, drainage or sanitary sewer facility without paying the fees for the inspection of such work. 
(4)  The subdivider's contractor shall give at least 48 hours notice in writing to the city of intent to commence actual construction of the facilities in order for inspection personnel to be made available. 
(5)  The subdivider shall delay connection of buildings to service lines of sewer and water mains until said sewer and water mains and service lines have been completed and accepted by the city. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the subdivider to notify all contractors and sub-contractors working for him that all of their work is subject to inspection by the city engineer or public works director at any time. certification of materials being used may be required by the city engineer or public works director. 
(7)  Laboratory tests required by the city inspector shall be performed by approved independent testing laboratories and will be at the discretion of the city inspector. Approved laboratories are laboratories that are members of the American Council of Independent Laboratories and shall comply with standard recommended practice for inspection and testing agencies for concrete, steel, and bituminous materials as used in construction (ASTM Designation E 329.) All costs for laboratory tests shall be borne by the subdivider or his contractor. 
(8)  Should any point not be covered in the plans, or subdivider's agreement, the subdivider shall be required to contact the city engineer for a determination as to the city's requirements. 
(9)  Any work, which in the opinion of the city inspector that does not meet the city's requirements or has not had proper city inspection shall be corrected. The inspector shall notify the contractor and subdivider in writing, of the reasons for requiring the contractor to cease all operations until the defect has been corrected in order to comply with city requirements and receive proper inspection. 
(d)  Final plans. Upon the completion of construction of any such utility or improvement, one set of plans on record and complete final plans, dated, signed and certified by the engineer in charge shall be filed with the city in digital format on compact disc showing all features as actually installed, including materials, size, location, depth of elevation, numbers, end of lines, connections, wyes, valves, storm sewer drains, inlets, and any other pertinent items. The city shall not accept such utilities until the foregoing has been submitted to, and approved by the city engineer. 
(e)  Guarantee of performance. No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless the subdivider has complied or provided for compliance with the policies and procedures set forth in article III "Design Standards," which is attached hereto and made a part hereof. Until such policies and procedures have been complied with by the subdivider and the plat approved by the planning and zoning commission as herein required, no building, water, sewer, plumbing, electrical, or any other public utility service permit shall be issued by the city council for any property in the subdivision. 
(f)  Performance bond. Prior to the recordation of any approved subdivision plat, the subdivider must file with the city secretary a bond executed by a surety company, holding a license to do business in the state, in an amount equal to the estimate cost of constructing the required improvements, as approved by the city engineer, guaranteeing to the city that all such improvements shall be constructed and completed in a satisfactory manner and within a period of two years from the date of plat approval. Said cost estimate shall include an escalator clause equal to the percent change according to a locally recognized construction cost index for the preceding calendar quarter. Said bond shall be approved by the city attorney and shall be made payable to and enforceable by the city. Upon substantial compliance and acceptance of all improvements by the city engineer, the bond may be released in writing by the city secretary and may be returned to the developer (see the technical manual). 
(g)  Maintenance bond. Where public infrastructure improvements have been installed prior to recording of the plat, the property owner shall submit a maintenance bond from each contractor, three sealed sets of "as built" plans or record drawings, one sealed set of "as built" mylars, and one CD containing a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the department of public works), together with a letter stating the contractors' compliance in accordance with the technical manual, and bearing sealed certification by the design engineer that all public improvements have been constructed in compliance with all city construction standards. The property owner also shall submit copies of the approved final plat with any required revisions on mylars and in the format and number required by the city engineer, together with all certifications required. The maintenance bond shall be in the form of a two-year warranty bond executed by a corporate surety licensed to do business in the state, conditioned that the improvements are free from defects in materials and workmanship in the amount of 25 percent of the total cost of construction. 
(h)  Where bond not prerequisite to approval. The filing of a performance bond shall not be a condition precedent to the approval of a plat where the subdivider, prior to the last regular meeting of the planning and zoning commission and before the expiration of 30 days from the date the plat was filed for approval, has signed and filed with the planning and zoning commission a performance agreement in substantially the following form: 
I, ___________, do hereby agree that, if the proposed plat _______, filed by me for approval on the ___ day of _______, is approved by the City Planning and Zoning Commission of Live Oak, Texas, the City Secretary of said city may retain said plat in his/her possession, without recording same, until I have either constructed all site improvements required under the provisions of the City of Live Oak, Texas Subdivision Ordinance, other than gas and electric lines, or have filed with the City a bond in an amount equal to the cost of all incomplete improvements as approved by the City Engineer, guaranteeing that all such completed improvements will be Constructed within two (2) years from the date of such bond. 
(i)  Acceptance by city. 
(1)  All work performed in construction, reconstruction, cutting and repairing of streets, storm sewer and other public improvements shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer, whose decision shall be final. 
(2)  The city shall not release the obligations of any financial assurance, including performance bonds, until the improvements have been approved and accepted by the city. 
(3)  Acceptance by the city shall be in the form of a letter from the city engineer or other authorized city official to the subdivider stating that inspections were conducted as the facilities were completed in accordance with specifications and standards provided for herein or approved by the city council at the time the final plat was approved for said subdivision. The developer shall instruct his engineer to prepare one set of reproducible prints (mylars) marked "As-Built" and dated the final date of acceptance. The construction plans shall note as-built conditions and shall be accompanied by a letter under the seal of the developer's registered professional engineer that the drawings are an accurate record of constructed items built in place. 
(j)  Issuance of building permits. No building permit, water, sewer, plumbing or electrical permit or service shall be issued or allowed to a subdivider, owner, or any other person with respect to any property in any subdivision covered by this chapter until such time as all of the applicable requirements of the chapter have been satisfactorily completed and the construction accepted by the city. 
(k)  Deferral or waiver of required improvements. 
(1)  The city council may defer, reduce, or waive at the time of plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all such improvements as, in its judgment, are not necessarily in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Whenever it is deemed necessary by the city council to defer the construction of any improvements required herein because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements prior to approval and according of the final plat. In lieu of a cash payment, the subdivider may use one of the other improvement guarantees set forth in this chapter. 
(l)  General construction requirements. Prior to initiating any construction work, the contractor and all subcontractors shall conduct a preconstruction conference with the city, city engineer, city inspector, and all affected franchised utilities. Prior to the preconstruction conference, the contractor shall provide a proposed construction sequence and schedule and a traffic safety plan, if required, for review and approval by the city engineer. As a general rule, the following construction sequence shall be employed: 
Step 1. Install temporary erosion/sedimentation controls. 
Step 2. Rough cut streets. 
Step 3. Install utilities. 
Step 4. Final grading. 
Step 5. Paving. 
Step 6. Hydromulch, final clean-up. 
(m)  Ownership and maintenance of completed public facilities. Upon acceptance of completed construction, all street improvements including construction of streets, alleys, thoroughfares, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm sewers, and drainage channels within dedicated right-of-way and easements shall be and remain the property of the city. The contractor shall be responsible for maintenance of the completed public improvement for a two-year period, following acceptance by the city. After expiration of the two-year maintenance period, the improvements shall be maintained by the city. 
(n)  Refund to developer from future connections to water and/or sanitary sewer systems. 
(1)  Application. Upon application and approval by the city council, a developer which is required to extend a water or sanitary sewer line past undeveloped property to reach his/her development may receive a refund from any future developer that connects within ten years of the initial construction. The application shall set forth the developer who is to receive the refund. The developer is eligible for refunds equal to, but not greater than, 75 percent of his participation in the sanitary sewer main for a period of ten years after completion of construction. 
(2)  Determination and application of connection fees. The city engineer will develop a linear front foot cost for the construction of the water or sanitary sewer main. Any future subdivision or plat that fronts along the affected sanitary sewer main shall be required to pay the calculated front foot cost to the city as a condition of plat approval. The city shall then notify the original developer of the availability of the refund. If the funds subject to refund remain uncollected by the developer to whom they are due for more than one year after notification, the funds shall become the property of the city. 
(3)  Records. The city secretary or designee shall maintain a record of the project front foot basis determined by city engineer, the refund limit, date construction was completed, limits upon which front foot fee may be collected, and the name of the developer entitled to refund. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. V, § 1), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-77. - Monuments. 
    Concrete monuments shall be placed in accordance with the technical manual. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. V, § 2), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-78. - Street improvements. 
    All street improvements shall meet the current requirements of the comprehensive plan and the requirements of technical manual, but in no case shall be less than the following specifications: 
Classification ROW Pavement Drainage Sidewalk Major Street 86' As required by the Comprehensive Plan, City P&Z and the Highway Department Secondary Street 60' 44' Curb or Curb 
& Gutter 4' both sides Minor Street 50' 30' Curb or Curb & 
Gutter 4' both sides Paved Alley (Res.) 20' 20' As required by City Engineer No Paved Alley (Comm) 24' 24' As required by City Engineer No  
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. V, § 3), 10-11-09) 
_____
Sec. 21-79. - Water system. 
(a)  General. All water supply, treatment, storage and distribution facilities shall be furnished and installed in compliance with the requirements of the technical manual, and current policies of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and American Water Works Association (AWWA). All plan submittals shall be submitted to the appropriate staff as designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Facilities required. Every lot in a subdivision shall be provided with an approved water supply by connecting to city's existing system or saws as appropriate. 
(c)  Fire hydrants. 
(1)  Fire hydrants. Hydrants to be properly located so there will be a fire hydrant every 300 feet measured along the hose lay in the mercantile and industrial areas, and every 500 feet measured along the hose lay in residential areas, so that every building in the city limits will be within 500 feet measured by the hose lay of a standard city fire hydrant. 
(2)  Standard fire hydrants shall be installed as part of the water distribution system per the city's design standards and conform to the following: 
a.  Standard fire hydrants must be connected to not less than an eight-inch diameter main and require fire department approval. 
b.  Standard fire hydrants shall have one four and one-half-inch connection and two two and one-half-inch connections, with the hydrant capable of discharging 250 gallons per minute through each of the two and one-half-inch outlets. In addition, it will have a total minimum flow of 750 gallons per minute and with a total friction loss not to exceed three pounds per square inch for the three-way outlet. 
c.  Standard fire hydrants shall be installed in a manner that the bottom of the four and one-half-foot outlet shall be no lower than 12 inches above ground level and two and one-half feet from face of curb. Each fire hydrant shall be installed with an isolation valve. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. V, § 4), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-80. - Waste water systems. 
(a)  General. All facilities for the collection and disposal of sewage shall be furnished and installed in compliance with the requirements of the technical manual and current policies of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
(b)  Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve each lot in all subdivisions and shall be connected to a public waste water system. 
(c)  On-site waste water facilities. In all subdivisions planned for septic tank use the minimum lot area shall be one-half acre per single-family dwelling. Septic tanks shall be installed on each lot concurrent with any development thereon and the design of such system and the method of installation shall conform in all respects to the requirements of Bexar County department of public works and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). If a water well and an on-site sewage facility (OSSF) exist on a single lot, that lot shall be at least one and one-half acre in size. On-site sanitary sewer treatment facilities shall not be allowed unless no wastewater facilities are provided to the lot(s) by the city. 
(d)  Unsewered lots. All lots must tie into existing city water and waste water systems unless a petition to the council, with a positive recommendation from city staff, is approved. Where off-lot sewerage is not provided, the lot size shall be determined to be in accordance with requirements of the Bexar County Commissioners Court Order "Regulating and Licensing of Private Sewage Facilities," and shall be approved by the director, Bexar County public works department prior to approval by the planning and zoning commission. Planned unit developments shall not be permitted with septic tanks system installations. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. V, § 5), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-81. - Drainage. 
(a)  General. Development of any lot within any subdivision shall not increase the peak flow discharges or velocities over natural conditions. Adequate drainage facilities, approved by the city engineer shall be provided to ensure compliance with this section. 
(b)  Facilities required. 
(1)  All necessary storm drainage facilities including enclosed storm sewer, bridges, culverts, and water course improvements, to carry off storm water within the subdivision and integrate such subdivision drainage with the overall urban drainage system, shall be installed in accordance with the technical manual and official urban and county drainage plans. 
(2)  Drainage channels will normally be concrete lined channels unless other means such as earth soddened, or other alternative methods are approved by the director of public works, city engineer, director of planning and zoning or the city planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  All subdivisions shall conform to the "Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973", Public Law 93-234, HR 8448 of the 93rd Congress and latest revisions thereof. The city flood plain management control ordinance as amended and policies as dictated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency will be adhered to. 
(4)  Federal flood plains are based on a 100-year frequency discharge, and apply only in those areas where official Federal Emergency Management Agency maps have been prepared, or where 100-year water and surface profile studies are available for the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The limits of the flood plain shall be shown on the subdivision plat, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. V, § 6), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-82. - Underground utilities. 
(a)  All new residential utility installations, including but not limited to electrical, gas, television, and telephone/telecommunication, shall be placed underground. 
(b)  All new nonresidential utility installations, including but not limited to electrical, gas, television, and telephone/telecommunication, shall be placed underground. Primary and secondary electrical service routed on the site shall be placed underground. 
(c)  All new construction within the public street rights-of-way shall be located underground. Where a street is scheduled for reconstruction, new development may be required to provide an escrow of the difference between overhead and underground service. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall prevent temporary service during construction from being located overhead. 
(e)  New development shall assume responsibility for all expense related to the underground placement of utilities. 
(f)  All communication and electrical support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.) necessary for underground installation shall be pedestal- or pad-mounted or placed underground. 
(g)  All service drops must be underground and equipment shall be pad-mounted and properly screened. 
(h)  Electrical transmission lines 59 kilovolts or more may be located overhead on galvanized steel and/or concrete structures. 
(i)  A five-foot easement, in addition to the right-of-way (ROW) dedication, shall be provided in the front of all lots that are not served by alleys for the installation of dry utilities (electric, gas, phone, cable, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. V, § 7), 10-11-09) 
Secs. 21-83-21-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 21-101. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm, association of persons, corporation or other organization violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00 per offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall never be a bar to other remedies of relief for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. VI, § 1), 10-11-09) 
Sec. 21-102. - Authority of the city engineer. 
    The city engineer is hereby authorized and directed in cooperation with appropriate city staff to promulgate rules, regulations, standards and specifications for the construction, installation, design, location and arrangement of streets, curbs, street lights, street signs, alleys, utility layouts, utility easements, gates for utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and water distribution systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells, monuments, criteria for drainage easement requirements, drainage facilities, and cross walk ways to be subsequently approved by the planning and zoning commission. City staff shall recommend to the city planning and zoning commission any changes to be made. No such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall conflict with this or any other ordinance of the city. All such improvements shall be constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged by the subdivider in accordance with such rules, regulations, standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Art. VI, § 2), 10-11-09) 
EXHIBIT "A" - TECHNICAL MANUAL-DESIGN GUIDELINES 
RELATED TO THE CITY OF LIVE OAK 
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 

A. - General design study requirements. 
    All subdivisions shall comply with the requirements, specifications and design standards as hereinafter outlined. 
    The design engineer shall provide the following studies, on which, the design of a subdivision is based: 
1.  Detailed soils study, including groundwater investigation, bore location and depth shall be recommended by the design engineer and require the approval of the city engineer prior to commencing with the study "field work." 
2.  Detailed drainage study herein specified. 
3.  Detailed pavement design, but the minimum section shall be a herein outlined. 
4.  Outline of "Quality Assurance Program" as herein outlined. This shall be submitted and approved be the city prior to starting construction. 
    Two copies of plans and profiles for streets, alleys, sidewalks, water, sewage, and drainage easements including the following information shall be submitted with each final plat, along with digital files of the plat and plans. 
B. - Streets, alleys, and sidewalks. 
1.  Plans (the required plans shall include a minimum of the following information). 
a.  Typical sections showing the proposed pavement width, type, thickness and crown; the proposed curb and gutter type as required, location in relation to centerline and exposure; the proposed sidewalk dimensions and location in relation to curbs and property lines; the proposed street grading slopes, for each of the different types of streets and alleys in the subdivision. 
b.  Alignment of each street, alley, sidewalk and crosswalk showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the centerline and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another street, alley or drainage easement; the station and radius of each curb return; the location of adjacent right-of-way lines; the location of monuments. 
c.  Location, description, and elevation of bench marks, the top of curb grade at each curb end, each 50-feet station and each end of each curb return; the centerline grade at each end and at each 50-foot station of alleys; the gradient of each tangent grade and the location and length of each vertical curve; the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection; the profiles of streets, alleys, and drainage ditches shall show the natural ground at adjacent property lines and the proposed centerline. 
d.  Scale, north arrow and date. Plan and profile shall be drawn to scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch equals five feet vertically. 
2.  Design. 
a.  At each street intersection the curb shall be rounded with a curve of radius "R", varying with the interior angle as specified in Table 1. 
b.  At each intersection the property lines at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve on radius "R", varying with the interior angle as specified in Table 1. 
c.  Street and alley grades shall, in general, conform to the terrain, and shall not exceed the grades specified in Table 2. No street or alley grades shall be less than one percent unless otherwise approved by the city engineer and director of public works. 
d.  Horizontal curve radii shall not be less than those specified in Table 2. 
3.  Construction requirements. The subdivider shall excavate, fill and grade all alleys and new streets including sidewalk areas within the subdivision so that pavements and sidewalks may be constructed along lines and grades approved by the city engineer. In general, the grades of sidewalks shall be so established that no extreme or abrupt changes in grade are encountered within blocks, and shall meet the requirements of "Americans with Disabilities Act" (ADA), but variations may be allowed by the city engineer where, because of soil conditions, topography, or valuable trees, the establishment of such grades would result in undue hardship. New streets and alleys shall be surfaced in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and constructed under his supervision. No street shall be surfaced until the underground utilities which are to be installed in the portions of the streets intended for vehicular traffic, have been installed, inspected, tested and approved. 
    New streets (including previously dedicated rights-of-way) and existing unpaved streets abutting both sides of a new subdivision or resubdivision, shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements. 
a.  Design report. A pavement design report shall be prepared and signed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. The pavement design requirements for all street classifications are listed in the table below. All pavements shall have a minimum 20-year design service life and shall include bus traffic unless specifically exempted. 
b.  Serviceability. The initial serviceability index (p0) for flexible pavements shall be 4.2 and for rigid pavement shall be 4.5. The minimum terminal serviceability index (Pt) for local streets shall be 2.0 and for collectors and arterials shall be 2.5. A standard deviation (S0) for flexible pavement shall be 0.45 and for rigid pavement shall be 0.35. 
c.  Subgrade. A geotechnical investigation must be performed for the design of all streets. The number and location of borings shall be sufficient to determine the subsurface conditions and their impact on the street design. 
1.  Subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications of the city, and treated to provide a PI, of the existing soils, less than 20 and compacted to a proctor dry density of not less than 95 percent. When fill is required it shall be placed in uniform lifts not to exceed six inches compacted depth prior to eight inches prior to compaction. 
2.  Each lift shall be compacted to 95 percent Proctor density before succeeding lifts are placed. (AASHTO T-99-57) Method D. The prepared subgrade shall have a minimum depth of six inches. Alternative methods of stabilization in place of the use of lime will be considered upon submittal of an engineering report. 
d.  Acceptable materials. Combinations of the following materials will be allowed for pavement structure. 
1.  Base reinforcement fabrics (Geogrids). 
2.  Flexible base (six-inch minimum). 
3.  Prime and tack coat. 
4.  Hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement (Type D - minimum 1.5-inch). 
5.  Asphalt treated base (four-inch minimum). 
6.  Reinforced concrete. 
e.  Curbs and gutters. Curb and gutter sections shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete and installed in accordance with the specifications of the city, on all streets within the subdivision along the lines and grades approved by the city. Curb and gutter shall be provided on both sides of all streets with a minimum height of seven inches. Driveways shall be designed as a "flush curb or a straight driveway section and the driveway width in the curb shall not be greater than is approved by the city. In the event a curb cut is required for the installation of driveways, sidewalks, or drainage, the following guidelines shall apply: 
1.  All curb cuts must be made with a masonry saw to insure a smooth finish. 
2.  The transition from curb to driveway, sidewalk or drain must be of a smooth finish so as to not endanger public pedestrians, and to meet all ADA requirements. 
3.  The elevation of the driveway at the street must be at least one inch above the gutter. 
4.  At the point where concrete and asphalt meet, a straight saw cut must be made so as to minimize asphalt deterioration. 
5.  Asphalt and concrete must meet all city specifications. 
6.  No work shall begin until a permit is secured from the city. 
f.  Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks having a width of not less than four feet and thickness of not less than four inches shall be constructed on each side of each street within the subdivision. Said sidewalks shall be adjacent to the property line and within street right-of-way and shall extend along all street frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends; provided, however, that where it is impractical for the subdivider to provide such sidewalks on the side lot lines abutting major thoroughfares or drainage ditches, sidewalks shall not be required. The location of sidewalks shall be subject to the review of the city engineer and approval by the city engineer and planning director and shall meet the requirements of ADA. 
g.  Street markers. Two street name signs having the following specifications shall be erected at all street intersections, in subdivisions: 
1.  The street name signs shall be of the cross-arm type, and shall be reflectorized on aluminum metal blanks. 
2.  Signs shall have lettering for the respective street name in four-inch minimum height standard letters with the block numbers and street, drive, place and etc., in two-inch minimum height standard letters. 
3.  Such signs shall be supported on a ten and one-half foot long pipe mounted two feet into the ground. Distance from the bottom of the street name sign to the ground surface shall be eight feet. 
4.  The pipe support for the street name sign shall be two-inch hot dip galvanized steel pipe. 
5.  The material of the street name signs, the method of attaching the sign to the post, the details of lettering, painting, and method of installation, as well as the location of the sign at the intersection shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city. 
h.  Street lights. Street lights in new subdivisions within the city limits and the annexed areas of the city shall be installed from time to time pursuant to agreement between the City of Live Oak, Texas and City Public Service, San Antonio, Texas. 
C. - Drainage and drainage structures. 
    (All drainage channels and right-of-ways shall be concrete lined, unless a variance and specific approval is obtained for installation of "unlined" drainage structures. All drainage improvements shall be based on 100 percent build out of watershed areas.) 
1.  Plans (the required plans shall include a minimum of the following information). 
a.  Construction details of all drainage structures including dimensions, reinforcing and components such as grates and manhole covers. 
b.  Alignment of drainage easements showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the centerline, and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve, the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another drainage easement, the location of each drainage structure and the location and size of all storm sewers. 
c.  The centerline grade at each end and at each 50-foot station of drainage ditches, the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection, the flow line elevations of each drainage structure, the flow line elevation of each storm sewer, at each point of change, each end and at the intervening gradients. The hydraulic grade line shall be shown on all drainage improvement plans. 
2.  Design. 
a.  Method of computing runoff. The basis of computing runoff shall be the rational formula or some other method provided it is acceptable to the city engineer. 
b.  Runoff calculations. Runoff rates shall be computed at not less than the following: 
Character of Area Percent Runoff Up to 1% 
Up to 3% Over 1% 
Up to 5% Over 3% 
Over 5% Avg. Flow Business or Commercial 
(90% or more impervious) 95 96 97 97 Densely Developed 
(80%-90% impervious) 85 88 91 95 Closely Built Residential and School Sites 75 77 80 84 Undeveloped 68 70 72 75 Average Residential 65 67 69 72  
_____ 
In all cases, wet antecedent conditions shall be assumed. Runoff rates shall be computed on the basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed to the proposed subdivision. For determination of time for concentration, times shall be figured on the basis that there shall be an improved drainage system upstream from point under construction. 
3.  Drainage facilities. 
a.  Stormwater retention. The stormwater drainage from the proposed subdivision will not increase the water level in any existing creek, stream or waterway above the water level previously associated with a 25-year frequency storm. The run off from the proposed subdivision, including the entire watershed contributing run off water to the proposed subdivision shall not exceed that for the same area in an undeveloped state. The determination of storm run off may be made by using the Austin standard method, rational method, or similar method acceptable to city engineer. Calculations shall be submitted, for review by the city engineer, for the drainage area undeveloped and for the area ultimately developed, as required in subsection C.2.a. 
The difference in run off quantities shall be managed by means of an "on-site: storm water retention system. The retention system shall be designed to release stormwater at a rate not to exceed that for an undeveloped state. The retention "reservoir" shall be so designed that water will not gather in pools which may become stagnant or foul and that the retention will not result in additional identifiable adverse flooding within the subdivision or other property. The retention system design must be reviewed by the city engineer and the director of public works and approved by the planning commission before any improvements may be made within the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Streets. Streets may be used for storm water drainage only if the calculated storm water flow does not exceed the height of the curb, or the velocity does not exceed ten feet per second. Minor streets shall be designed on a basis of a five-year frequency, major streets on a ten-year frequency. Where streets are not capable of carrying storm waters as outlined above, drainage channels or storm sewers shall be provided. Street width shall not be widened beyond width as determined by street classification. 
Where storm sewers are required, design shall be based on a 25-year frequency, and the entire 25-year discharge will be picked up at the point where the street can no longer handle the runoff flowing curb full. No allowance shall be made for overruns or partial street flows combined with storm sewer flows at initial pickup points. Inlets and underground system shall be designed on a 25-year frequency; street discharges, after initial pickup, may be based upon street classification for frequency required. 
c.  Concrete lined channels. The design of concrete lined channels shall be based on a 25-year frequency and is subject to the approval of the city engineer and shall comply with the following general requirements: 
1.  Drainage freeboard table. (This table applies to both concrete lined and earth channels.) 
Design Depth 
of flow Required Freeboard 0-5 feet 0.5 feet 5-10 feet 10% of design depth 10+ feet 1.0 foot  
2.  Concrete lined channels shall have a minimum of two feet from inside of concrete rip rap to the property lines. The horizontal area between the channel interior, to the property line on each side shall be covered with five-inch concrete rip rap. 
3.  From the flowline of the concrete lining to the top of the concrete lining, a side-slope not steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical shall be required. 
4.  For normal conditions, the concrete lining shall be a minimum of four inches thick and reinforced with No. 3 round bars placed not more than 16 inches on centers both directions. Where surface, nature of ground, height and steepness of slope, etc., become critical, design shall be in accordance with appropriate structural standards. All concrete lining shall develop a minimum compressive strength of not less than 2,500 pounds per square inch in 28 days. 
5.  Vertical walls will be permissible in concrete channels provided depth is not to greater than two feet. 
6.  Easements or rights-of-way for concrete lined channels shall extend to the property line on both sides of the channel. 
7.  The minimum N value of roughness coefficient of 0.015 shall be used for a wood float type concrete surface finish. This N value is as used in Manning's formula. 
d.  Earth channels. The design of earth channels where acceptable, shall be based on a 25-year frequency subject to the approval of the city engineer, and shall comply with the following general specifications: 
1.  The depth of the earth shall be for the design depth of the flow plus the required freeboard (see table titled "Drainage freeboard table"). 
2.  The side slope shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. 
3.  Easements or right-of-way for earth on channels shall extend a minimum of two feet on one side and 15 feet for an access road on the opposite side of the extreme limits of the channels, when such channels do not parallel and adjoin an alley or roadway. When such channels do parallel and adjoin an alley or roadway, the easement or right-of-way shall extend a minimum of two feet on both sides of the extreme limits of the channel. Where utilities are installed in the access road of the drainage right-of-way, said right-of-way shall extend two feet on one side and 17 feet on the opposite side of the design limits of the channel. These 17 feet are to provide an access way along channel with a maximum cross slope of a half-inch per foot toward channel. 
4.  The N value of roughness coefficient as used in the Manning formula shall be 0.035 for earth channels. 
e.  Velocity control. The following velocity chart shall be used for scour protection and to determine the type drain which shall be used. Concrete lined channels may also be used at velocities less than eight feet per second if so desired by the engineer. Where velocities are in the supercritical range, allowance shall be made in the design for the adequate handling of the water. 
Velocity Type Drain Required 1-6 f.p.s. Earth 6-8 f.p.s. Concrete retards or other approved erosion controls 8+ f.p.s. Concrete lining or drop structures  
f.  Channel bends and turns. Allowance for extra freeboard shall be made wherever design conditions require it. 
g.  Storm sewers. Storm sewers shall be designed on a 25-year frequency and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. For all ordinary conditions, storm sewers shall be designed on the assumption that they will flow full under the design discharge; however, whenever the system is placed under a pressure head or there are construction, turns, submerged or inadequate outfalls, etc., the hydraulic grade line shall be computed and plotted in profile. In all cases, adequate outlets shall be provided and the system adequately designed. No storm sewers shall be less than 24 inches in diameter. 
h.  Alleys. Alleys may be designed on a five-year frequency to carry storm water. 
TABLE 1 
INTERSECTION CURB RETURNS 
Interior Angle 
In Degrees Local Streets 
Radii Collector Streets 
Radii Major Streets 
Radii 150-145 15 25 25 145-140 15 25 28 140-135 15 25 30 138-85 15 25 35 85-75 20 30 50 75-65 25 35 80 65-55 30 40 90 55-45 35 45 110 45-0 35 45 150  
  
TABLE 2 
STREET AND ALLEY GRADES 
(Minimum street slope shall be one percent). 
Street or Alley Type Maximum Slope Thoroughfare 6% Collector 6% Local 10% Marginal Access 10% Alley 10%  
HORIZONTAL CURVE RADII 
Street Type Center Line Radius Thoroughfare 1200' Collector 700' Local 100' Marginal Access 100'  
  
_____
D. - Sanitary sewer collection systems. 
1.  All gravity sewers shall be plastic sewer pipe conforming to Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, City of Live Oak and A.S.T.M. standards, and installed in conformance with the specifications of the city engineer. 
2.  The minimum size of sewer mains in residential areas shall be eight inches in diameter. Minimum grades shall be 0.4 percent for eight-inch mains, 0.25 percent for 12-inch mains, slope of mains larger than 12 inches minimum slope shall be approved by the city engineer. 
3.  All outfall mains shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the maximum ultimate build out flow from the entire watershed, as approved by the city. 
4.  Lift stations shall be furnished where necessary, of such size and design as determined by the city. 
E. - Potable water distribution system. 
1.  Design specifications. The water distribution system design shall include the minimum requirements of the Texas Commission for Environmental Quality (TCEQ), Texas State Fire Insurance Commission and American Water Works Association for residential, mercantile and industrial areas in addition the requirements for peak hour design shall meet the requirements of TCEQ demand, as determined by the director of public works. 
2.  Major supply mains. Supply mains in the distribution system shall be looped and have a minimum size of 12 inches inside diameter and shall not exceed 6,000 feet in length between cross connecting mains. 
3.  Mercantile and industrial mains. Mains in all mercantile areas shall be looped between supply mains and shall have a minimum size of eight inches inside diameter and shall be the shortest of the two following lengths: 3,000 feet or a length that would render the line incapable of producing flows and pressures set out herein for the type of area to be served and with pressures and flows that exist at the supply main's connections as determined by the director of public works. 
    Mains in principal mercantile and industrial areas shall be installed in dedicated streets and sized so that the minimum fire flow from any single fire hydrant will be not less than 3,000 gallons per minute with 20 p.s.i. residual pressure. Mains in light mercantile areas shall be located in streets or fire lanes and shall be sizes so that the minimum fire flow from any single hydrant will be not less than 1,500 g.p.m. with 20 psi residual pressure. 
4.  Residential mains. Mains in residential areas shall be looped between mains of eight inches or larger inside diameter and shall have a minimum size of eight inches inside diameter and shall be the shortest of the two following lengths: 3,000 feet, or a length that would render the line incapable of producing the flows and pressure set out herein for the type of area served and with the pressures and flows that exist at the supply main's connections and as determined by the city. Domestic mains shall be installed in dedicated street right-of-way and sized so that the minimum fire flow at any single fire hydrant will be not less than 750 g.p.m. with 20 p.s.i. residual pressures and a domestic use of two g.p.m. for every lot in the subdivision. 
5.  Domestic lines. Domestic service lines in residential areas shall be looped between mains on "through" streets and dead end in streets terminated with a cul-de-sac and shall have a minimum size of eight inches inside diameter. Domestic lines shall be located in dedicated streets between curb and sidewalk. 
6.  Valve location. The distribution system in mercantile and industrial areas shall be equipped with sufficient number of valves and so located that no case of accident, breakage or repair to the water distribution system mains will necessitate shutting from service a length of water main greater than one side of a single block or a maximum of 500 feet. The distribution system in residential areas shall be equipped with a sufficient number of valves and so located that no case of accident, breakage or repair to the water distribution system mains will necessitate shutting from service a length of water main greater than two sides of a single block or a maximum of 600 feet. 
7.  Fire hydrant spacing. All extensions or additions to the city distribution system within the city limits must meet the requirements as set forth in current key rate schedule as promulgated by the Texas State Board of Insurance for the installation of fire hydrants. Hydrants shall be located so that there will be a fire hydrant every 500 feet average distance as measured along dedicated streets in residential areas, including dedicated easements and fire lanes In mobile home parks and travel trailer parks. 
    Every building in the city limits shall be within 500 feet of a standard city fire hydrant. Hydrants shall be located so that there will be a standard city fire hydrant every 300 feet average as measured along dedicated streets in all mercantile areas. 
    Fire hydrants within light mercantile areas containing apartments and apartment houses shall be located in dedicated streets or fire lanes behind curbs and be spaced not more than 300 feet hose lay from any building within the district, each distance to be measured down any standard fire hose laid from the fire hydrant to the building. 
    All fire hydrants shall have a six-foot clear horizontal radius of 360 degrees around the fire hydrant free from obstructions and shall be located on street corners or side property lines so as to be readily accessible at all times. 
F. - Laboratory testing. 
    All materials to be used in subdivision construction shall be subject to testing. The preponderance of testing to be performed in subdivisions is directly related to street construction and a series of laboratory tests normally associated with road and street construction will be required in subdivisions, said tests being performed by an independent testing laboratory using qualified personnel and licensed by the state. 
    The engineer of record shall notify the city engineer at least one week prior to the contractor beginning construction. All costs for required testing shall be paid for by the developer and submitted to the city engineer for approval. 
    Required topographic surveys for pavements: Surveys shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered surveyor licensed by the state. A detailed topographic survey of the subgrade surface, base and surface asphalt shall be submitted and approved prior to the placing of overlaying pavement materials as shown in the approved pavement study. 
MINIMUM RATIO OF TESTING  Subgrade minimum 1 per 100 linear feet of roadway  At Curb/Gutter minimum 1 per 200 linear feet  Base minimum 1 per 50 linear feet  Asphalt Stabilized Base minimum 1 per 50 linear feet  Backfill Density Control minimum 1 per 50 linear feet PROCTORS (moisture-Density relationship)  Subgrade (raw) 1 per subdivision unless material changes  Base 1 per 500 C.Y. materials or less ATTERBERG LIMITS & GRADATION  Base 1 per 500 C.Y. materials or less HOT MIX CONTROL  Surface Course Design 1 per subdivision  Base Course Design 1 per subdivision  Extraction 2 per day run/minimum 1 per 500 tons  Densities 1 per 100 linear feet CONCRETE  Curb Gutter 1 set (3) per 500 feet - or each pour  Sidewalk 1 set (3) per 2,500 square feet - or each pour  Inlets 1 set (3) per six inlets - or each pour  
    The above schedule is a minimum schedule for testing, failures not included. In the event of failures, additional tests will be taken. If excessive rain occurs on a previously tested section, the city shall have the right to order retests as necessary. 
    The city's representative on the job shall notify the testing lab when tests are to be taken. If the contractor cannot locate the city's representative within a reasonable period of time (two hours) he may contact the engineer or his representative who may then, after he has inspected the work, authorize the testing lab to take tests at the subdivision site. In the event neither the engineer nor the city's representative is available within two hours, contractor may order the lab test. Provided, however, if it is necessary to retest, such retesting shall be at the contractor's expense. Except as otherwise provided above, it is the intent of the city that the contractor not contact the lab for the purpose of requesting routine tests. The scope of testing of materials incorporated in subdivision construction is not necessarily limited to those tests outlined above. In the event of unusual conditions or factors which may give the city reason to question the quality of the materials in any portion of the subdivision, the city will have the right to order such additional tests as are necessary at the subdivider or contractor's expense. However, the city will consult with the engineer on reasons for such additional tests before a testing lab will be asked to conduct such tests. 
    All tests in accordance with these requirements will be performed in accordance with the American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM) latest revision, and/or elsewhere provided in approved plans and specifications for the subdivision. The city will require all subdivision test reports to be certified by a registered professional engineer (Texas registration) and will further require that the city be furnished a minimum of two copies of testing reports. 
    SANITARY SEWER MAINS-AIR TESTING 
    This item shall cover the testing of complete sections of installed sewer pipe. The contractor shall conduct low-pressure air test on completed sections of sewer main in the presence of the city's inspector. The air test will be used to evaluate materials and construction methods on the pipeline sections, and successor air tests shall be mandatory for the acceptance of the lines. 
    Materials for air testing: 
Compressor air supply: Any source which will provide at least 300 cubic feet per minute at 100 pounds per square inch. 
Plugs, valves, pressure gages, air hose, connections and other equipment necessary to conduct the air test shall be furnished by the contractor. The test equipment for air testing will consist of valves, plugs, and pressure gages used to control the rate at which air flows to the test section and to monitor the air pressure inside the plugs. Test equipment shall be assembled as follows: 
1.  Determine section of line to be tested. 
2.  Apply air pressure until the pressure inside pipe reaches 4 p.s.i.g. 
3.  Allow the pressure inside pipe to stabilize, then bleed back to 3.5 p.s.i.g. 
4.  At 3.5 p.s.i.g, the time, temperature, and pressure will be observed and recorded. A minimum of five readings will be required for each test. 
If the time in seconds for the air pressure to decrease from 3.5 p.s.i.g. to 2.5 p.s.i.g. is greater than that shown in the following table, the pipe shall be presumed to be free from defect. When these rates are exceeded, pipe breakage, joint leakage or leaking plugs are indicated and an inspection must be made to determine the cause. The contractor shall affect such repairs as may be required to accomplish a successor air test. 
    ALLOWABLE TIME TABLE 
Pipe 
Size Minute Second 4" 2 0 6" 3 0 8" 4 0 10" 5 0 12" 5 30 15" 7 5 18" 8 30 21" 9 50 24" 11 20 27" 12 45 30" 14 10 36 17 00 42 19 50 48 22 40 54 25 30 60 28 20  
    POTABLE WATER DISTRIBUTION MAINS-FLUSHING AND TESTING MAINS 
    Flushing. Immediately upon completion of pipe laying the contractor shall flush all mains which are scheduled to be disinfected by machine chlorination by the owner. This flushing shall be at the direction of the engineer and shall consist of completely filling sections of main between valves and then displacing such initial volumes of water by introducing clear water from existing facilities into and through the main to the point of discharge from the main being flushed. The flow through shall continue until the engineer determines all dust, debris or foreign matter that may have entered during pipe laying operations have been flushed out. The new line shall then be left under system pressure for testing. To avoid damage to pavement and inconvenience to the public, fire hoses shall be used to direct flushing water from the main into suitable drainage channels or sewers. 
    Operation of valves. No valve in the owner's water distribution system shall be operated by the contractor without prior permission of the engineer. The contractor shall notify the owner when a valve is to be operated and shall only operate the valve in the presence of the engineer's representative. 
    Hydrostatic test. Except in the high pressure sections of the water distribution system where test pressures will exceed 150 p.s.i., all new mains shall be hydrostatically field tested at a maximum test pressure of 150 p.s.i. before acceptance by the engineer. Where designated as "high pressure area", all new mains shall be hydrostatically field tested at a maximum test pressure of 200 p.s.i. before acceptance by the engineer. It is the intent of these specifications that all joints be watertight and that all joints which are found to leak either by observation or during any test shall be made watertight by the contractor. If case repairs are required, the hydrostatic field test shall be repeated until the pipe installation conforms to the specified requirements and is acceptable to the engineer. After the new main has been laid and backfilled as specified but prior to chlorination and replacement of pavement, it shall be filled with water for a minimum of 24 hours and then subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test. The hydrostatic test shall be made so that the maximum pressure at the lowest point does not exceed the specified test pressure. 
    The specified test pressure shall be supplied by means of a pump connected to the main in a satisfactory manner. The pump, pipe connection, and all necessary apparatus including gauges and meters shall be furnished by the contractor. Unless otherwise specified, the owner will furnish water for filling lines and making tests through existing mains. 
    Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the main. To accomplish this, taps shall be made, if necessary, at the points of highest elevation and afterwards tightly plugged. 
    At intervals during the test, the entire route of the new main shall be inspected to locate any leaks or breaks. If any are found, they shall be stopped or repaired. In this section of the valve being tested, the test shall be repeated until satisfactory results are obtained. 
    The duration of each pressure test shall be a minimum of four hours for new mains in excess of 1,000 lineal feet and a minimum of one hour for new mains less than 1,000 lineal feet after the main has been brought up to test pressure. The test pressure shall be measured by means of a tested and properly calibrated pressure gauge acceptable to the engineer. All pressure tests shall be continued until the owner is satisfied that the new main meets the requirements of these specifications. 
    Should any test of pipe in place disclose leakage greater than that listed in Table 4 or 5, Hydrostatic Test Leakage Allowances, as applicable, the contractor [shall] locate and repair the defective joints until the leakage is within the specified allowances. 
    Leakage is defined as the quantity of water supplied into the newly laid main, or any valved section of it, necessary to maintain the specified leakage test pressure after the main has been filled with water and the air expelled. 
    The contractor shall notify the engineer prior to beginning the test. 
G. - Disinfection of new mains utilizing machine chlorination. 
    General. After the new mains have successfully passed the pressure test specified in hydrostatic test, the owner will disinfect those mains shown on the plans or otherwise indicated as "Machine Chlorination by City." 
    This disinfection shall include chlorination, flushing, and placing the mains in service. 
    Operation of valves. During and after the disinfection of the mains, the contractor shall be notified by the engineer sufficiently in advance to enable the contractor to have a competent representative present whenever valves are to be operated that will affect the pressure in any part of the work for which the contractor is responsible. 
    Contractor's personnel and equipment. The contractor shall supply labor and equipment necessary to make all excavations required for chlorination, equipment connections, subsequent flushing, and placing the mains in service. 
    Safeguarding and backfilling open holes. The contractor shall be responsible for safeguarding any open holes excavated or left open for flushing and disinfection purposes. Following completion of disinfection, the contractor shall backfill such holes. 
H. - Disinfection of mains utilizing dry calcium hypochlorite. 
    General. Mains shall be disinfected with dry Calcium Hypochlorite (HTH) where shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. This method of disinfection will also be followed for main repairs. 
    Dosage. The contractor shall disinfect the new or replaced mains with Calcium Hypochlorite (HTH) of 70 percent available chlorine furnished by the owner. Sufficient Calcium Hypochlorite (HTH) shall be used to obtain a minimum chlorine concentration of 50 p.p.m. The following Table 6, Chlorine Dosage, is included for the convenience of the contractor: 
TABLE 6 
CHLORINE DOSAGE 
(A heaping tablespoon holds 
approximately one-half ounces) 
(A standard measuring cup holds 
approximately eight ounces.) 
Diameter of Pipe 
(Inches) Ounces per Foot to obtain 50 p.p.m. Chlorine Dosage 6 0.0138 8 0.0233 10 0.0364 12 0.0523 14 0.0708 16 0.0934 18 0.1175 20 0.1455 24 0.2080 30 0.3270 36 0.4690 42 0.6370 48 0.8330  
    Filling the main. Those sections of main to which the dry Calcium Hypochlorite (HTH) has been applied shall be filled slowly to allow for the even distribution of the disinfecting material. The manipulation of valves shall be under the supervision of the engineer's representative in accordance with the provisions of operation of valve. 
    Holding time. The length of time that sections of main disinfected with Calcium Hypochlorite (HTH) shall be allowed to stand undisturbed will depend upon the particular job. 
a.  The required minimum detention time will be 18 hours when circumstances permit a shutdown with no customers out of service. 
b.  The required minimum detention time will be two hours when customers are out of service during a shutdown with no leakage past valves. 
c.  The required minimum detention time will be 30 minutes when customers are out of service during a shutdown with some leakage. 
    Flushing. Following the expiration of the specified holding time, the treated section of main shall be flushed thoroughly by the contractor in accordance with the applicable provisions of FLUSHING AND TESTING MAINS. Flushing shall continue until no chlorine remains detectable by taste or odor or until the chlorine residual is less than 0.3 p.p.m. 
    Preventing reverse flow. Valves shall be manipulated so that the strong chlorine solution in the line being treated will be flushed out of the main and will not flow back into the line supplying the water. 
    Supervision. All disinfection of mains shall be done under the general supervision of a representative of the owner. 
    Additional treatment. Should the new main fail to meet minimum public health standards for bacteriological quality after flushing, further treatment shall be as directed by the engineer. If further disinfection is required, chlorination shall be done in accordance with DISINFECTION OF NEW MAINS UTILIZING MACHINE CHLORINATION. In no case, however, shall the new line be acceptable as complete and satisfactory until the bacteriological quality of the water taken from the main meets the Standards of Texas Department of Health Resources. 
    Safeguarding and backfilling open holes. The requirement for safeguarding and backfilling all holes excavated or left open for chlorinating and sampling shall be as specified in safeguarding and backfilling open holes. 
(Ord. No. 1403, § 1(Exh. A), 10-11-09; Ord. No. 1475, §§ I, II, 1-8-13) 
Chapter 22 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Sales and use tax; exemption of gas and electricity for residential use. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, "residential use" means use in a family dwelling or in a multi-family apartment or housing complex or building or portion thereof occupied as a home or residence. 
(b)  There are hereby exempted from the taxes imposed under the state and local sales and use taxes the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption within the city of gas and electricity for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 366, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-78) 
Cross reference- Utilities generally, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Authority, V.A.C.S. art. 1066c, § 4A. 
Sec. 22-2. - Exemption for elderly. 
    Properties in the city qualifying as homesteads for owners 65 years of age, or more, shall be entitled to $25,000.00 in exemptions from city taxes on such homestead, providing that the record owner or owners of such property reside on the property, is entitled to same as a homestead, and applies from year to year to the Bexar Appraisal District for this exemption. 
(Ord. No. 314, 4-12-77; Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-12-87) 
State Law reference- Authority, V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 11.13. 
Sec. 22-3. - Delinquent taxes penalty. 
    All ad valorem and personal property taxes otherwise due and payable to the city that remain delinquent on July first of the year in which they become delinquent, shall incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection, which penalty shall be, but not exceed 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest otherwise due. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 1, 3-30-82) 
State Law reference- Authority, V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 33.07. 
Sec. 22-4. - Taxation of certain goods, wares, ores and other tangible personal property forwarded out of state. 
    All of that property described in the Texas Constitution, Article VIII, Section 1-j, shall be fully taxable in the city, beginning January 1, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 1, 1-9-90) 
Editor's note- For the convenience of the Code user, part of the preamble to Ord. No. 854, which did not specifically amend this Code, is set forth below: 
" Whereas, the City of Live Oak finds that the taxation of certain goods, wares, ores, and other tangible personal property that is forwarded out of this state within 175 days of its acquisition or importation into this state is in the public interest," 
Section 1 of Ord. No. 854 was codified as § 22-4 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 22-5. - Gross receipts tax on bingo games for charitable purposes. 
    A one percent gross receipts tax on the conduct of bingo games within the city is imposed in accordance with Section 3(d)2 of the Bingo Enabling Act, Article 179d, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1-14-86) 
Secs. 22-6-22-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 

Sec. 22-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purposes of this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
    City treasurer shall mean the city treasurer of the City of Live Oak. 
    Consideration shall mean the cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
    Hotel shall mean any building or buildings in which the public may for a consideration obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or other buildings where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration, but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
    Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than 30 days. 
    Occupant shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
    Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of October, November and December; the second quarter being the months of January, February and March; the third quarter being the months of April, May and June; and the fourth quarter being the months of July, August and September. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 1, 12-11-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 22-17. - Tax levied; amount; exemptions. 
    There is hereby levied a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2.00 or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the costs of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession. 
Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  No tax shall be imposed upon a permanent resident. 
(2)  No tax shall be imposed for federal or state employees traveling on official business. 
(3)  No tax shall be imposed for diplomatic personnel who present a tax exemption card issued by the United States Department of State. 
(4)  No tax shall be imposed for federal or state military personnel traveling on official military business. This exemption does not cover military staff on leave or between stations. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 2, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-18. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by this article for the city. 
(b)  The hotel operator shall be entitled to one percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax. However, as hereinbelow provided, this reimbursement may be forfeited at the discretion of the city if the hotel operator fails to timely pay over the tax or timely file a report as required by the city or file a false report with the city. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 3, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-19. - Quarterly reports to city treasurer. 
    On the last day of the month following each quarterly period (beginning the last day of the month following the first quarterly period of calendar year 1981), every person required to collect the tax imposed hereby shall file a report with the city treasurer showing the price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the city treasurer may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the city treasurer. The city treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this ordinance. The city treasurer shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonable time documentation for information contained in the report to the city by the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 4, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-20. - Rules and regulations of city treasurer; access to books and records. 
    The city treasurer shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 5, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-21. - Penalties-Generally. 
    If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the city treasurer the tax as imposed herein when the report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five percent of the amount due as penalty, and after the first 30 days, he shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax. However, such penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the due date. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including hotel operators who fail to collect the tax, fail to file a return, file a false return, or who are delinquent in their tax payment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to exceed $500.00, and each 24 hours of any such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 6, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-22. - Same-Additional. 
    The city is hereby authorized to take the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due: 
(1)  Require the forfeiture of any revenue the city allowed the hotel operator or retain for its cost of collecting the tax; 
(2)  Bring suit against the hotel for noncompliance; and/or 
(3)  Bring suit against the hotel seeking any other remedies provided under Texas law. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 7, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-23. - Additional authorization to bring suit. 
    The city attorney is hereby authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and required to pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in the injunction. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 8, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-24. - Use of revenue derived from levy of hotel occupancy tax. 
    The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this article may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities (as such is defined in V.A.T.S. Tax Code, section 351.001); 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the municipality or its vicinity. Inasmuch as the tax levied hereunder is seven percent of the total consideration paid for the occupancy of hotel rooms, the city shall reserve a portion of the tax revenue equal to at least one percent of the costs of the occupancy of hotel rooms for the purpose of advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public meeting and convention facilities, and for promotion of tourism and advertising of the city and its vicinity either by the city or through contract with persons or organizations selected by the city. 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms. However, not more than 15 percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenue collected by the city or the amount of the tax received by the city at the rate of one percent of the cost of a room, whichever is greater, may be used for the purposes provided by in this section. 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  Which are at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities; or 
b.  Which are located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists, convention delegates, or other visitors to the municipality. 
Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended only in a manner which directly enhances and promotes tourism and the convention and hotel industry as hereinbefore delineated. Such revenue shall not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the municipality which are not directly related to promoting the hotel and convention industry or tourism in the municipality. 
(6)  It is the intention of the city to make expenditures for purposes authorized under the hotel occupancy tax ordinance only for such purposes and in such amounts as are authorized by law. The city recognizes the fact that the Texas legislature has amended the provisions of this act, from time to time, and will continue to do so in the future. Accordingly, it is ordained by this council that the ordinance shall be amended to conform to any future legislative amendments to the tax code which authorizes this city to impose the tax revenues thereunder and to conform specifically to such future limitations as to the amount that may be spent for any particular purpose. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 9, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-25. - Administrative requirements; accountability; keeping of records. 
(a)  The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. The city council shall approve in writing in advance the annual budget of the entity to which it delegates those functions, and shall require the entity to make periodic reports to the city council at least annually listing the expenditures made by the entity of revenue from the tax provided by the municipality. 
(b)  The entity must maintain the revenue provided by the municipality from the tax in a separate account established for that purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any other account. 
(c)  The municipality may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its convention and visitors programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax other than by contract as provided herein. 
(d)  The approval by the city council of the annual budget of the entity to which these functions are delegated creates a fiduciary duty in the person or entity with respect to the revenue provided by the municipality to the person or entity under the contract. 
(e)  A person or entity with whom the municipality contracts to conduct authorized activities shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person or entity and, on request of the city council or other person, shall make the records available for inspection and review. 
(f)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing of expenditures hereinbefore authorized. The portion of the total administrative costs for activities for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the administrative costs actually incurred in conducting the authorized activities. 
(g)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity the primary purpose of which is not directly related to the promotion of the person's job in an efficient and professional manner. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 10, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-26. - Effective date. 
    The hotel occupancy tax authorized herein shall become effective January 1, 1981, pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 431, previously passed, adopted and enacted by the city on August 26, 1980. 
(Ord. No. 896, § 11, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 22-27. - Exclusions from advertising and promotions program. 
    A hotel or motel as defined in section 22-16 that contributes to the hotel taxes under this provision may be considered for city funded advertising under section 22-24. A hotel or motel operating in the City of Live Oak shall be excluded from the city's advertising and promotions program if they fall under one of the following categories: 
(1)  Within the last calendar year, the hotel/motel establishment has received more than one substantiated complaint of rodent, vermin or insect infestation including but not limited to roaches, rats and bed bugs, or any other condition deemed a nuisance or hazardous to health and safety under chapter 18 of this Code, Chapter 481 of the Texas Health and Safety Code or any other related health and safety statute or ordinance; and a follow-up inspection conducted by the city shows no attempt to remedy the unlawful condition(s); or 
(2)  The hotel or motel is not current on their hotel occupancy tax remittances as outlined in section 22-19. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § I, 11-12-13) 
Chapter 23 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention and protection, Ch. 9; planning, Ch. 17; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; exemption of gas and electricity for residential use from sales and use tax, § 22-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Rates. 
    The rates, fees and charges for city utility services shall be as established by the city council from time to time. 
Secs. 23-2-23-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 23-16. - Emergency restrictions. 
(a)  The City of Live Oak has adopted the three-stage drought management plan as implemented by the Edwards Aquifer Authority. The guidelines for this three-stage emergency drought management plan have been included with this section and labeled as Attachment A. Since the existing plan is subject to change in order to reflect the current condition of the Edwards Aquifer, it will be necessary to comply with those guidelines as found on the Edwards Aquifer website. It will be necessary to periodically update this attachment with revised regulations. Current regulations can always be viewed utilizing the Internet and going to the Edwards Aquifer website at www.edwardsaquifer.net/restrictions.html. 
(b)  Soaker hoses are hereby determined to be sprinklers under the provisions of this section and subject to the applicable restrictions as specified in each stage but may be used for foundation watering on any day of the week during specified times. 
(c)  It is hereby declared that the purpose of this section is to comply with the Edwards Aquifer Authority Emergency Drought Management Plan Rules and that said rules shall be used as a reference for clarification, definitions and applicability of conservation rules. Emergency drought management stages will remain in effect for at least 30 days unless a more restrictive stage is implemented. A stage may be rescinded before the 30 days expire if the General Manager of the Edwards Aquifer Authority determines aquifer groundwater levels are sufficient to end the stage. 
(d)  Any person, individual, corporation o partnership that shall violate any provision of this section shall be deemed upon conviction to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 1255 , §§ 1-4, 5-30-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1255 , § 6, adopted May 30, 2006, repealed the former § 23-16 and §§ 1-4 of the ordinance enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 23-16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 437, §§ 1-6, adopted Oct. 14, 1980; Ord. No. 875, §§ 1-6, adopted Aug. 28, 1990; Ord. No. 903, §§ 1-6, adopted March 12, 1991; and Ord. No. 1034, §§ 1-6, adopted July 9, 1996. 
Note- Attachment A of Ord. No. 1255 is not set out herein, but is on file for review in the offices of the city. 
Secs. 23-17-23-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL STORM WATER UTILITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1387, §§ I, III-VI, adopted January 13, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article III, §§ 23-31-23-35 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 23-31. - Findings. 
    The city council has found and hereby finds that: 
(1)  The city will establish a municipal storm water utility and adopt a schedule of storm water fees for all real property in the city's service area as herein described, subject to fees allowable under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 402, subch. C. 
(2)  The city will provide storm water services and operate, maintain, and improve the storm water utility system facilities and natural waterways for all lots and tracts within the city limits. 
(3)  All lots and tracts within the city limits are hereby automatically included in the municipal storm water system and are eligible to receive storm water services concurrent with payment of storm water utility fees, except any real property exempted under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 402, subch. C., including city-owned land, such as streets, alleys, parks, facilities, drainage easements, utility land and easements, rights-of-way, lakes, creeks, and other natural areas, and including lots or tracts without any development. 
(4)  The city will offer storm water utility services on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms in accordance with the storm water management plan adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § I, 1-13-09) 
Sec. 23-32. - Establishment of a municipal storm water utility. 
    The provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 402, subch. C., are hereby adopted and a municipal storm water utility is hereby established by the authority of that subchapter and by the authority granted to the city council by state law and the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § III, 1-13-09) 
Sec. 23-33. - Public utility. 
(a)  The municipal storm water utility system and the related storm water services of the city are declared to be a public utility. Existing public drainage and storm water facilities are incorporated in the municipal storm water utility system as permitted by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.046. 
(b)  The municipal storm water utility and its storm water facilities, assets, and employees shall be under the administrative control of the city manager, or his designee. The operating budget of the municipal storm water utility will be reviewed and approved by the city council annually. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § IV, 1-13-09) 
Sec. 23-34. - Service area. 
    The municipal storm water utility service area is the area within the city limits, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.044(8). 
(Ord. No. 1387, § V, 1-13-09) 
Sec. 23-35. - No waiver of immunity. 
(a)  This article does not imply that a benefited property will be free from flooding or erosion, and does not create additional duties on the part of the city. 
(b)  This article does not waive the city's immunity under any law. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § VI, 1-13-09) 
Sec. 23-36. - Municipal storm water rate. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  The city council has found and hereby finds that: 
a.  The total amount of square feet of impervious cover from a benefited property is directly related to the amount of storm water runoff from that property; 
b.  The storm water runoff flows into the city's storm water utility system, including the public streets and drainage easements, inlets, storm sewers, manholes, junction boxes, ditches, swales, channels, creeks, and other natural and man-made water ways, and is carried to a nearby creek, river, or other water way at the edge of the city limits. 
c.  The operation, maintenance, and improvement of the city's storm water utility system requires funding and a municipal storm water utility has been created for that purpose. 
d.  The assessment of a storm water utility rate in the city is based upon an inventory of the lots and tracts within the city limits and upon the classification of each of those lots and tracts based upon the type of land use and amount of recorded impervious cover. 
e.  It is nondiscriminatory, equitable, and reasonable to classify benefited properties in the city as single family detached residential and all other eligible developed properties. 
(2)  Public notice. 
a.  Prior to the adoption of this section, the city council caused to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice stating the time and place of a public hearing to consider the ordinance from which this section derives. The notice was published prior to the date of the hearing in accordance with state law. 
b.  It is officially found, determined, and declared that the meeting at which the ordinance is adopted was open to the public, and public notice of the time, place, and subject matter of the public business to be considered at such meeting including the ordinance, was given, all as required by the V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551, as amended. 
(b)  Storm water utility rate established. 
(1)  A municipal storm water utility rate is established. 
a.  The municipal storm water utility of the city has been established and declared to be a public utility within the meaning of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 402, subch. C., known as the Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act (the "Act"). 
b.  The city will provide drainage and storm water management within its boundaries which is established as a single service area of the system, upon payment of the determined storm water utility rate, as defined in the Act, and excluding certain exempted real property. 
c.  The storm water rate will be based on non-discriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms. 
(2)  Existing storm water and drainage facilities, materials, supplies, equipment, and personnel of the city have been incorporated into the storm water utility system, and are under the administrative control of the city manager. 
(3)  Municipal storm water utility rate. 
a.  There shall be assessed a monthly rate in an amount provided herein for the municipal storm water utility system. The rate shall be assessed to each utility account for the applicable property. The city manager is authorized to collect such rate in a manner consistent with this chapter, the city charter and state law. The related monthly storm water utility charge will be separate line item on the water and wastewater utility billing statement and shall be clearly identified as a separate charge. 
b.  The rate established herein are based on the calculation of the inventory of lot and tracts within the municipal storm water utility service area, having taken into consideration the total impervious area in square feet of the benefited property as recorded for each parcel in the Bexar County Appraisal District's parcel database. 
c.  A single family detached residential dwelling shall be considered one equivalent residential unit (or ERU) for the purposes of a monthly charge. The average square footage of impervious cover per ERU is determined to be 2,042 square feet. The ERU for attached housing is 0.7 per dwelling unit. The ERU for other eligible non-residential properties shall be a calculated multiple of an ERU, as determined by the eligible impervious cover on such properties in relation to 2,042 square feet. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  The calculated monthly storm water utility bill established by this section shall be identified separately on the bill as "storm water utility charge." 
f.  Delinquent storm water utility charges are subject to the same penalties and methods of collection as other water and wastewater utility rate or other rates or fees for utility services provided by the city. 
(4)  Segregation of income. The income of the storm water utility system shall be segregated and completely identifiable in the accounts of the city pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.049. Revenues may be transferred to the city's general fund to the extent allowable under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.049. 
(5)  Credits and adjustments. 
a.  Certain customers may apply for a storm water rate credit and have their storm water service charges reduced or pro-rated as determined by the director of public works, based on the following criteria: 
School district watershed education credit. Public schools within the city may receive a continuing credit from their calculated monthly storm water charge if they provide for an approved, continuing watershed education program for their classes. 
b.  A storm water utility system lot or tract owner or occupant of lot or tract, hereinafter referred to as "user" may apply to the city manager or his/her designee for other adjustments in the user's storm water utility rate if: 
1.  The user demonstrates that the category of developed use has changed from the original assessment or was accessed in error; 
2.  The user demonstrates that the amount of recorded impervious cover has not been correctly stated or classified, and as a result, the rate amount is in error. 
c.  The city manager or his/her designee a) shall adopt procedures to ensure that applications for credits or adjustments of storm water utility rate will be processed and acted upon in a consistent, uniform, and timely manner, and b) may thereafter adjust the storm water utility rate of a "user" who applies for an adjustment under this subsection and who meets the standards required therein. The city manager shall make the final determination of the correct action to take in resolution of a requested credit or adjustment by a "user." 
(c)  Eligibility. 
(1)  The following property is, by statute, exempt from payment of the storm water rate: 
a.  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system. 
b.  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the municipality in which the property is located for maintenance. 
c.  A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the municipality in which the property is located. 
d.  State of Texas property. 
e.  Accredited two- and four-year institutions of higher education. 
(2)  The following property is exempt from payment of the storm water rate: City of Live Oak property. 
(3)  All religious organizations exempt from taxation pursuant to Texas Tax Code §11.20 shall be permitted a 50-percent reduction in their monthly municipal storm water utility rate as calculated pursuant to section 23-36(b)(3). 
(d)  No waiver of immunity. This section does not imply that a benefited property will be free from flooding or erosion, and does not create additional duties on the part of the city. This section does not waive the city's immunity under any law. 
(Ord. No. 1389, §§ I-IV, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 1458, § II, 10-25-11; Ord. No. 1492 , 1-28-14; Ord. No. 1539, § I , 9-27-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1389, §§ I-IV, adopted February 24, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 23-36 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 23-37-23-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1417, arts. I-XII, adopted October 27, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article IV, §§ 23-51-23-62 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 23-51. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose/intent. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, as well as comply with the regulations mandated by both the United States Environmental Protection Agency ("E.P.A.") and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ("T.C.E.Q."), through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system ("MS4") in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BMP-Best management practices 
BTEX-Benzene, Toluene, Ethyl benzene, and Xylene 
HHW-Hazardous household waste 
mg/l-Milligrams per liter 
MS4-Municipal separate storm sewer system 
NPDES-National pollutant discharge elimination system 
ppb-Parts per billion 
PST-Petroleum storage tank 
SWPPP-Storm water pollution prevention plan 
TPH-Total Petroleum Hydrocarbon 
(c)  Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    Agricultural storm water runoff means any storm water runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other non-point source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.24. 
    Best management practices (BMP) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMP's also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
    City means the City of Live Oak, Texas or the city council of the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Commercial means pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit. 
    City manager means the person appointed to the position of city manager by the city council of the City of Live Oak, Texas or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Discharge means any addition or introduction of any pollutant, storm water, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States. 
    Discharger means any person, who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
    Domestic sewage means human excrement, gray water, other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions, that is free from industrial waste. 
    Extremely hazardous substance means any substance listed in the appendices to 40 CFR Part 355, emergency planning and notification. 
    Facility means any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
    Fire department means the fire department of the City of Live Oak, Texas or any duly authorized representative thereof. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Gray water means liquid from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing, or food preparation. 
    Hazardous household waste (HHW) means any material generated in a household (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, camp grounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR § 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the E.P.A. pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261. 
    Industrial waste means industrial waste is any liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade or business. 
    Motor vehicle fluids means any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, or any other fluid used in a motor vehicle. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by the state, most notably by but not limited to the T.C.E.Q. under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Notice of intent (NOI) means the notice of intent that is required by either the industrial general permit or the construction general permit. 
    Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    Petroleum storage tank (PST) means any one or combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks that contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; chemical waste; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; or industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term "pollutant" does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated range land, pasture land, and farm land. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of: 
(1)  Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials, and 
(2)  Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Sanitary sewer or sewer means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant (and to which storm water, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
    Septic tank waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Service station means any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks. 
    Sewage or sanitary sewage means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the city sewage treatment plant for treatment. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities. 
    State means the State of Texas. 
    Storm water means storm water runoff, surface runoff and drainage, and snow and/or ice melt runoff. 
    Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan required by either the construction general permit or the industrial general permit and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in storm water discharge associated with construction or industrial activity. 
    TPDES means the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    Used oil or used motor oil means any oil that has been refined from crude oil or synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law. 
    Water quality standard means the designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in V.T.C.A., Administrative Code tit. 31, ch. 307. 
    Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "waters of the United States" at 40 CFR § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-52. - General prohibition. 
(a)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely of storm water and other allowable discharges. 
(b)  Allowable discharges include: 
(1)  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, a TPDES permit (other than the TPDES permit for discharges from the MS4); 
(2)  A discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting by the fire department; 
(3)  A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances; 
(4)  Agricultural storm water runoff; 
(5)  A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means unless the total residual chlorine (TRC) has been reduced to less than 1.0 mg/l and it contains no harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(6)  A discharge or flow from lawn watering, or landscape irrigation, or other irrigation water; 
(7)  A discharge or flow from a diverted stream or natural spring; 
(8)  A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater; 
(9)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined as 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20)) to the MS4; 
(10)  Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, footing drain, or sump pump; 
(11)  A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container; 
(12)  A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant; 
(13)  A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing; 
(14)  A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
(15)  A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
(16)  Storm water runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber or filter or any other source of pollutant; 
(17)  Swimming pool water that has been dechlorinated so that total residual chlorine (TRC) is less than 1.0 mg/l and that contains no harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning. 
(c)  No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) if the discharge or flow in question has been determined by the city manager to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger, and the discharge has occurred more than 15 days beyond such notice. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. II, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-53. - Specific prohibitions and requirements. 
(a)  The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in section 23-52. 
(b)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's TPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(c)  No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4: 
(1)  Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid; 
(2)  Any industrial waste; 
(3)  Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste; 
(4)  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste; 
(5)  Any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste; 
(6)  Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or public entity that operates more than two such vehicles; 
(7)  Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft; 
(8)  Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
(9)  Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning; 
(10)  Any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed; 
(11)  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the blow down from a boiler; 
(12)  Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydro-mulch material, or material from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material; 
(13)  Any runoff or wash down water from any animal pen, kennel, or fowl or livestock containment area; 
(14)  Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain, or spa; 
(15)  Any swimming pool water containing total residual chlorine (TRC) of 1.0 mg/l or more or containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning; 
(16)  Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means if the total residual chlorine (TRC) is at 1.0 mg/l or more or if it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(17)  Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials unless treatment adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge (this prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from fire fighting by the fire department); 
(18)  Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment; 
(19)  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard; 
(20)  Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4; 
(21)  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria: 
a.  Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; 
b.  No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant; and 
c.  No discharge containing more than 50 parts per billion of benzene; 500 parts per billion combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene, and xylene (BTEX); or 15 mg/l of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH). 
(22)  Any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities, or associated with land filling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials, in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable. 
(23)  Any sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial. 
(24)  Any pavement wash water from a service station to be discharged into the MS4 unless such wash water has passed through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil, and sand interceptor before discharge into the MS4. 
(25)  No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue. 
(d)  Used oil regulation. No person shall discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or water course; knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill; or apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. III, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-54. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry-Inspection and sampling. The city manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any person or entity discharging storm water to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United States to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article. Dischargers shall allow the city manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the city manager, upon request, any SWPPPs, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this article and with any state or federal discharge permit. 
(1)  Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities. 
(2)  The city manager shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations. 
(3)  The city manager may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its storm water discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring. 
(4)  The city manager may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Illicit discharge detection plan. The city will inspect the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) for illicit discharges. The inspections shall be based on a plan providing a map and schedule for inspections, listing appropriate techniques for detection, and including forms to be used to document inspection results. 
(c)  Search warrants. If the city manager has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. IV, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-55. - Enforcement-Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the city manager finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city manager may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and/or 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
    If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. V, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-56. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city. The notice of appeal must be received within ten days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city or its designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. VI, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-57. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the city upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city, the city manager, the city engineer and/or any contractor designated by the city, the city manager and/or the city engineer to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. VII, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-58. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within ten days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within five days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. VIII, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-59. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. IX, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-60. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the city may impose upon violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. X, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-61. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. XI, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-62. - Criminal prosecution. 
    Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $500.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. The city may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. XII, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 23-63. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Art. XIII, 10-27-09) 
Chapter 24 - VEGETATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Tree care program. 
(a)  Program created. There is hereby created and established a tree care program to provide full power and authority over the care of all trees, plants and shrubs located within public rights-of-ways, parks and public places and aids in the proper growth of a landscape program to enhance the beauty of the city. 
(b)  Care of public trees. 
(1)  The public works director and/or his designees shall have the responsibility, to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, parks, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. This shall include the removal of trees that may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or any municipal water or sewer line, or any tree that is affected by fungus, insect, or other pest disease. 
(2)  Every owner of any tree or shrub overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall, in accordance to the city pruning guidelines, prune the branches so that such branches shall not [severely] obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection; will not obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks; will not obstruct vision of traffic signs; and will not obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection, and as provided in section 20-3 of this Code. 
(3)  No person shall remove, destroy, or cause the removal or destruction of a tree on city property or in any city park without first having obtained written permission for such removal or destruction from the public works director. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to attach any cable, wire, rope sign or any object to any city tree, plant or shrub without written permission from the public works director. 
(c)  Tree care board. 
(1)  Board membership. The tree care board shall consist of the members of the parks and recreation commission. 
(2)  Meetings. The board shall meet a minimum of four times each year. All stated meetings shall be open to the public. The board chairman may schedule additional meetings as needed. 
(3)  Duties. The duties of the tree care board shall include: 
a.  To review the tree management plan, tree preservation and mitigation guidelines, and the tree care program as may be necessary. 
b.  To promote the protection of healthy trees and provide guidelines for the replacement and/or replanting of trees. 
c.  To uphold rules and regulations governing the protection and preservation of native or established trees within the city, which provide for purification of air and water, provide for shade, windbreaks and the cooling of air, provide for open space and more efficient drainage of land, thus reducing the effects on soil erosion. 
d.  To study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update periodically a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposal of public trees and shrubs on city property. 
e.  To review and recommend specific beautification projects and public awareness programs to the parks and recreation department, city manager and/or city council as may be appropriate. 
f.  Coordinating and promoting Arbor Day activities. 
g.  Submitting the annual application to renew the Tree City USA designation. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating subsections (b)(2), (3), and (4) of this section shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense. The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1452, §§ I, II, 6-28-11) 
Secs. 24-2-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDSCAPING AND TREE PRESERVATION REQUIREMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1134, §§ 1-14, adopted August 28, 2001, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as chapter 24, article II is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 24-26. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these regulations: to develop an ordinance regarding landscaping and tree preservation requirements within the boundaries of the city of live oak so as to maintain, to the greatest extent possible, existing trees and green spaces within the city and to facilitate the planting of additional trees and plant materials to accomplish the following objectives: 
(1)  To provide for tree preservation within the boundaries of the city and to establish requirements for the installation and maintenance of landscaping elements and other means of site improvements in off-street parking areas and other developed properties. 
(2)  To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by creating an urban environment that is aesthetically pleasing, one that promotes economic development through enhanced quality of life and encourages the preservation of trees and green spaces for the enjoyment of future generations. 
(3)  To preserve and maintain vegetative cover which will reduce soil erosion, reduce flooding, provide for shade, conserve energy and water resources and enhance the attractiveness of the community. 
(4)  To encourage the preservation of trees to provide health benefits by cleansing and cooling of the air and contributing to the psychological wellness of the community. 
(5)  To encourage the preservation of trees to provide economic benefits by adding value to property and reduction of energy costs through passive solar design utilizing trees and green spaces. 
(6)  To provide enhanced preservation standards and incentives that exceed published requirements to encourage the maximum preservation of trees and green spaces. 
(7)  To preserve trees as an important public resource that enhances the quality of life and maintains the unique character and the physical, historical and aesthetic environment of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 1, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-27. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  To regulate all activities that result or may result in the removal of protected or heritage tree(s) as defined herein and to provide minimum landscape requirements. Said activities include any of the following conducted on property to which this regulation applies: 
(1)  Industrial, commercial, retail, business, office, multi-family and institutional development, including all new construction and any additions that increase the total floor area of a structure by more than 2,000 square feet. 
(2)  Construction of a new parking lot equal to or larger than 2,000 square feet. 
(3)  Any grading, filling or clearing of land prepatory to construction. 
(4)  Any clearing, selective or individual cutting or removal of any protected or heritage tree(s) as defined herein. 
(5)  Chemical or biological treatment of tree(s) that may result in the death or destruction of any protected or heritage tree(s) as defined herein. 
(6)  Trenching or excavation that may damage or destroy protected or heritage tree(s) as defined herein. 
(b)  The directives in this article shall not apply to the clearing of understory necessary to perform boundary surveying of real property or the clearing of underbrush required to conduct tree surveys or inventories. Clearing for surveying may not exceed a width of two feet for general survey (i.e. of casement boundary, etc.) and eight feet for survey of property boundary lines. No trees ten inches or larger in diameter may be removed in any manner during such boundary or general surveying. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 2, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-28. - Definitions. 
    Arborist means an individual certified as an arborist by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
    Circumference means the perimeter or boundary of a circle. 
    DBH means the diameter at breast height is a standard measure of expressing the diameter of the trunk or bole of a standing tree. DBH is measured at a height of 1.4 meters (4.59 feet) for other than ornamental trees, which are usually measured at 1.5 meters (4.92 feet) above ground. 
    Diameter means a straight line, which passes through the center of a circle or sphere and stops at the circumference or surface. A measurement of distance. 
    Field inspector means any individual that is selected by the administrative staff of the city to accompany an arborist, or qualified individual that represents a development company, into the area where development is planned. This field inspector will be provided a plan that identifies the proposed area that is to be developed. The field inspector will be responsible to verify location of trees, conditions, size and number and will indicate his/her annotate on the site plan provided to the planning and zoning commission before any trees of any type will be physically removed from the area. No permit will be issued unless this fieldwork has been accomplished by the field inspector. 
    Footprint means an area that is covered by a permanent enclosed or covered structure. Note: A driveway and parking facilities are not included as structures. 
    Grade changes mean changes in the elevation of the land around an existing tree that would create exposure of the root system to the air and reduces the supply of nutrients and moisture available to the roots. 
    Heritage tree means any tree that is above 24 inches in diameter and not exempted by this article. 
    Landscape architect means an individual currently registered with the Texas Board of Architectural Examiners to practice landscape architecture in the State of Texas. 
    Mitigation means to discuss and arrive at a conclusion that will cause alleviation, abatement or dimension of anything that could be considered a penalty. 
    Pervious means the ability of a substance to allow the passage of water. 
    Protected tree means any tree that is between six inches and 24 inches in diameter and not exempted by this article. 
    Ratio of replacement means protected trees are to be replaced at a ratio of one inch to one inch and heritage trees are to be replaced at a ratio of two inches for every one inch removed. 
    RPZ means root protection zone. An eight-foot diameter no-paving zone encompassing the trunk of any protected or heritage class tree. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory rather than used in a directory manner. 
    Street yard means the area of a lot which lies between the property line along a dedicated street and the actual wall line of the building or, if no building exists, to the rear property line. 
    Tree means any self-supporting woody plant species, which normally grows to an overall minimum height of 15 feet. 
    Tree inventory means the amount that summarizes total number of diameter inches of a tree that will be removed or will be preserved. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 3, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 1447, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 24-29. - Exempted trees. 
    Trees exempted from this article will include: Arizona ash, chinaberry, Chinese tallow, cottonwood, hackberry, huisache, juniper (cedar), mesquite, and mulberry trees are exempted from this article, and may be removed without penalty. Additionally, trees classified as "trash trees" by the incumbent Bexar County Extension Agent-Horticulture may be exempted and removed without penalty upon proof of such classification. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 4, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 1447, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 24-30. - General requirements. 
(a)  Installation. All landscape materials shall be installed according to Texas Association of Nurserymen (TAN) Standards. 
(b)  Maintenance. The owner, manager or agent of the owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas. 
(c)  Planting criteria. 
(1)  Trees. Trees planted under this article shall be a minimum of six feet in height. Trees should have an average crown greater than 15 feet at maturity. 
(2)  Lawn grass. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the Bexar County area such as Bermuda, Zoysia, or Buffalo Grass. 
(d)  Construction phase. 
(1)  No paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material within the root protection zone (RPZ) of trees to be preserved shall be allowed. 
(2)  Soil and other materials shall not be temporarily or permanently stored in locations, which should cause suffocation of root systems of trees to be preserved. 
(e)  Removal of diseased or damaged trees. 
(1)  Upon direction from city management, property owners may be required to treat or remove trees suffering from transmittable diseases or pests or allow the city to do so, charging the actual cost thereof to the property owner. 
(2)  The city may not require the removal of trees except for the reason of disease, infestation, danger of falling, creation of a traffic hazard or the inability to properly and safely maintain public rights-of-way or easements. 
(f)  All landscape design and planting shall take into consideration the importance of water conservation. 
(g)  Native vegetation shall be preserved and protected in common open space areas to the greatest extent practical. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 5, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-31. - Responsibilities of the developer. 
(a)  Permits shall be required prior to commencement of any regulated activity. 
(1)  A tree affidavit will be required when there is no heritage or protected trees in the proposed development. No tree preservation plan or removal permit will be required in this instance. 
(2)  An understory clearing permit may be applied for in certain instances to remove underbrush and trees less than three inches in diameter. This permit is intended only to facilitate the surveying of heritage and protected trees on heavily overgrown sites. 
(3)  All sites containing heritage or protected trees will require a tree preservation removal permit. 
(b)  A tree preservation plan will be required prior to issuance of a tree preservation removal permit. The tree preservation plan must contain the following data: 
(1)  Location of property lines, easements, setbacks, and buffer zones and rights-of-ways. 
(2)  Proposed development information including location of buildings, sidewalks, dumpsters, paving, carports, curbs, light poles, etc. 
(3)  Existing and proposed topography. Contour intervals not to exceed one foot. 
(4)  Scale, North arrow and location map. 
(5)  Location, diameter and species of all protected and heritage trees. Each tree is to be assigned a number for identification purposes. 
(6)  Location, diameter and species of any mitigation trees. 
(7)  Tree inventory that summarizes total number of diameter inches existing on-site, to be removed, to be preserved and to be used for mitigation. The tree inventory must specifically identify what will happen to each protected and heritage tree at the site. 
(c)  The developer shall be responsible to render three sets of site plans for tree inventory and survey. All plans shall be provided by the developer and shall be paid for by the developer. No cost shall be incurred by the city. 
(d)  The developer shall agree not to remove or replace any trees except as authorized by an understory clearing permit until final approval has been granted by the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
(e)  The developer shall meet the requirements for installation of new trees according to Texas Association of Nurserymen (TAN) standards. 
(f)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to guarantee for a period of two years that all trees planted will have a survival term of life. If a planted tree should die before the two-year period, then it shall be replaced by a like kind or a better value class of tree. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 6, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-32. - Minimum landscape installation requirements. 
(a)  A minimum percentage of the total lot area of property on which development, construction or reconstruction occurs after the effective date of this article shall be devoted to landscape development in accordance with the following schedule; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to the development, construction or reconstruction of single-family, detached, residential structures. 
REQUIRED LANDSCAPING SCHEDULE 
Land Use Per Cent Landscaping Required Townhouses 20 Apartments 20 Office and professional uses 15 Commercial/Retail/Business Use 10 Industrial or manufacturing 10  
    Exceptions to this article may be granted to require a lesser amount of landscaping, by the planning and zoning commission if the aesthetic, buffering and environmental intent of this article is met. 
(b)  The landscaping required by this article shall be placed upon that portion of the tract or lot that is being developed. Seventy-five percent of the minimum amount of landscaping required by the section shall be installed in between the front and/or side property lines and the building constructed. Underdeveloped portions of a tract or lot shall not be considered landscaped. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements in subsections (a) and (b), any commercial or industrial use which has a side or rear yard contiguous to any noncommercial use shall be buffered (screened) as defined in existing subdivision or zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 7, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-33. - Minimum tree preservation incentives. 
    A minimum of all protected and/or heritage trees within the surveyed area must be preserved as follows: 
(1)  In all developments governed by this article: 
a.  One hundred percent of all trees 24 inches and larger must be preserved or mitigated. 
b.  Thirty percent of all trees six inches and larger must be preserved or mitigated. 
c.  If greater than 30 percent of protected and heritage trees are preserved, the extra diameter inches may be used to mitigate any heritage class trees removed. 
(2)  All percentages and measurements relating to preservation will be based on the initial tree survey. Any subsequent redevelopment of property must minimally preserve the applicable percentage of total diameter inches protected and/or heritage trees as recorded in the initial tree survey. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 8, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-34. - Mitigation. 
(a)  Protected trees may be removed in excess of minimum preservation requirements provided the excess removal is properly mitigated. However, at least ten percent of the total diameter inches within the surveyed area shall not be mitigated, and must actually be preserved. 
(b)  If mitigation is required to compensate for removing trees in excess of the number of diameter inches allowed to be removed within the surveyed area to be calculated for tree preservation under the minimum preservation requirements, the mitigation may be achieved in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Protected trees shall be mitigated at a ratio of one inch mitigation for any one inch of removed trees. 
(2)  Heritage trees shall be mitigated at a ratio of two inches of mitigation for any one inch of removed trees. 
(3)  In considering application for a replacement tree, the city may weigh the value of smaller trees, clumps of trees, and natural vegetation that is to be retained on this site, with greater weight going to retention of existing trees and vegetation. 
(c)  Dead, diseased, and infested trees, and trees which could pose a potential safety hazard (in pre-development state) may be exempt from this mitigation by the owner furnishing a letter bearing the original signature and seal (landscape architect) or signature and certification number (arborist) citing which tree(s) is/are to be excluded from this calculation, referenced by tree number or designation to the owner-provided tree survey, and owner-provided photographic documentation of dead, diseased, infested, or hazardous trees. Upon no circumstances may more than 20 percent of the existing trees be excluded due to the aforementioned conditions. All expenses/fees for landscape architect/arborist certification will be borne by the developer/owner. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 9, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 1447, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 24-35. - Size and replacement. 
(a)  No artificial plant material may be used to satisfy tree replacement requirements. 
(b)  Plant materials must comply with the following planting area requirements at the time of installation: 
(1)  In satisfying this requirement the use of mulch material shall be provided at the time of planting. 
(2)  Each replacement tree must be planted at least 30 inches away from any impervious surface. 
(3)  Plant areas must be protected from vehicular traffic through the use of concrete curbs, wheel stops or other permanent barriers. 
(4)  Replacement trees, with the exception of Live Oak trees, required by this article shall be of like or better quality and must have a minimum diameter of 21/2 inches measured at the time of installation, and shall be planted in a pervious area of at least 50 square feet. Live Oak trees must be replaced with Live Oak trees and meet the aforementioned measurement and planting criteria. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 10, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 1447, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 24-36. - Tree preservation requirements. 
    A developer may apply for, and subject to verification, shall receive incentives for tree preservation as follows. 
Parking space reduction. Upon application and verification by the city, a developer shall be entitled to a reduction in the minimum parking requirements specified in the city zoning regulation, section 2, to help meet the minimum tree preservation requirements. For the purpose of providing an incentive, the said minimum parking requirements of section 2 may be reduced by one parking space for every four inches of trees that are above those required to be protected or mitigated on site. The city shall issue a certificate to the appropriate city department(s) confirming that a reduction has been earned under this section. Up to 15 percent of the required spaces may be waived. In order to promote placing trees in the parking field to provide additional cooling and shade benefits it is suggested that the developer attempt to place a portion of the preserved and/or mitigated trees in the interior of the parking areas at a ratio of one tree for every 15 parking spaces, and attempt to have no parking space further than 80 feet from any tree. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 11, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-37. - Inspection and fees. 
(a)  An inspection fee of $0.05 per square foot for the required landscaped area shall be collected by the city at the time of application for a building permit. In no case shall be fee exceed $300.00 or be less than $25.00. This fee shall be calculated without regard to any tree preservation credits to which the applicant may be entitled. 
(b)  The city shall inspect each site prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the required landscaping is not yet in place, the developer/owner shall make fiscal arrangements by bond, certificate of deposit, or letter of credit, satisfactory to the city in the amount of $2.00 per square foot of required landscaping not in place to ensure that such required landscaping shall be installed. Any developer/owner wishing to make such fiscal arrangements must also grant license to the city to enter upon the land for the purpose of installing the required landscaping in the event that such landscaping is not in place at the time of the inspection required by subsection (a). Such fiscal arrangements shall be released if the required landscaping is in a place at the time of inspection. Compliance with this article must be met within 90 days of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 12, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-38. - Exceptions and variances. 
    The planning and zoning commission and city council shall have the power to grant variances in special cases where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships created in meeting the requirements of this article. In cases where retention of natural or existing trees in open space, setback, buffer areas or drainage ways could create unusual development problems, planted trees may be required in lieu of retention. The city manager or his/her designated representative shall advise the planning and zoning commission when such hardship or development problem exists. The guidelines to be used in determining whether a variance should be granted are as follows: 
(1)  That meeting the requirements of this article would prohibit an owner of property from using land for a use that the zoning ordinance expressly permits. 
(2)  That the hardships or difficulties of meeting the requirements of this article are peculiar to that property and not general in character. 
(3)  That the lack of landscaping will not be detrimental to adjoining property or health, safety, and welfare of the general public. 
(4)  That the hardships and difficulties of the landscaping and/or buffering are greater than the benefits derived by the general public. 
    Financial hardship due to meeting the requirements of this article is not alone sufficient to grant an exception. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 13, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 24-39. - Violations, endorsements and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to intentionally or knowingly remove or destroy, or allow the removal or destruction of a protected or heritage tree(s) located on any property to which this article applies, or for any person to knowingly or intentionally perform any regulated activity in manner that does not conform to the requirements of this article. Any act or omission contrary to the requirements or directives of this article, or any breach of any duty imposed by this article shall constitute a violation hereof. 
(b)  Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction be subject to a maximum fine of $200.00 per violation. Each and every tree removed in violation of this article will be considered a separate violation. Additionally, each and every day until the illegally removed tree has been replaced or otherwise mitigated will be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 14, 8-28-01) 
Appendix A - ZONING REGULATIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 456 
AN ORDINANCE BY THE PROVISIONS OF ARTICLE 1011a, REVISED CIVIL STATUTES OF TEXAS, TO REGULATE THE LOCATION, HEIGHT, BULK, NUMBER OF STORIES, AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS; OPEN AREAS; LOT COVERAGE; DENSITY AND DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION; THE USES OF LAND, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; TO REQUIRE OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING; AND FOR SAID PURPOSES TO DIVIDE THE CITY INTO DISTRICTS OF SUCH NUMBER, SHAPE, SIZE AND CHARACTERISTICS AS MAY BE ADVISABLE TO CARRY OUT THESE REGULATIONS; TO PROVIDE FOR ITS ENFORCEMENT; TO PROVIDE FOR A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; AND TO PRESCRIBE PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISION; PROVIDING FOR A SAVINGS CLAUSE, REPEALING ALL PRIOR ORDINANCES CONFLICTING OR INCONSISTENT HEREWITH AND FURTHER PROVIDING FOR SEVEABILITY. 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Live Oak adopted a zoning ordinance in 1970 in accordance with a comprehensive plan; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Live Oak believes that certain changes, additions and amendments are necessary, and for clarification and practical purposes a new zoning ordinance should be adopted; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Live Oak deems it necessary to prevent congestion on streets; to secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers; to promote health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to preserve the natural environment; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City, all in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan, 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIVE OAK, TEXAS: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the city's zoning ordinance, No. 456, adopted on June 9, 1981. The ordinance is set out as enacted, except that material inserted in brackets has been added to correct obvious errors or to clarify the meaning where the same was ambiguous. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Amendatory ordinances are cited in parenthetical history notes at the end of affected provisions. The absence of a note indicates that the provision is derived unchanged from Ordinance No. 456. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; aboveground fires in multifamily housing units, § 8-5; flood damage prevention and protection, Ch. 9; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; planning, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007; comprehensive plan, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.002; board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008-211.013; zoning districts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.005; regulation of signs by home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.901; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE 

Section 1 - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as "The City of Live Oak, Texas, Zoning Ordinance." 
Section 2 - Enacting clause. 
    That there be enacted the following Zoning Ordinance, which amends in its entirety, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Live Oak, Texas, dated July 7, 1970, said amendments together with a map creating and delineating zoning districts. 
Section 3 - Purpose. 
    The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the street; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the over-crowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration among other things, for the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive plan. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS, DISTRICT BOUNDARIES, OFFICIAL ZONING MAP, NEW AND UNSCHEDULED USES, AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED 

Section 1 - Districts. 
    The City of Live Oak is hereby divided into types of districts as follows: 
PD Pre-Development District R-1 Single Family Residential District R-2A Garden Home District-Zero Lot Line R-2B Garden Home District-Conventional R-3 Two Family Residential District R-4 Town Houses Residential District R-5 Apartment/Multi Family Residential District R-6 Mobile Home District B-1 Office and Professional District B-2 Neighborhood Services District B-3 General Business District I-1 Light Industrial District I-2 Medium Industrial District  
Section 2 - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the zoning map of the City of Live Oak, which is on file in the offices of the city and made a part of this ordinance, the same as if copied in full herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
2.1  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, high-ways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
2.2  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
2.3  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
2.4  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of creeks shall be construed to follow such shorelines; and in the event of their movement, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
2.5  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the rails of the main line. 
2.6  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
2.7  In the case of a district boundary line dividing a property into two parts, the property will remain divided until the property owner, firm or corporation petitions the city council for rezoning. 
2.8  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
Section 3 - Official zoning map. 
    3.1 Maintenance of zoning map: The official zoning map shall be kept in the office of the planning and zoning administrator and one copy shall be posted in the council chambers. 
    It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning administrator to keep the official map current and the copies thereof, herein provided for, by entering on such maps any changes which the city council may from time to time order by amendments to the zoning ordinance and map. 
    3.2 [Identification of map and copies; amendments thereto:] The city secretary, upon the adoption of this ordinance, shall affix a certificate identifying the map as the Official Zoning Map of the city. She/he shall likewise officially identify the copies directed to be kept by the planning and zoning commission and in the council chambers. All amendments to the map shall be made immediately after their enactment and the date of the change shall be noted on the certificate. 
Section 4 - Classification of new and unscheduled uses. 
    It is recognized that new or unlisted types of land use may seek to locate in the City of Live Oak. In order to provide for such contingencies, a determination of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows: 
4.1  The planning and zoning administrator shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the planning and zoning commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning district into which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage and amount and nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer. 
4.2  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing and meet with the parties of interest and shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted. Such public hearings shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Article XVIII, Sections 4.3 and 4.5. 
4.3  The planning and zoning commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the city council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The city council shall hold a public hearing and review recommendations of the planning and zoning commission and make such determination concerning the classification of such use as it determines appropriate in accordance with provisions of Article XVIII, Sections 4.3 and 4.5. 
Section 5 - Compliance required. 
    No land shall be used for and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than provided in the regulations prescribed for the district in which it is located, except as hereinafter provided. 
5.1  The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open space, including lot area per family, required by the height and area provisions of this ordinance for each and every building existing at the time of passage of this ordinance or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this ordinance for the district in which such lot is located. 
5.2  Masonry construction requirements. 
5.2.1 Residential construction. All construction of single family homes, duplexes, and apartments upon completion must have at least three-fourths (3/4) masonry on the exterior walls. Any exterior walls fronting on a street must be 100 percent masonry with the exception of eaves, second stories, porches, trim, windows, doors, and other similar exceptions. The esthetic value of the surrounding area shall be preserved. All construction shall blend into the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.2.2 Commercial construction. New construction in commercial districts shall be of 100 percent masonry on all exterior first floor facades fronting on a public street. The masonry materials used for such exterior facades shall be similar to that of existing adjacent buildings. The 100% masonry requirement shall not apply to eaves, porches, trim, windows, doors, and similar articulation features. To encourage innovated designs, the City Manager or his designee is authorized to modify this masonry material requirement for specific projects to accommodate unique architectural designs, which will enhance the aesthetics of the new construction; provided the applicant provides the City Manager or his designee with satisfactory evidence that such alternative design's purpose is to improve the overall appearance of the new construction and is not proposed merely for cost savings. 
(Ord. No. 477, § 1, 2-23-82; Ord. No. 594, § 1, 9-11-84; Ord. No. 1552 , § 1, 9-26-17) 
ARTICLE III. - NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY 
    Annexed territory-temporary classification. All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Live Oak shall be temporarily classified as PD, Pre-Development District. The planning and zoning commission will review all territory for consideration of zoning within 180 days of annexation. The procedure for establishing permanent classification of annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law for the adoption of the original zoning regulations. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRE-DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS (PD) 
    In an area temporarily classified as PD, Pre-Development District: 
1.1  No person shall erect, construct, or add to any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory without first applying for appropriate zoning. 
1.2  No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the Building Permit Official other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building permitted in the PD, Pre-Development District, unless and until such territory has been classified in a district other than the PD, Pre-Development District, by the city council in the manner provided by law, except that a building permit may be issued in accordance with the provisions as follows: 
1.3  An application for a permit for any use shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Administrator of the City of Live Oak, and by him referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration and recommendations to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission in making its recommendation to the City Council concerning any such permit shall take into consideration the appropriate land use for the area and the Comprehensive Land Use Plan for the City of Live Oak. The City Council after receiving and reviewing the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission may by majority vote authorize the issuance of a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy or may disapprove the application. 
1.4  Use Regulations. In a Pre-Development District no land shall be used for and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than: 
See Schedule of Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses". 
ARTICLE V. - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
    See Schedule of Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses". 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 2 1/2 standard stories in height. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
3.1  Front yard setback. 
A front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
Where a lot fronts on one street and abuts another street in the rear, there shall be a one foot non-access easement across the rear of the lot. 
3.2  Side yard setback. 
There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five (5) feet, except the side yards adjacent to a side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. The projection of a roof eave into the required side yard shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
Reverse frontage. 
On corner lots, where interior lots have been platted, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front line of the lots in the rear. (Ord. No. 581, § 1, 5-8-84) 
3.3  Rear yard setback. 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet. A one story portion of a main residential building may extend into the required rear yard a maximum of ten (10) feet, provided the cumulative width of such extension is not greater than one-half (1/2) of the width of the rear yard determined as the minimum width within the rear yard setback. The cumulative combination of one-story extensions of main buildings and detached accessory buildings may not occupy more than 30% of the required rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 1, 5-8-84) 
3.4  Area of lot. 
The minimum area of the lot shall be seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet. 
3.5  Width of lot. 
The minimum width of the lot shall be sixty (60) feet. 
3.6  Depth of lot. 
The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
Section 4 - Parking regulations. 
    Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two (2) automobiles for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport, except as permitted by Article XVI, Section 3, or other automobile storage structure shall be located within the required setback. 
(Ord. No. 1487, § 1, 10-29-13) 
Section 5 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings, includes a private garage, bona fide servants quarters not for rent but for the use of servants employed on the premises. When the accessory building is directly attached to the main building it shall be considered an integral part of the main building. When the accessory building is attached to the main building by a breezeway, the breezeway may be considered a part of the accessory building. When the breezeway extends into the required rear yard it, together with the accessory building or buildings, may occupy not more than 30% of the required rear yard. The floor area of all the accessory buildings on the lot shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the principal structure exclusive of breezeways and attached garage, provided however, that this regulation shall not reduce the total floor area of all accessory buildings on one lot to less than six hundred (600) square feet and shall not apply to bona fide farm and agricultural buildings. Accessory buildings shall not be constructed closer than five (5) feet from the side or rear lot lines. 
ARTICLE VI. - GARDEN HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2A, R-2B AND R-2C)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1578 , § 1, adopted March 26, 2019, amended the title of Art. VI to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI was titled, "Garden Home Residential District (R-2A and R-2B)." 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
    See Schedule for Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses." 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 21/2 standard stories in height. 
Section 3 - Garden home residential district (R-2A). 
    The following regulations shall apply to the Single Family Dwelling, R-2A Garden Home Dwelling District, Zero Lot Line Construction. 
3.1  Requirements. 
The plat of the requested area shall incorporate the requirements for an R-2A as follows: 
Zero lot line, one-family dwellings may be constructed in an area requested and approved for designation as R-2A. 
Zero lot line homes shall be uniformly located on the same side of the lot within a street block and shall not be constructed on less than five (5) adjoining lots. 
Zero lot line homes shall have no windows on the zero lot line side of the lot within a street block. 
The entire frontage of one side of the street in the block must be included in the R-2A designation. An exception may be made where an alley breaks the block on that side of the street. 
Section 4 - Area regulations for R-2A zero lot line construction. 
4.1  Front yard setback. 
The front yard setback for R-2A Garden Home District is set at a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 2, 5-8-84) 
4.2  Side yard setback. 
The building may be constructed with a zero side yard on one side and a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet on the other side. This ten (10) foot side yard shall extend the full depth of the lot. Five (5) feet of the ten (10) foot side yard shall be designated as a maintenance easement. This easement shall extend the depth of the lot. 
Exceptions are permitted so that the end houses of the block shall have a ten (10) foot side yard setback from the street right-of-way. Under no circumstances shall the setback between the lots be less than ten (10) feet. 
4.3  Rear yard setback. 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than ten (10) feet. 
4.4  Area of lot. 
The minimum area of the lot shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
4.5  Width of lot. 
The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. 
4.6  Minimum depth of lot. 
The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
4.7  Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two (2) automobiles for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport, except as permitted by Article XVI, Section 3, or other automobile storage structure shall be located within the required setback. 
(Ord. No. 1487, § 2, 10-29-13) 
4.8  Accessory buildings. 
No accessory building as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be set back three (3) feet from property lines. No accessory building may be closer than ten (10) feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings shall not be allowed in front or side yards. 
Section 5 - Garden home residential district R-2B conventional or traditional construction. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the Single Family Dwelling R-2B Garden Home Residential District, Conventional or Traditional Construction. 
(Ord. No. 456, Art. VI, § 5, 6-9-81) 
5.1  Requirements. 
The plat of the requested area shall incorporate the requirements for a R-2B area, as follows: 
Conventional or Traditional Construction, single family dwellings may be constructed in an area requested and approved for designation R-2B. 
No area shall be designated R-2B that contains less than five (5) adjoining lots on each street or seven (7) lots in a cul-de-sac. 
The entire frontage of one side of the street in the block must be included in the R-2B designation. An exception may be made where an alley breaks the block on that side of the street. 
Section 6 - Area regulations for R-2B conventional or traditional construction. 
6.1  Front yard setback. 
The front yard setback for R-2B Garden Home District shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
6.2  Side yard setback. 
The side yard setback for R-2B Garden Home District shall be a minimum of five (5) feet. Corner lots shall have a ten (10) foot side yard setback from the street right-of-way. The projection of a roof eave into the required side yard shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
6.3  Rear yard setback. 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. A one story portion of a main residential building may extend into the required rear yard a maximum of ten (10) feet, provided the cumulative width of such extension is not greater than one-half (1/2) of the width of the rear yard determined as the minimum width within the rear yard setback. The cumulative combination of one story extensions of main buildings and detached accessory buildings may not occupy more than 40% of the required rear yard. 
6.4  Area of lot. 
The minimum area of the lot shall be six thousand two hundred (6,200) square feet. 
6.5  Width of lot. 
The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty-five (55) feet. 
6.6  Minimum depth of lot. 
The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred ten (110) feet. 
6.7  Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two (2) automobiles for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport, except as permitted by Article XVI Section 3, or other automobile storage structure shall be located within the required setback. 
6.8  Accessory buildings. 
No accessory building as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be set back three (3) feet from property lines. No accessory building may be closer than ten (10) feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings shall not be allowed in the front or side yards. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 3, 5-8-84; Ord. No. 1578 , § 2, 3-26-19) 
Section 7 - Area regulations for R-2C conventional or traditional construction. 
7.1  Front yard setback. 
The front yard setback for R-2C Residential District shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
7.2  Side yard setback. 
The side yard setback for R-2C Residential District shall be a minimum of five (5) feet. Corner lots shall have a ten (10) foot side yard setback from the street right-of-way. The projection of a roof eave into the required side yard shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
7.3  Rear yard setback. 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
7.4  Area of lot. 
The minimum area of the lot shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
7.5  Width of lot. 
The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. 
7.6  Minimum depth of lot. 
The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
7.7  Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two (2) automobiles for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport, except as permitted by Article XVI Section 3, or other automobile storage structure shall be located within the required setback. 
7.8  Accessory buildings. 
No accessory building as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be set back three (3) feet from property lines. No accessory building may be closer than five (5) feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings shall not be allowed in the front or side yards. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1578 , § 3, 3-26-19) 
ARTICLE VII. - TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
    See Schedule of Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses." 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 21/2 standard stories in height. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
3.1  Front yard setback. 
There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
3.2  Side yard setback. 
There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a minimum width of not less than ten (10) feet. On corner lots, where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided as in the "R-1" district, Article V, Section 3.2. 
3.3  Rear yard setback. 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
3.4  Area of lot. 
Except as hereinafter provided all dwellings erected, enlarged, relocated, reconstructed, or converted shall be located upon lots containing the following areas: 
A lot on which a single family dwelling is located shall contain not less than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet. 
A lot on which a two family dwelling is located shall contain not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
3.5  Width of lot. 
The maximum width of the lot shall be seventy-five (75) feet for a two family dwelling. 
3.6  Depth of lot. 
The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
Section 4 - Parking regulations. 
    Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two (2) automobiles for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport, except as permitted by Article XVI, Section 3, or other automobile storage structure shall be located within the required setback. 
(Ord. No. 1487, § 3, 10-29-13) 
Section 5 - [Accessory buildings.] 
    See Article V, Section 5. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TOWN HOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-4) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
See Schedule for Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses." 
In a town house district, no land shall be used and no buildings erected or relocated for or converted to any use other than single family attached dwellings (town houses). Each dwelling unit shall be located on a separate lot, and front on a street. 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 21/2 standard stories in height. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
3.1  Front yard setback. 
The minimum front yard shall be twenty (20) feet setback. 
3.2  Side yard setback. 
None permitted, except that no portion of a town house or accessory structure in, or related to, one group of contiguous town houses shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to any portion of a town house or accessory structure related to another group. Each corner lot shall have a side yard of at least ten (10) feet, except that in the case of reversed frontage, a side yard equal, at least, to the depth of the front yard required for a structure fronting the side street shall be required. 
3.3  Rear yard setback. 
A thirty-five (35) foot rear yard shall be required. 
3.4  Depth of lot. 
Minimum depth of 100 feet. 
3.5  Width of lot. 
Minimum width of thirty (30) feet. 
Section 4 - Density regulations. 
    No town house development shall exceed a density of more than twelve (12) units per gross acre. Each site development shall contain no less than three units, nor more than ten (10) units per site. 
Section 5 - Accessory buildings. 
    Their use is permitted when located on the same lot and does not involve the conduct of business. No accessory building as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be set back three (3) feet from property lines. No accessory building may be closer than ten (10) feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings shall not be allowed in front or side yards. 
Section 6 - Parking regulations. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided on the basis of two spaces per town house unit. 
Section 7 - Open space. 
    In addition to required yards and parking area, six hundred (600) square feet of open space shall be provided for each unit within the development. 
ARTICLE IX. - APARTMENT/MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-5) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
    See Schedule of Uses, and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses". 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 21/2 standard stories in height. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
3.1  Front yard setback. 
A front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
3.2  Side yard setback. 
There shall be a side setback on each side of the lot with minimum dimensions as follows: 
For a multiple family dwelling where ends of the building are adjacent to and parallel to the side lot line or within thirty (30) degrees thereof the side setback shall be ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent of the average width of the lot, whichever is smaller, but in no case shall such a side setback be less than five (5) feet. 
For a multiple family dwelling where sides of the building other than the ends are adjacent or parallel to the side setback lines or within thirty (30) degrees thereof, the side yard shall be not less than twenty (20) percent of the overall length of the building side adjacent to the side setback line, but in no instance less than fifteen (15) feet. 
For any other permitted use not otherwise listed, the side setback shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
In all cases where the side yard is adjacent to a side street the side yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. On corner lots where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided as in the "R-1" District, Section 3.2 (reverse frontage). 
No building erected in an R-5 district will be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any other building erected in an R-5 district. 
3.3  Rear yard setback. 
    There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.4  Area of lot. 
All structures hereinafter erected, enlarged, relocated, reconstructed, or converted, shall be located upon lots containing the following areas: 
A lot on which there is erected or converted a multiple family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for the first two units and one thousand, four hundred (1,400) square feet for each additional unit. The overall density shall not exceed twenty-two (22) units to the acre. If sanitary sewer facilities are not available, area requirements for multiple family use shall also comply with all ordinances of the City of Live Oak and Bexar County Public Works. 
A lot on which there is erected or converted and any other permitted use not otherwise listed shall contain an area of not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
3.5  Depth of lot. 
Minimum depth of lot shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
3.6  Width of lot. 
Minimum width of lot shall be sixty (60) feet. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 5, 5-8-84) 
Section 4 - Parking regulations. 
    A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided for each residence in an apartment/multi-family residential district, one of which may be in a communal area. 
Section 5 - Accessory buildings. 
    No accessory building as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be set back three (3) feet from the property line. No accessory building may be closer that [than] ten (10) feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings as permitted herein may be allowed in required side yards, provided, however, that no accessory building may be closer than ten (10) feet to any main building on the same lot, nor closer than three (3) feet to a common property line. No accessory buildings shall be allowed in the front yard. 
ARTICLE X. - MOBILE HOME DISTRICT (R-6) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
See Schedule of Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses". Also, see Mobile Home Ordinance Number 186 and amendments thereto. 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation, measured at 90° to the frame, shall not exceed three (3) feet. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
3.1  The minimum front yard setback shall be ten (10) feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space. 
3.2  No mobile home shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any property line nor closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the property line adjoining a public street. 
3.3  For other structures on each space the minimum setback shall be at least ten (10) feet. 
3.4  The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, that mobile homes parked end to end may have a clearance of not less than ten (10) feet. 
Section 4 - Parking regulations. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided. If no off-street parking is available in a ratio of two (2) spaces for each mobile home site, the minimum street width shall be thirty-six (36) feet. 
ARTICLE XI. - OFFICE AND PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT (B-1) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
    See Schedule of Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses". 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 3 standard stories in height. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
    Area uses are governed by the regulations prescribed. A buffer zone of one hundred (100) feet, a street or an eight (8) foot privacy fence shall be maintained between residential districts. 
3.1  Front yard setback. 
A front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.2  Side yard setback. 
No side yard shall be required except: 
a.  On a corner lot a side yard of ten (10) feet shall be required on the side street; and on corner lots where a lot abuts lots fronting the side street, a side yard shall be provided in accordance with Article V, Section 3.2, Reverse Frontage. 
b.  On the side of lot in this district adjoining a residential district, there shall be a side yard of twenty-five (25) feet. No side yard shall be required where the district is separated from the residential district by an alley. 
3.3  Rear yard setback. 
When lots abut property with residential zoning, there shall be rear yards having a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet; no rear yard shall be required for retail use abutting another B-1 District, B-2 District, B-3 District or Industrial District. 
3.4  Area of lot. 
The minimum area of the lot shall be six thousand (6,000) feet. 
3.5  Width of lot. 
The minimum width of the lot shall be sixty (60) feet. 
3.6  Depth of lot. 
The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 477, § 2, 2-23-82; Ord. No. 581, § 6, 5-8-84) 
Section 4 - Parking regulations. 
    See Article XVI. 
Section 5 - Accessory buildings. 
    No accessory building, as permitted herein shall occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be set back three (3) feet from the rear property line; provided, however, that where the rear lot line is the line of an alley twenty (20) feet or more in width, no setback shall be required. No accessory building may be closer than ten (10) feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings, as permitted herein, may be allowed in required side yards, provided; however, that no accessory building may be closer than ten (10) feet to any main building on the same lot, nor closer than three (3) feet to a common property line. No accessory buildings shall be allowed in the front yards. 
Section 6 - Fences required. 
    Where an office and professional district is adjacent to residential lot(s), a privacy fence is required with a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
ARTICLE XII. - NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE DISTRICT (B-2) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
    See Schedule of Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses". 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed three (3) standard stories in height. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
    Area uses which may be permitted within a Neighborhood Service District are governed by the prescribed regulations. A buffer zone of one hundred fifty (150) feet, a street or an eight (8) foot privacy fence shall be maintained between residential districts. 
3.1  Front yard setback. 
A front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.2  Side yard setback. 
No side yard shall be required except: 
a.  On a corner lot, a side yard of ten (10) feet shall be required on the side street; and on corner lots where a lot abuts lots fronting the side street, a side yard shall be provided in accordance with Article V, Section 3.2, Reverse Frontage. 
b.  On the side of lot in this district adjoining a residential district, there shall be a side yard of twenty-five (25) feet. No side yard shall be required where the district is separated from the residential district by an alley. 
3.3  Rear yard setback. 
When lots abut property with residential zoning, there shall be rear yards having a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet; no rear yard shall be required for retail use abutting another B-2 district or lower classification. 
3.4  Area of lot. 
The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
3.5  Width of lot. 
The minimum lot width shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
3.6  Depth of lot. 
The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 477, § 3, 2-23-82; Ord. No. 581, § 7, 5-8-84) 
Section 4 - Parking regulations. 
    See Article XVI 
Section 5 - Accessory buildings. 
    No accessory buildings, as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be set back three (3) feet from the rear property line; provided, however, that where the rear property line is the line of an alley twenty (20) feet or more in width, no setback shall be required. No accessory building may be closer than ten (10) feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings, as permitted herein, may be allowed in required side yards; provided, however, that no accessory building may be closer than ten (10) feet to any main building on the same lot, nor closer than three (3) feet to a common property line. 
Section 6 - Fences required. 
    Where a neighborhood service district is adjacent to residential lot(s), a privacy fence is required with a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-3) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
    See Schedule of Uses and Article II, Section 4 "New and Unscheduled Uses". 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed three (3) standard stories in height. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
    Area uses permitted within a general business district are governed by the regulations prescribed. A buffer zone of two hundred (200) feet, a street or an eight (8) foot fence shall be maintained between residential districts. 
3.1  Front yard setback. 
A front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.2  Side yard setback. 
No side yard shall be required except: 
a.  On a corner lot, a side yard of ten (10) feet shall be required on the side street; and on corner lots where a lot abuts lots fronting the side street, a side yard shall be provided in accordance with Article V, Section 3.2, Reverse Frontage. 
b.  On the side of lot in this district adjoining a residential district, there shall be a side yard of twenty-five (25) feet. No side yard shall be required where the district is separated from the residential district by an alley. 
3.3  Rear yard setback. 
When lots abut property with residential zoning, there shall be rear yards having a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet; no rear yard shall be required for business use abutting another B-3 district or industrial district. 
3.4  Area of lot. 
The minimum area of the lot shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
3.5  Width of lot. 
The minimum width of the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
3.6  Depth of lot. 
The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 477, § 4, 2-23-82) 
Section 4 - Parking regulations. 
    See Article XVI 
Section 5 - Accessory buildings. 
    No accessory building, as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be set back three (3) feet from the rear property line; provided, however, that where the rear line of the lot is the line of an alley twenty (20) feet or more in width, no setback shall be required. 
Section 6 - Fences required. 
    Where a general business district is adjacent to residential lot(s), a privacy fence is required with a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
ARTICLE XIV. - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    Light manufacturing processes which do not emit detectable dust, odor, smoke, gas, or fumes beyond the boundary property lines of the lot or tract upon which the use is located or beyond the boundary line of the I-1 Industrial District zoned lot which is generally perceptible in frequency or pressure above the ambient level of noise in the adjacent areas. A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
    See Schedule of Uses and Article II, Section 4, "New and Unscheduled Uses". 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed six (6) standard stories in height unless set back from all lot lines or any required yard lines one (1) foot for each two feet above such height limit. When a building is located on a lot adjoining a residential district, it shall not exceed six (6) standard stories in height unless it is set back one foot from all required lines for each one foot of additional height above such height limit. 
(Ord. No. 456, Art. XIV, § 2, 6-9-81) 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
    A buffer zone of two hundred (200) feet, a street or an eight (8) foot privacy fence shall be maintained between residential districts. 
3.1  Front area setback. 
There shall be provided a front building setback of no less than fifty (50) feet. 
3.2  Side area setback. 
There shall be provided a side building setback no less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.3  Rear area setback. 
No rear yard is required, except that a rear yard of not less than fifty (50) feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the residential district also backs up to the rear street. No parking, storage, or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in I-1 Districts within twenty-five (25) feet of the rear property line. 
3.4  Area of lot. 
The minimum area of the lot shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 456, Art. XIV, § 3.4, 6-9-81) 
3.5  Width of lot. 
The minimum width of the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
3.6  Depth of lot. 
The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
ARTICLE XV. - MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2) 

Section 1 - Use regulations. 
    Any manufacturing, industrial servicing or storage process not prohibited by law and upon approval by the city council in accordance with the specific use permit procedure, Article XIX. 
Section 2 - Height regulations. 
    See Article XIV, Section 2. 
Section 3 - Area regulations. 
    See Article XIV, Section 3. 
ARTICLE XVI. - PARKING REGULATIONS 

Section 1 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this section to establish the guidelines for off-street parking space consistent with the proposed land use to: 
a.  Eliminate occurrence of non-resident on-street parking in adjoining neighborhood; 
b.  Avoid the traffic congestion and public safety hazards caused by a failure to provide such parking space; and 
c.  Expedite the movement of traffic on public thoroughfares in a safe manner, increase the carrying capacity of the streets, reduce the amount of land required for streets, and the cost to both the property owner and the city. 
Section 2 - Off-Street parking and loading requirements. 
    Schedule of off-street parking regulations: 
Type of Generator Unit Minimum No. of Spaces Per Unit One and two family dwellings Dwelling 2 Multi family dwelling and townhouses Dwelling 2 Rooming or boarding houses Sleeping rooms 1/2 Fraternity or sorority Beds 1/4 Private club or lodge Members 1/5 Church or temple Seat 1/5 School (except high school or college  Seats in auditorium Seat 1/10  Seats in classroom Classroom 3 College or high school  Seats in auditorium Seat 1/8  Seats in classroom Classroom 3 Country club or golf club Members 1/5 Community center, library, museum, or art gallery  0-2,000 square feet Total 10  2,000 + square feet Square feet 1/300 Hospital Beds 1/2 Santitorium, convalescent home, home for the aged, or similar institutions Beds 1/4 Theater or Auditorium (except school) Seats 1/4 Sports arena, stadium, or gymnasium Seats 1/5 Hotel Sleeping rooms 1/3  Commercial floor  Area Square feet 1/200 Tourist home, cabin, or motel Sleeping rooms 1 Dance hall, assembly or exhibit hall Square feet 1/100 Business or professional office, studio bank, medical or dental clinic  0-1,000 square feet Total square feet 3  1,000 + square feet 1/200 Bowling Alley Alley 4 Mortuary or Funeral Home Seats 1/4 Restaurant, night club cafe, or similar recreation or amusement establishment Seat 1/3 Retail store or personal service establishment Square feet 1/200 Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe repair, or service shop  0-1,000 square feet Total 2  1,000 + square feet Square feet 1/300 Printing or plumbing shop or similar service establishment Employes 1/3 Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, warehouse, or similar establishment Employees 1/2 Garden shop/plant sales facilities: Main building Square feet 1/200 Storage/display area Square feet 1/800  
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 4-14-87) 
2.1  Provisions for determining the number of locations of parking spaces. 
In computing the number of such parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern: 
a.  "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. 
b.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number. 
c.  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this Ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10) percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance is enlarged in floor area or in the area used, said improvement or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. 
d.  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
2.2  [Location of spaces.] 
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from an institutional building served and not to exceed five hundred (500) feet from any other non-residential building served. 
a.  Up to one hundred (100) percent of the parking spaces required for a church or church school auditorium, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours; provided, however, that written agreement therefore is properly executed and filed as specified in paragraph "2". 
b.  In any cases where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot or contiguous with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. 
2.3  Development and maintenance of parking area. 
Every parcel of land hereafter used as public parking area, including commercial parking lots, automobile, farm equipment, mobile home, trailer, or other open-air sales lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Surfacing: Except as otherwise provided, all off-street parking areas shall be all-weather surfaces, shall be installed, graded to drain, and maintained so [as] to dispose of surface water accumulated within the area, for all parking areas for more than five (5) vehicles. Parking spaces shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and safe parking of vehicles. Surfaces shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. 
b.  Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be arranged so as to direct or shield the light away from the adjoining premises in any residential district. 
c.  Number of off-street parking spaces required: The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined from the preceding table of off-street parking regulations. The classification of uses referred to shall be deemed to include and apply to all uses. 
d.  Off-street loading regulations: Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the same premise, loading space in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  In the neighborhood service and general business districts, one loading space for the first five thousand (5,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor area in the building and one additional loading space for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(2)  In the I-1 & I-2 industrial districts, one loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet or fraction thereof, of floor area in the building. 
(3)  No more than three (3) off-street loading spaces shall be required for any neighborhood service or general business use, nor more than five off-street spaces for any industrial use. 
Section 3 - Carports. 
a.  Carports are a permitted encroachment in the front-yard setback in the following Residential Districts: R-1; R-2A; R-2B; R-2C and R-3, provided such carports comply with the following: 
(i)  Each resident within the City intending to construct a carport must obtain a permit with the Development Services Department. 
(ii)  The Development Services Department may issue the permit if the applicant presents construction or design plans that meet all the requirements set forth in Exhibit 1. 
(iii)  The permit fee is established at $30.00 for the initial fee, plus $5.00 per thousand dollars of construction cost. 
(iv)  Any request with deviations from these Standards, Regulations and Guidelines in Exhibit 1 are required file for a variance and proceed to the Board of Adjustment. 
b.  No carport may be constructed in a front yard setback unless: (i) the carport complies with all requirements set out in subsection a., of this section and Exhibit 1; or (ii) a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment allowing the carport to encroach in the front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 1487, § 4, 10-29-13; Ord. No. 1578 , § 4, 3-26-19) 
Exhibit 1 
1.  A one story standard structure extension as a carport is allowed to extend into the front set back of the residential structure. 
2.  Carports may only be constructed to match the permanent home structure materials and general design/color scheme as the exterior of the house. All materials must meet the manufacturer's approved specifications. 
3.  The carport shall have three open sides, no walls allowed. 
4.  A carport may extend into the front setback of a residential structure not closer than five feet from the front property line (which is generally 15 feet from the curb). 
5.  All carports must have plans submitted to the building official for his review, to insure that it complies with all the building standards that are established by International Building and all other codes adopted by the City of Live Oak, as amended. 
6.  The carport shall not exceed 20 feet in width and have a maximum, interior height clearance of ten feet. In the event special construction circumstances exist and compliance is unattainable, the building official shall address the issue and ensure compliance with the city's building standards as described by #5. 
7.  At any time that the materials of the carport is showing wear or is damaged to the extent that it will allow for the elements to enter, it must be replaced at the expense of the owner. 
8.  If the property is located in a homeowner's association, and there are restrictive covenants in place that provide restrictions for those properties, the owner is required to provide a signed affidavit stating that proposed carport meets these restrictive covenants. 
(Ord. No. 1578 , § 2, 3-26-19) 
ARTICLE XVII.5. - LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 840, adopted Sept. 12, 1989, amended Ord. No. 456 by adding a section pertaining to the location of sexually oriented businesses consisting of provisions lettered A.-F. In order to conform to prevailing style of Ord. No. 456, such provisions were designated as a new Art. XVII.5, §§ 1-6, by the editor. 
Cross reference- Sexually oriented businesses, § 12-201 et seq. 

Section 1 - Definitions. 
1.  Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
2.  Adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as its principal business purpose offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
b.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
c.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
3.  Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
a.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
b.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
c.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
4.  Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
a.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
b.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
c.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
5.  Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproduction are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
6.  Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
7.  Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Live Oak or his designated agent. 
8.  Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
9.  Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
10.  Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
b.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
c.  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
d.  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
11.  Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
12.  Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
a.  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breasts. 
b.  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breasts. 
13.  Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
14.  Residential district means a single-family, two-family, townhouse, multiple-family or mobile home or trailer court included in the zoning districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 of the Live Oak Zoning Ordinance. 
15.  Residential use means a single-family, two-family, townhouse, multiple-family or "mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, or trailer court" used as included in the zoning districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 or the Live Oak Zoning Ordinance. 
16.  Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
17.  Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
a.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
b.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or [is] semi-nude. 
18.  Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult novelty store, or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
19.  Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
20.  Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
b.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
d.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in a. through c. above. 
21.  Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) percent, as the floor area exists [existed] on October 1, 1988. 
22.  Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The sale, lease or sublease of the building; 
b.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
c.  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 840, § A, 9-12-89) 
Section 2 - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
1.  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of: 
a.  A church; 
b.  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
c.  A public park adjacent to a residential district as defined in this ordinance; or 
d.  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this ordinance. 
2.  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business. 
3.  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase in floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
4.  For the purposes of subsection 1., measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises of a church or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
5.  For purposes of subsection 2. of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
6.  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance, that is in violation of subsections 1., 2., or 3. of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three (3) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that [if] the sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and [the] later-established business(es) is nonconforming. 
7.  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license as provided for in Live Oak Ordinance No. 841, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license under said Ordinance No. 841, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 840, § B, 9-12-89) 
Section 3 - Exemption from local restrictions. 
1.  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of Section 2 of this ordinance, then the applicant may, not later than ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of Section 2. 
2.  If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the Live Oak Board of Adjustment and Appeals ("board") shall consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within sixty (60) days from the date the written request is received. 
3.  The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
4.  The board may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 2 if it makes the following findings: 
a.  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
b.  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this chapter of the city Code; 
c.  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
d.  That the location of the sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
e.  That all other applicable provisions of this ordinance and Ordinance No. 841 will be observed. 
5.  The board shall grant the exemption by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the entire board of adjustment. Failure by the applicant to obtain this number of votes shall result in a denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the board is final. 
6.  If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of Section 2 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
7.  If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the board's action. 
8.  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of Ordinance No. 841 or this ordinance other than the locational restrictions of Section 2. 
(Ord. No. 840, § C, 9-12-89) 
Section 4 - Gender and number. 
    The use of the masculine herein includes the feminine; the use of the singular includes the plural. 
(Ord. No. 840, § D, 9-12-89) 
Section 5 - Enforcement. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 840, § E, 9-12-89) 
Section 6 - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of Section 2 of this ordinance is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 840, § F, 9-12-89) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 1 - Statement of intent. 
    For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the city, this ordinance shall not be amended except to correct an error in the ordinance or, because of changed or changing conditions in particular areas or in the city generally, or to rezone an area, extend the boundary of an existing zoning district or to change the regulations and restrictions thereof, all in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
Amendment limitation. 
    Subject to the limitations of the foregoing statement of intent, an amendment to this ordinance may be initiated by: 
a.  City council on its own motion; 
b.  The planning and zoning commission; 
c.  Or petition, as hereafter provided except that amendments to the zoning ordinance shall not be subject to the initiative and referendum process. 
Section 2 - Changes and amendments. 
2.1  Authority. 
The city council in accordance with applicable state law may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulation standards and boundaries herein established. In addition, a comprehensive review of the zoning ordinance text and map shall be made by the planning and zoning commission for the purpose of keeping the city current with development patterns and innovative methods in zoning and examining existing land uses and changes in land uses made by developers and builders within the city in order to ascertain those areas, where the patterns of development are changing. The planning and zoning commission, at least every three (3) years shall file a report and recommendation thereon with the mayor and city council. The three (3) year time period shall commence upon the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
2.2  Application and petition for amendment. 
For changes to the regulation and/or district map as follows: 
2.2.1  Any person, firm or corporation petitioning the city council for a change in the zoning district map shall do so upon forms provided for such purpose by the office of the city secretary and all petitions for changes shall be filed with the office of the city secretary. Notice shall also be given to the city secretary if said application for change originates with any member of the city council or planning and zoning commission. (Ord. No. 456, Art. XVIII, § 2.2.1, 6-9-81) 
2.2.2  Petitions shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission at its regularly scheduled meeting. If, after review of the application or petition, the majority of the planning and zoning commission shall agree that: 
a.  Such requested change is not in keeping with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
b.  There is no error in the original zoning of the property for which a change is requested. 
c.  There has been no substantial change in the environment of the property for which a change is requested that could warrant a change since its original classification. 
d.  Granting of the request would create a spot zone whereby the property would enjoy a special or monopolistic privilege not enjoyed by nearby properties of equal or similar locational factors. 
The applicant shall be advised in writing by the city secretary that it is the opinion of the planning and zoning commission that granting the requested change would not be in keeping with the objectives and purposes of the comprehensive plan, and zoning ordinance, and/or the district map, the particular request will not be recommended for amendment or change. The planning and zoning commission will then transmit their recommendations to the city council for final approval/disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 629, 4-30-85) 
Section 3 - Procedure for amendment petition. 
3.1  Filing of application. 
All petitions for amendments to this ordinance, shall be in writing, signed, and filed with the city secretary for presentation to the planning and zoning commission. 
3.2  Contents of petition. 
All petitions for amendments to this ordinance, shall contain at least the following: 
a.  The petitioner's name, address, and interest in the petition, as well as the name, address and interest of every person having a legal or an equitable interest in the land covered by the petition. 
b.  The nature and effect of the proposed amendment. 
c.  A fully dimensioned map showing the following will be provided: 
(1)  The land which would be affected by the proposed amendment. 
(2)  A legal description of such land. 
(3)  The present zoning classification of the land. 
(4)  The zoning classification of all abutting zoning districts. 
(5)  All public and private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the land under consideration. 
d.  If the proposed amendment would require a change in the zoning map, the owners of all land within the area to be changed within a 200 foot radius must be notified in writing. 
e.  The alleged error in this ordinance, which would be corrected by the proposed amendment together with a detailed explanation of such error in the ordinance, which is alleged, and detailed reasons as to how the proposed amendment will correct the same. 
f.  The changed or changing conditions, if any, in the area or in the municipality generally, that make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary. 
g.  Evidence that the petition is in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
h.  All other circumstances, factors and reasons which applicant offers in support of the proposed amendment. 
3.3  Time limitations. 
If a petition for rezoning is denied by either the planning and zoning commission or the city council, another petition for reclassification of the same property or any portion thereof shall not be filed within a period of one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of denial provided, however, that: 
(1)  Substantial change in conditions has taken place in the vicinity of the property sought to be rezoned or for which a specific use permit was requested. 
(2)  The applicant applying for rezoning seeks different relief. 
(3)  The last final decision denying rezoning was predicated upon fraud, accident or mistake. 
Section 4 - Public notice and procedure for amendments. 
4.1  Whenever it is the desire of the majority of the members of the planning and zoning commission that an amendment or change to the zoning ordinance or district map be proposed and considered at a public hearing or as a result of a petitioner application by a person, firm, or corporation that has not been rejected or denied as set forth in section 2.2.2 such proposed amendment or change shall be scheduled by the city secretary for public hearings before the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Such public hearings shall hereinafter be known as the public zoning hearing. 
4.2  Area under request. 
Each application for a public zoning hearing shall be accompanied at the time the hearing is scheduled by a fee in accordance with the following schedule: 
Lots or Area Amount of Fee 1 to 5 lots inclusive or up to 11/2 acre $35.00 Each lot over 5 10.00 Each acre over 1 1/2 30.00 Maximum fee: never to exceed 200.00  
No action to amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the zoning ordinance or the district map shall be final until there shall have been public zoning hearings before the planning and zoning commission and the city council thereon with public notices of such hearings as herein required. 
4.3  Notice of any public hearing involving the zoning ordinance and district map shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and designated as the official publication of the city stating briefly the change or amendment to be considered at the hearing and the time and place of such hearing which shall not be less than fifteen (15) days prior to public hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the property owners as determined from the most recently approved city tax roll of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change in classification or specific use permit is proposed. Such notice shall be given not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days before the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be made by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States Post Office. 
4.4  Notice of any public zoning hearing involving a change or amendment to the district map or the granting of a specific use permit shall be given as set forth in subsection 4.3 above. In addition, written notice shall state the time and place of hearing and give the address of the property proposed for change or a specific use permit that is to be considered. 
4.5  The public zoning hearings shall be meetings of the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Rules of order commensurate with proper conduct, hearing of arguments and receiving of evidence shall be adopted and observed at the hearings. The recording of minutes shall be made of the hearings and shall be maintained or filed in the office of the city secretary. 
4.6  The planning and zoning commission shall within ten (10) days after their public zoning hearing act and recommend upon changes, amendments or specific use permits considered at such hearing. 
The members of the planning and zoning commission shall vote on each proposed change, amendment or specific use permit as to their recommendations to the city council for either adoption or denial. The recommendations of the city planning and zoning commission shall be transmitted to the office of the city secretary for the city council in writing within five (5) days following the meeting of the city planning and zoning commission. 
4.7  After receipt by the city council of the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall at their public hearing, act upon the proposed changes, amendments or specific use permits by granting approval or denial. 
In cases when the planning and zoning commission's recommendation against proposed specific use permit or amendment, supplement, change or repeal of the regulations or restrictions of the zoning ordinance or the boundaries of the district map herein established or when a written protest against an amendment under consideration is filed with the office of the city secretary and signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or those immediately adjoining the same and extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom such amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of members of the city council, except that where there is a written protest against such change, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change, or of the lots and land immediately adjoining the same and extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom, such amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three/fourths (3/4) of the members of the city council. 
4.8  If the city council fails to pass an ordinance approving such proposed specific use permit, amendment, supplement, or change, a new application for such proposed specific use permit, amendment, supplement, or change in the zoning ordinance or the boundaries of the district map shall not again be considered until after the expiration of six (6) months from the date of such proposed amendment, supplement or change was rejected; provided; however, that such application may be reconsidered within the above mentioned six (6) month period if it be shown that: 
(1)  Substantial change in conditions has taken place in the vicinity of the property sought to be rezoned or for which a specific use permit was requested. 
(2)  The applicant applying for the rezoning seeks different relief. 
(3)  The last final decision denying rezoning was predicated upon fraud, accident or mistake. 
The procedures for such application for rezoning shall be the same as if the applicant has never filed a previous application for zoning change. 
(Ord. No. 477, § 7, 2-23-82) 
[Section 5 - Joint hearings on proposed rezonings and other matters.] 
[5.1]  Public hearings shall be held jointly between the Live Oak Planning and Zoning Commission and the Live Oak City Council to consider requests for rezoning and such other matters as are the proper subject of dual consideration by said bodies. For purposes of conducting business, a quorum consisting of three (3) members of the planning and zoning commission and three (3) members of the city council shall be required. In the event an alternate to the planning and zoning commission serves in place of the regular member and hears testimony relevant to a particular item and that subject is placed on the agenda for a subsequent meeting, or a vote thereon as required at a subsequent meeting, the alternate shall sit and/or vote in place of the regular member. Under these circumstances the alternate shall vote only on a particular issue he previously considered. 
[5.2]  All interested persons wishing to speak at a public hearing must address the bodies at the podium and state their name and address. The mayor shall preside over such meetings and shall insure the following procedures are followed: 
a.  The applicant will have twenty (20) minutes to present information relevant to his request. 
b.  Staff presentation. 
c.  Each proponent of the request shall have five (5) minutes to speak. The maximum time allowed for all proponents is thirty (30) minutes. 
d.  Each opponent of the request shall have five (5) minutes to speak with a maximum thirty (30) minute time for all persons speaking in opposition thereto. 
e.  The applicant shall have ten (10) minutes for rebuttal arguments. 
f.  Council and commission members shall have the opportunity to ask questions and/or make comments. 
g.  The mayor shall close the public hearing. After such proceedings are closed no further evidence will be considered by either body, either in support or against the proposals previously considered on its agenda. 
h.  Immediately after the conclusion of such public hearing the Live Oak Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its recommendation to the city council or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. 
i.  The Live Oak City Council may deliberate and make its final decision concerning the matters previously considered at its next regular council meeting provided and except, however, that no further evidence or testimony either in support or against the proposals previously considered shall be heard or considered. 
(Ord. No. 633, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-85) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 633, which the preceding section is derived from, purported to amend Ordinance No. 456, but did not amend a specific section thereof; accordingly it has been inserted by the editor as section [5] of this article. 
ARTICLE XIX. - SPECIFIC USE PERMITS 

Section 1.1 - Authorized uses. 
    The city council of the City of Live Oak, Texas after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected, in accordance with the notice procedures prescribed under Article XVIII for amending the zoning ordinance, and after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the issuance of specific use permit for zoning specific uses set forth in the Schedule of Uses when situated within the zoning districts identified within the schedule. 
[Section] 1.2 - Development standards required. 
    The planning and zoning commission in considering and determining their recommendation and the city council in considering any request for a specific use permit may require from the applicant, plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. The city council may in compliance with this ordinance, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as specific use permits, the city council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and location indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, explosion, glare, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. 
[Section] 1.3 - Temporary construction buildings. 
    Temporary buildings and temporary building material storage area to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specified period of time in accordance with a permit issued subject to periodic renewal by the Inspector for cause shown. Upon completion, abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed within thirty (30) days, or at the direction of the building official. 
[Section] 1.4 - Temporary development signs. 
    Temporary development and promotional signs not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in area may be erected on private property. The building official shall control the location and duration of such sign use to assure that the occupancy and use of adjacent lots are not interferred with and that no safety hazard is created. Such special development signs will be removed at the direction of the building official after completion of the development. 
[Section] 1.5 - [Additional restrictions or conditions.] 
    The commission may impose additional reasonable restrictions or conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this ordinance and to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use. These requirements may include, but are not limited to, increased open space, loading and parking requirements, suitable landscaping and additional improvements such as curbing and sidewalks. 
[Section] 1.6 - [Petitions.] 
    Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the Commission, may present to the Board of Adjustment a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is unjust, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of injustice. Such petition shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment within ten (10) days after the final decision of the Commission, and not thereafter. 
[Section] 1.7 - Recording. 
    One (1) copy of an approved specific use permit, shall be delivered to the owner of the property, one (1) copy shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
[Section] 1.8 - Development. 
    Following the issuance of a specific use permit, the building inspector shall insure that if the development is undertaken, it is completed in compliance with said permit. However, if a specific use permit has not been used within six (6) months after the date granted, the permit is automatically cancelled, which fact shall be noted over the signature of the building official on the file copies of the permit, and the owner shall be so notified in writing. 
ARTICLE XX. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Section 1 - [Purpose.] 
    It may be desirable that many properties in the city be developed in accordance with site plans prepared and approved in advance of development. To encourage such planned unit development, regulatory provisions are provided as follows: 
Section 2 - Use provisions. 
    Whenever any property is designated as being within the planned unit development, the following types of uses may be authorized: 
a.  Housing development consisting of any combination of dwelling types on tracts with a minimum of five (5) acres. 
b.  Uses permitted in the neighborhood service district, on tracts with a minimum area of one (1) acre and when an integral part of a planned unit development. 
c.  Recreation area/open space. 
d.  A combination of any of the developments listed or other uses permitted in the zoning districts corresponding to property on the zoning district map. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 8, 5-8-84) 
Section 3 - Procedures. 
a.  A site plan setting forth the uses to be incorporated into the planned unit development shall be approved and filed as part of the Ordinance. The provisions of Article XVIII Amendments shall govern the review and processing of each application for a planned unit development. 
b.  Such required site plan shall show the provisions for ingress and egress to the property, access from a public street, number and density of housing units proposed per gross acre, sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking space, height of buildings, maximum lot coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls or fences and other development and protective requirements considered necessary to create a reasonable transition and protection of the adjacent property. 
c.  The planning and zoning commission may recommend that the city council impose conditions relative to the standards of development and such conditions shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the land or any structure, which is part of the development. Such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. 
d.  Site plans submitted for consideration under the provisions of sub-section "c" may be altered or amended with approval of the planning and zoning commission, but any change in the development shall be considered an amendment to the zoning ordinance and shall be processed in accordance with article XVIII. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 8, 5-8-84) 
ARTICLE XXI. - REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING USES 

Section 1 - Continuance of use. 
    Any nonconforming use of land or structures may be continued for definite periods of time, subject to such regulations as the board of adjustment may require for immediate preservation of the adjoining property and the ultimate removal of the nonconforming use. If, however, a continuous operation is not carried on in such nonconforming use during a continuous period of one (1) year, the building, other structure or tract of land where nonconforming use previously existed shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume activity operation shall not affect the foregoing. 
Section 2 - Change of use. 
    A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other type of nonconforming use without the prior approval of the board of adjustment which may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another, provided the use is within the same or higher classification as the original nonconforming use, that such nonconforming use and occupancy will not tend to prolong and continue nonconforming use. A nonconforming use once changed from a lower to a higher classification use shall not be changed thereafter to a lower classification use, and such prior lower classification use shall be considered abandoned. 
Section 3 - Damage and destruction. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescense or total destruction by fire or other cause. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes not exceeding fifty (50) percent of its value, the building inspector shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If greater than fifty (50) percent and less than total, the board of adjustment may grant permit for repair after public hearing and having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of public welfare and the areas surrounding the designated nonconforming use. 
Section 4 - Enlargement. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended, except upon authorization of the board of adjustment. 
Section 5 - Normal maintenance. 
    Normal maintenance of a building or a structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations not extending the nonconforming use. 
Section 6 - Structural changes. 
    No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a non-conforming use except that required by law. 
ARTICLE XXII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 1 - Administrative provisions. 
    The city shall charge fees associated with planning and zoning applications for zoning, platting and other miscellaneous fees in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council and as amended from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, adopted Jan. 30, 2018, repealed the former § 1 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 477, § 8, adopted Feb. 23, 1982; and Ord. No. 619, § 1, adopted April 9, 1985. 
Section 2 - Certificates of occupancy and compliance. 
2.1  Certificates of occupancy shall be required for: 
a.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
b.  Change in use of an existing building. 
c.  Occupancy and use of vacant land. 
d.  Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification. 
e.  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. 
2.2  Certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses. 
A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of this ordinance. Application for such certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the building inspector by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one (1) year of the effective date of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for a lawful nonconforming use, or refusal of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming use shall be evidence that said nonconforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of this ordinance. 
Section 3 - Procedure. 
    Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which has been altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Said certificate shall be issued within three (3) days of completion of construction or alteration. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to the building official. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the certificate of occupancy therefor shall be issued. The fee for such certificate of occupancy shall be in accordance with the Certificate of Occupancy Fee as stated in the City's Fee Schedule and as amended from time to time as necessary, and shall be paid to the City of Live Oak at the time the building permit is issued. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of law. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building official or his agent. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 2, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
[Section 4 - Joint hearings by planning and zoning commission and city council on rezoning requests, etc.; procedures.] 
[(a)]  Public hearings shall be held jointly between the Live Oak Planning and Zoning Commission and the Live Oak City Council to consider requests for rezoning and such other matters as are the proper subject of dual consideration by said bodies. For purposes of conducting business, a quorum consisting of three (3) members of the planning and zoning commission and three (3) members of the city council shall be required. In the event an alternate to the planning and zoning commission serves in place of the regular member and hears testimony relevant to a particular item and that subject is placed on the agenda for a subsequent meeting, or a vote thereon as required at a subsequent meeting, the alternate shall sit and/or vote in place of the regular member. Under these circumstances the alternate shall vote only on a particular issue he previously considered. 
[(b)]  All interested persons wishing to speak at a public hearing must address the bodies at the podium and state their name and address. The mayor shall preside over such meetings and shall insure the following procedures are followed: 
[(1)]  The applicant will have twenty (20) minutes to present information relevant to his request. 
[(2)]  Staff presentation. 
[(3)]  Each proponent of the request shall have five (5) minutes to speak. The maximum time allowed for all proponents is thirty (30) minutes. 
[(4)]  Each opponent of the request shall have five (5) minutes to speak with a maximum thirty (30) minute time for all persons speaking in opposition thereto. 
[(5)]  The applicant shall have ten (10) minutes for rebuttal arguments. 
[(6)]  Council and commission members shall have the opportunity to ask questions and/or make comments. 
[(7)]  The mayor shall close the public hearing. After such proceedings are closed no further evidence will be considered by either body, either in support or against the proposals previously considered on its agenda. 
(Ord. No. 633, § 2, 5-14-85) 
[(8)]  Immediately after the conclusion of such public hearing the Live Oak Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its recommendation to the city council or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. 
[(9)]  The Live Oak City Council may deliberate and make its final decision concerning the matters previously considered at its next regular council meeting provided and except, however, that no further evidence or testimony either in support or against the proposals considered shall be heard or considered. 
(Ord. No. 633, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-85) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 633, adopted May 14, 1985, purported to amend the zoning ordinance by adding the provisions set out herein as "[Section 4]," but did not specify the provision of the zoning ordinance intended to be amended. Accordingly, such material has been placed here at the editor's discretion. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1467, § I, adopted June 12, 2012, amended Art. XXIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. XXIII, §§ 1-7, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 456, adopted June 9, 1981; Ord. No. 477, § 9, adopted Feb. 23, 1982; and Ord. No. 1401, § II, adopted March 12, 2009. 

Section 1 - [Appointment and service.] 
1.1  Appointment. The Board of Adjustment of the City of Live Oak shall consist of at least five members to be appointed by the City Council for a term of two years by ordinance. Appointments shall be consistent with State law and Live Oak City Council procedures. Terms shall begin and end in September. 
1.2  Removal. Removal may only be for cause, as found by the City Council, on a written charge after a public hearing. 
1.3  Vacancies. A vacancy on the board shall be filled for the expired term based on appointments of the City Council by ordinance. 
1.4  Alternate board members. The City Council may provide by ordinance for the appointment of alternate board members to serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city manager. An alternate member serves for the same period as a regular member and is subject to removal in the same manner as a regular member. A vacancy among the alternate members is filled in the same manner as a vacancy among the regular members. 
1.5  All Board of Adjustment meetings shall be open to the public and subject to the Texas Open Meetings and Public Information Acts. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § I, 6-12-12) 
Section 2 - [To hear and rule on appeals.] 
    The Board of Adjustment of the City of Live Oak shall hear and rule on all appeals to this ordinance. In appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the Board of Adjustment may make special exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance that are consistent with the general purpose and intent of the ordinance and in accordance with any applicable rules contained in the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § I, 6-12-12) 
Section 3 - Jurisdiction and hearing. 
3.1  Jurisdiction. When, in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, make special exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance that are consistent with the general purpose and intent of the ordinance and in accordance with any applicable rules contained in the ordinance. The Board of Adjustment shall not permit any variations or exception if the applicant has contributed to the cause of the unnecessary hardship of which he complains. 
3.2  Hearing requirements. 
a.  Each case before the Board of Adjustment must be heard by at least 75 percent of the members. 
b.  The board by majority vote shall adopt rules in accordance with any zoning ordinance. 
c.  Meetings of the board are held at the call of the presiding officer and at other times as determined by the board. The presiding officer or acting presiding officer may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
d.  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings that indicate the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. The board shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the board's office and are public records. 
3.3  Who may appeal to the board. Except for a member of the Live Oak City Council who serves on the Board of Adjustment, the following persons may appeal to the board: (a) a person aggrieved by a decision made by an administrative official (i.e. Building Inspector); or (b) any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by the decision. 
3.4  Requirements to appeal to the board. The appellant must file with the board and the official from whom the appeal is taken a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed within a reasonable time as determined by the rules of the board. On receiving the notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed. 
3.5  Stay. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the board facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the board or a court of record on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown. 
3.6  Setting hearing. The board shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest. A party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § I, 6-12-12) 
Section 4 - [Determinations and authority.] 
4.1  Determinations. The Board of Adjustment may hear issues on and make determinations for the following: 
a.  The reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use, provided such reconstruction does not prevent the eventual return of such property to a conforming use. 
b.  Modifications of yard, open space, parking lot area or lot size regulations of a minor nature that is necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land where such parcel was separately owned at the time of the passage of this ordinance and is of such restricted area where the shape of the lot is such that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification. 
c.  Reduce required off-street parking if it can be shown that the required minimum as herein established will not at any time be necessary because of the character of the proposed uses at a probable limited quantity of employees, clients, customers or tenants. 
d.  Decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in the order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Official in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
e.  Approval of special exceptions under article XXIV, wireless antennas and antenna facilities. 
f.  Authorize, in specific instances, a variance to the terms of a zoning ordinance if the variance is not contrary to the public interest of the City, and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance provision would result in an unnecessary hardship. 
4.2  Scope of authority. 
4.2(a)  In exercising its authority under Section 4.1, the board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the board has the same authority as the administrative official. 
4.2(b)  The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the board is necessary to: 
(1)  reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official; 
(2)  decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is required to pass under a zoning ordinance; or 
(3)  authorize a variation from the terms of a zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § I, 6-12-12) 
Section 5 - Applications for special exceptions. 
    All applications for special exceptions shall be by appeal to the Board of Adjustment. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the administrative officer except as otherwise provided herein. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record in the matter being appealed. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § I, 6-12-12) 
Section 6 - Court appeal. 
    Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city may present to a court of record as provided by law a petition, duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
6.1  Writ of certiorari. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the Board of Adjustment to review such decision of the Board of Adjustment and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served, which shall not be less than ten (10) days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board, and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
6.2  Return of certified copies. The Board of Adjustment shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The returned copies shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be certified. If upon the hearing it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, the court shall take evidence, appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. Cause shall not be allowed against the board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from. All issues in any proceeding under this article shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § I, 6-12-12) 
Section 7 - Enforcement, penalty and remedies. 
7.1  Offense and penalty. A person commits an offense if the person violates this ordinance or regulation adopted under this ordinance. An offense under this subsection is a misdemeanor, punishable by fine, not exceeding $1,000.00 as provided in Code of Ordinances Chapter 1, Section 1-7. 
7.2  Other remedies. If a building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or if a building, other structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the City may institute appropriate action to: 
(1)  prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use; 
(2)  restrain, correct, or abate the violation; 
(3)  prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land; or 
(4)  prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use on or about the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § I, 6-12-12) 
ARTICLE XXIV. - WIRELESS ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA FACILITIES 

Section 1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to further an overall plan for the enhancement of public safety, consistent community development, preservation of property values and the general welfare of the city while providing for the communication needs of the residents and businesses in the city. The purpose of this article is to govern the placement of these facilities to: 
1.  Ensure that their location and use do not compromise the aesthetic quality of the community; 
2.  Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the city; 
3.  Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to locate them in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
4.  Encourage co-location on both new and existing antenna facilities; 
5.  Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact through careful design, landscape screening, and innovative stealth techniques; and 
6.  Enhance the ability of wireless telecommunication providers to provide services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 2 - Definitions. 
    In this article the following definitions apply: 
    Alternative tower structure: Clock towers, steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. See also the definition of "Stealth facility." 
    Amateur radio antenna: A radio communication antenna used by a person holding an amateur station license from the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Antenna: A device used in communications, which transmits or receives radio signals, television signals, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
    Antenna, building attached: An antenna attached to an existing structure in two general forms: (1) roof-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the roofs of buildings, or (2) building-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the sides of buildings. These antennas can also be mounted on structures such as water tanks, billboards, church steeples, electrical transmission towers, etc. 
    Antenna facility: The antenna, mast, pole, structure, tower, building, equipment and other supporting material used to mount the antenna and equipment, equipment storage buildings and concealing or screening structures needed to operate an antenna. 
    Co-location: The act of locating wireless communications equipment for more than one telecommunications carrier on a single antenna facility. 
    Equipment storage building: An unmanned, single story equipment building or structure used to house telecommunications equipment necessary to operate the telecommunications network. 
    Monopole tower: A self-supporting tower facility composed of a single spire used to support telecommunication antennas. Monopole towers cannot have guy wires or bracing. 
    Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas: Any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special exception has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this article, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
    Satellite receive-only antenna: An antenna, one meter or less in diameter that enables the receipt of television signals transmitted directly from satellites to be viewed on a television monitor. Such antennas are commonly known as a satellite dish, television receive-only antenna, dish antenna, parabolic antenna, or satellite earth station antenna. 
    Satellite antenna: An antenna, greater than one meter in diameter, which enables the transmission of signals directly to and from satellites. Such antennas are commonly known as a satellite dish, dish antenna, parabolic antenna, or satellite earth station antenna. 
    Stealth facility: "Stealth" is a generic term describing a method that would hide or conceal an antenna, supporting electrical or mechanical equipment, or any other support structure that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth facilities may include totally enclosed antennas, wireless facilities that replicate or duplicate the construction of common structures such as flagpoles, alternative tower structures, and camouflaged wireless facilities that are constructed to blend into the surrounding environment. 
    Telecommunications tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed for the purpose of supporting one or more antennae used for the provision of commercial wireless telecommunications services. This definition includes monopole towers, alternative mounting structures or any other vertical support used for wireless telecommunications antennae. This definition does not include commercial radio or television towers; nor does it include such things as satellite receive only antenna or amateur radio antennas. 
    Telecommunications tower facility: A facility that contains a telecommunications tower and equipment storage building or structure. 
    TV antenna: An antenna that enables the receipt of television signals transmitted from broadcast stations. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 3 - Applicability/general regulations. 
    The following regulations apply to all antenna facilities and antennas located within any district: 
    Applicability: Except as specifically provided, all new telecommunications towers or antennas in the city shall be subject to the regulations contained in this article. Preexisting towers or antennas lawfully in existence at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article, other than those contained in sections 9 and 11 below: 
Type of Facility Building 
Permit 
Required Special 
Exception 
Required Satellite Receive Only < 1 meter No No Satellite Antenna > 1 meter in Commercial Area Yes No Satellite Antenna > 1 meter in Residential Area Yes Yes Amateur Radio Antenna Complying with Height Limits Yes No Amateur Radio Antenna Exceeding Height Limits Yes Yes Television Antennas No No Level 1 Stealth Facility in FC, UR, WC or DR District Yes No Level 2 Stealth Facility in FC, UR or WC District Yes No Level 2 Stealth Facility in DR District Yes Yes Level 3 Stealth Facility in FC, UR or WC District Yes No Level 3 Stealth Facility in DR District Yes Yes Level 4 Stealth Facility in FC or UR District Yes No Level 4 Stealth Facility in WC or DR District Yes Yes Monopole Tower up to 120 Feet in Height in FC, UR or WC District Yes Yes Monopole Towers In DR Districts or Over 120 Feet Tall Prohibited Prohibited  
1.  Equipment storage building. An equipment storage building associated with an antenna facility or an antenna shall be screened and landscaped as described in other sections of this article, or be incorporated into the stealth treatment so that it is consistent and complementary with the existing structures and uses on the premises. All equipment storage buildings must be constructed of a masonry material. (Equipment storage buildings or cabinets must be made of masonry material or enameled metal.) Alternative materials may be permitted upon approval by the city council and recommended by the planning and zoning commission. The base of all tower facilities must be screened with a masonry wall that will completely screen the equipment storage building. 
2.  Driveway surfaces. All telecommunication tower facilities must have an access drive that is constructed of asphalt or concrete. One off-street parking space must be provided at each telecommunication tower facility. 
3.  Lights. No outdoor lighting shall be allowed on any antenna facility except lights or lighting that is by required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission. 
4.  Antenna facility capacity: All new antenna Facilities must be structurally designed to allow for at least two sets of antennas. 
5.  Tower types: Only monopole, alternative mounting structures or stealth towers are permitted in the city. 
6.  Prohibited in easements. Antenna facilities shall not be placed in easements unless authorized by the easement holder. 
7.  Construction standards. A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction or installation of any antenna facility. An antenna facility must be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations and under the seal of a professional engineer registered in the state. Additionally, all antenna facilities shall comply with applicable state and local building codes. 
8.  Building codes/safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of antenna facilities, the owner of an antenna facility must ensure that it is maintained in compliance with all provisions of the city's building code and zoning regulations. If upon inspection, the city concludes that an antenna facility fails to comply with such codes and regulations and/or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon written notice to the owner of the antenna facility, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with applicable standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance shall constitute grounds for the removal of the antenna facility at the owner's expense. This notice requirement shall not preclude immediate action by the building official as allowed by law if public safety requires such action. 
9.  Contained on property. No part of an antenna facility, antennas, or other attachment may extend beyond the property lines or required building lines of the lot on which the antenna or antenna facility is located. 
10.  State or federal requirements. All antenna facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, and if the controlling state or federal agency mandates compliance, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. 
11.  Variance requirement. A variance granted by the board of adjustment, pursuant to article XXV is required for an antenna or antenna facility which will not comply with the requirements of this article unless otherwise specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 4 - Amateur radio antenna and TV antennas. 
    Amateur radio antenna and TV antennas are allowed in any zoned district. Amateur radio antennas and TV antennas must comply with the following regulations: 
1.  TV antennas. 
a.  Antenna location. TV antennas can only be located on a roof or in the back yard of a structure. 
b.  Number of facilities per lot. No more than one TV antenna is permitted on each lot. 
c.  Height limitations. A TV antenna can not extend more than eight feet above the maximum height limitation applicable for the zoning district. 
d.  Setbacks. TV antennas are not permitted within any required setback area. 
2.  Amateur radio antennas. 
a.  Amateur radio antennas and associated antenna structures shall be the minimum height and size necessary to reasonably accommodate the operator's communication needs, in accordance with FCC regulations as set forth in FCC order "PRB-1" and section 97.15 of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 250.002, or the respective successor sections thereto. An applicant for an amateur radio antenna and associated antenna structure shall provide objective technical data to support the antenna height requested where such requested height exceeds the maximum height permitted by right in the zone. 
b.  No portion of any amateur radio antenna, associated support structure, or related equipment shall overhang a property line that is not part of the subject site at any time. 
c.  Retractable antenna structures shall be required for amateur radio antenna structures over 30 feet in height that are in or within 300 feet of any residential zoning district. At times when not in operation, the antenna structure may be required to be retracted to the lowest elevation possible in order to maintain a safe clearance above any nearby building, accessory structure, overhead utility, landscaping and/or any other site improvements. 
d.  No amateur radio antenna or facility shall be sited or operated in such a manner that it creates at any time, either by itself or in combination with other wireless communication facilities, power densities in any inhabited area that exceed the FCC's maximum permissible exposure (MPE) limits for electric and magnetic field strength and power density for transmitters or any applicable more restrictive standard subsequently adopted by the city, county, state or federal government. Absolute compliance with FCC Office of Engineering Technology (OET) Bulletin 65 or any successor document thereto, is mandatory, and any violation shall be grounds for the city to immediately terminate any permit granted hereunder, or to order the immediate service termination of any non-complying facility within the city. 
e.  At least one resident, tenant or property owner of the property shall be an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC. 
f.  The square footage area and winding loading of all antennas shall not exceed those maximums as specified by the manufacturer of the associated support structure. 
g.  If at any time there is not a least one resident, tenant or property owner of the subject property licensed by the FCC as an amateur radio operator the city may require any antenna and associated support structure to be removed within 90 days. 
i.  Any antenna or associated support structure which exists on a property where at least one resident, tenant or property owner is a licensed by the FCC as an amateur radio operator is hereby declared a nuisance. 
h.  All applicable usual city permit requirements and other applicable laws, ordinances and other regulations for antenna structures of this type shall apply. 
i.  All manufacturers' safety and installation requirements shall be adhered to in the installation of any tower, antenna and boom. 
j.  Any used associated support structures erected shall be inspected by a qualified engineer to ensure its structural integrity and a report shall be provided to city counsel by the inspecting engineer verifying its structural integrity. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 5 - Satellite receive only antennas, less than one meter in diameter. 
    Satellite dish receiving antennas, two meter or less in diameter shall be permitted in the R-1, R-2's, R3, R-4, R-5, R-6, or any residentially zoned planned development district. Satellite receive only antenna must comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Antenna location. Satellite receive only antenna less than one meter in diameter can only be located on a roof or in the back yard of a residence. 
2.  Number of facilities per lot. No more than one satellite receive only antenna less than one meter in diameter is permitted on each lot. 
3.  Height limitations. A satellite receive only Antenna less than one meter in diameter can not extend more than eight feet above the maximum height limitation applicable for the zoning district. 
4.  Setbacks. Satellite receive only antennas less than one meter in diameter are not permitted within any required setback area. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 6 - Satellite antennas greater than one meter in diameter. 
    A satellite antenna greater than one meter in diameter is permitted is under the following conditions: 
1.  Nonresidential zoning districts. Satellite antennas greater than one meter in diameter is an accessory use permitted by right in nonresidential zoning districts. 
2.  Residential zoning districts. Satellite antennas greater that one meter in diameter are only allowed in residential zoning districts upon the approval of a special exception granted by the board of adjustment. 
3.  Height. Satellite antennas greater than one meter in diameter shall not exceed ten feet in height above the base of their mount. 
4.  Location. Satellite antennas greater than one meter in diameter can not be erected in any required setback or in the front of residential structures. 
5.  Screening. Satellite antennas greater than one meter in diameter that are mounted on the ground shall be screened from view from adjoining properties by solid fencing or evergreen plants to a height of a least six feet. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 7 - Placement of antenna facilities. 
    This section does not apply to amateur radio, TV, and satellite receive-only antennas. For the purpose of determining the appropriate locations for the placement of antenna facilities, the city is divided into land use threshold areas that establish different regulations pertaining to height, location, and type of antenna facility. These land use thresholds are defined as follows: 
1.  Full commercial ("FC"). Property within the I-1, I-2, B-2, B-2, B-3 districts. 
2.  Undeveloped residential ("UR"). Property within R-1, R-2's, R3, R-4, R-5, R-6, or any residentially zoned Planned Development districts, that: 
a.  Is not a part of a recorded subdivision; or 
b.  Is a part of a recorded subdivision but has not had a building permit issued for a residential structure; and 
c.  Not located within the calculated limits of the developed residential ("DR") threshold. 
3.  Wireless corridors ("WC"). Property within, and 150 feet either side of, the right-of-way of a freeway or a major or minor arterial roadway, as indicated on the city's thoroughfare plan. 
4.  Developed residential ("DR"). Property within the R-1, R-2's, R-3, R-4 R-5 and R-6, or any residentially zoned planned development districts, which: 
a.  Is a recorded subdivision that has had at least one building permit for a residential structure; or 
b.  Is within 600 feet of areas described in subsection 4.a. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 8 - Antenna facility impact levels. 
    For the purpose of determining appropriate locations for antenna facilities, the city recognizes differing levels of impact for antenna facilities depending upon physical location, aesthetics, and land use compatibility. These antenna facility impact levels are described as follows: 
1.  Monopole. A monopole tower requires a special exception. The antenna equipment may not extend more than five feet above the highest point on the monopole. 
2.  Level 4 stealth facility. The antenna on a level 4 stealth facility is located on an existing structure (other than a telecommunications tower) including, but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole. The antenna is neither screened nor hidden. For the purpose of this level, a pole or tower may be reconstructed to structurally hold the antenna but the height of the structure can not be increased. 

3.  Level 3 stealth facility. The antenna on a level 3 stealth facility is located on an existing structure (other than a telecommunications tower) including, but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole. The antenna shall be aesthetically painted, constructed, or applied with material so that it is incorporated into the pattern, style, and material of the structure to effectively render the antenna unnoticeable. A new structure may be constructed to hold or house the antenna or equipment; however, the structure must be consistent with the overall architectural features of the primary buildings. 
4.  Level 2 stealth facility. The antenna on a level 2 stealth facility is attached to the structure in such a manner that if it is seen it appears unrecognizable as an antenna, and the structure in which or on which the antenna is attached is an integral part of an overall development. 
5.  Level 1 stealth facility. The antenna on a level 1 stealth facility is attached to the structure in such a manner that the antenna is completely unseen and the structure in which or on which the antenna is attached is an integral part of an overall development. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 9 - Antenna facility siting matrix. 
    Antenna facilities shall be located in accordance with the following siting matrix. This matrix provides for areas where antenna facilities may be located as permitted uses, areas where they may be located with a special exception, and areas where they are prohibited. 

(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 10 - Special exception. 
    When a special exception is required by this article for the location of an antenna facility or an antenna, the applicant must submit an application in accordance with the procedure established in this article. Special exceptions to this article are granted by the board of adjustment in accordance with this article. 
1.  Application. In order to properly evaluate an application to locate an antenna facility or an antenna that requires a special exception, the applicant must provide: 
a)  A completed special exception application and appropriate application fee. 
b)  A narrative detailing the proposed antenna facility. The narrative must indicate the following: 
i)  Whether the proposed structure is a co-location, a new monopole tower or a new alternate mounting structure. 
ii)  The height of the proposed tower. 
iii)  Why the antenna facility is necessary at the proposed location. 
iv)  The name(s) of the telecommunications providers or other users of the antenna or tower and describe the use to be made by each user; 
v)  Whether the applicant has made an effort to co-locate the facilities proposed for this antenna facility on existing antenna facilities in the same general area. Identify the location of these existing sites, and describe in detail these efforts and explain in detail why these existing sites were not feasible. 
vi)  Attach all studies or tests performed which demonstrate why the existing sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage. 
vii)  Provide written documentation from existing sites' owners and/or operators which confirm the statements provided. 
viii)  Indicate whether the existing sites allow/promote co-location and, if not, describe why not. 
ix)  Whether co-location will be allowed to other telecommunications providers at the requested site. If they are not allowed, state every reason and the basis of each reason. 
c)  Provide a site plan of the proposed antenna facility at a scale of 1" = 30'. The site plan should be on a single 24" × 36" sheet and include: 
i)  A survey and legal description of the proposed antenna facility; 
ii)  A detail on how access to the site is to be achieved; 
iii)  A plan view layout of the proposed antenna facility clearly showing: 
iv)  The location of the facility, 
v)  All equipment and structures in the proposed antenna facility, 
vi)  The required off-street parking space, 
vii)  Distances to property lines, 
viii)  Required setbacks, 
ix)  Adjacent land uses and zoning designations, 
x)  Existing structures on the site, 
xi)  Required landscaping or screening of the base of the tower, 
xii)  All recorded and proposed easements, and 
xiii)  Natural features, such as water courses and trees. 
d)  Elevation drawings showing: 
i)  The design and height of the proposed antenna facility, 
ii)  Detailed drawings of all structures and equipment, 
iii)  Screening requirements, 
iv)  All requirements specified in wireless antenna facility special exception request site plan check list. 
e)  If the requested location is in a residential district the applicant must provide evidence that they have made an effort to locate the facility in a nonresidential district. Identify the location of these nonresidential district sites, describe in detail these efforts, and explain in detail why these nonresidential sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests performed which demonstrate why the nonresidential sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage. 
f)  Provide a map showing the proposed provider's current coverage area for the city. The map must show the roadway network and be labeled. The applicant must also provide propagation analysis showing the areas the proposed provider's existing antenna currently covers, the areas the applicant's existing sites and the requested site would cover. The propagation analysis must be labeled and have a legend. 
g)  Describe the applicant's master antenna facilities plan for the city. Attach maps and other related documentation. Provide information indicating each phase of the plan. 
2.  Consideration of application. In considering whether to grant a special exception, the board of adjustment shall consider the following: 
a)  The appropriateness of the location and design of the antenna facility; 
b)  The potential for interference with the enjoyment of the use surrounding properties; 
c)  Aesthetics; impact, including but not limited to, the surrounding topography, surrounding tree coverage and foliage; proposed buffering; and the design of the antenna facility, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
d)  The proposed height of the antenna facility relative to surrounding structures; 
e)  The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for which special exception is sought; 
f)  The compliance with the city's regulations; and 
g)  The availability of suitable alternative sites. Suitable alternative site(s) shall mean a location or locations that would provide the same or better signal coverage than the proposed site for which a special exception is requested. The applicant shall provide documentation supporting his contention that alternative site(s) are not suitable and/or available. 
3.  Application fees. The application fee for consideration of a special exception under this article is $500.00 and the actual engineering expenses expended by the city in review of the applicable application. 
4.  Procedures for consideration of special exception. The procedures for consideration of an application for a special exception requested under this section of the ordinance shall be the same as those procedures for a request of a conditional use permit under article XXV of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 11 - Written report. 
    Denial of an application for a special exception under this article must be documented in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
Section 12 - Appeal. 
    An applicant may appeal the decision of the board of adjustment to the district court by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days following the date the administrator notifies the applicant of his decision. A decision not timely appealed in accordance with this article shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § III, 3-12-09) 
ARTICLE XXV. - ENFORCEMENT/ENFORCEMENT OFFICER/ENACTMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1401, § I, adopted March 12, 2009, renumbered the former articles XXIV and XXV as articles XXV and XXVI. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 

Section 1 - Enforcement. 
1.1  Enforcement officer. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the planning and zoning administration and the building inspector. 
1.2  Right to enter. 
The building inspector or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time prior to the completion of the buildings for the purpose of making inspections of building or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
1.3  Stop orders. 
Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, the building inspector may issue a stop order to the owner or contractor doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
Section 2 - Violation and penalties. 
2.1  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or regulations made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specification of plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall, for each and every violation and non-compliance respectively be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be fined a sum of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every day that such violation and/or noncompliance shall exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
2.2  But in case any person, firm, or corporation violates any of the provisions of this ordinance or fails to comply therewith, the City of Live Oak in addition to imposing the penalties above, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in court to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any land, and the definition of any violation of the terms of this ordinance as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the City of Live Oak from invoking the civil remedies given it by law in such cases, but same shall be cumulative of and in addition to the penalties prescribed for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 9-13-83; Ord. No. 748, 8-25-87; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 3-29-88) 
Section 3 - Provisions of ordinance declared to be minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the requirement that is more restrictive or that imposes higher standards as determined by the building inspector shall govern. 
Section 4 - Repeal of conflicting ordinances or orders. 
    Ordinance and all orders, ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect. 
Section 5 - Severability clause. 
    Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - EFFECTIVE DATE[7] 
    This ordinance shall become effective from and after the date of its approval and adoption as provided by law. 
    PASSED and APPROVED this the 9th day of June, 1981, with an effective date of June 18, 1981. 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- See note at article XXV. 

APPENDIX A - [SCHEDULE OF USES] 
SCHEDULE OF USES Pre-Development District Single Family Residential District Garden Home Residential District Two Family Residential District Town House Residential District Apartment/Multi-Family Residential District Mobile Home Residential District Office and Professional District Neighborhood Service District General Business District Light Industrial District Medium Industrial District SYMBOL PD R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6 B-1 B-2 B-3 I-1 I-2 X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval AGRICULTURE USES Agricultural field crops X X X X X X X Agricultural animal husbandry X X X X X X X Farm, ranch or orchard X X X X X X X New and unscheduled agricultural uses as provided under Sec. 2.1. X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval PRIMARY RESIDENTIAL USES One family dwelling detached X X X X X X S S S One family dwelling attached (town house) X S S S S S Two family dwelling X X S S S Multi family dwelling (apartments) X S S S Garden home S X S S S S S S Mobile home X Planned residential unit development See Section 2.1 X X X Boarding or rooming house X X X Motel or hotel, apartment hotel S S X New and unscheduled residential uses as provided under Sec. 2.1 X X X X X X X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval ACCESSORY AND INCIDENTAL USES Accessory building residential X X X X X X X X X X X S Farm accessory building X S S S X S Home occupation X X X X X X X X X X Off-street parking incidental to main use X X X X X X X X X X X S Servant or caretakers quarters X X X X X X X X X X Social and recreational building S S S S X X X X X X S Swimming pool (private) X X X X X X X X X X X S Temporary field or construction office X X X X X X X X X X X S New and unscheduled accessory and incidental uses-Sec. 2.1. X X X X X X X X X X X S X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval INSTITUTIONAL AND SOCIAL SERVICE USES Airport, heliport or landing field S S X S Church and rectory X X X X X X X X X X X X Civic center X X X X Convent/monastary S S S S S X X X Day nursery/kindergarten S S S S S X S X X X Fraternity or sorority lodge or civic club (no liquor) X X X X X Home for alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients S S S Hospital (general acute care) S X X X Hospital (chronic care) S X X X Institutions of religious or philanthropic nature S X X X Library, art gallery, museum X X X X X X S Public administration offices X X X X S Residence home for aged S S X X X Schools, private, college, university S S S S S X X X X X S Schools, public or parochial S S S S S X X X X X S New and unscheduled institutional and special service use Sec. 2.1 S S S S S X X X X-Normal 
S-Special use permit 
CC-City Council Approval UTILITIES AND RELATED SERVICE USES Electrical substation S S S S S S S S S X S Electric power generating plant X S Fire station S S S S S S X X X X S Gas transmission and metering station S S S S S S S S X X X S Local utility distribution lines X X X X X X X X X X X S Radio, television or micro wave towers S S S S S S S S S X X S Radio television transmitting station commercial S X X S Sewerage pumping station S S S S S S S S S X X S Sewerage treatment plant CC CC Railroad tracks and right-of-way CC CC CC Telephone business office X X X X S Telephone exchange switching/relay equipment S S S S S S S X X X X S Utilities, public or private other than listed S S S S S S S S S X X S Utility shops or storage, yards and buildings X X S Water treatment plant S S S S S S S S S X S Water well, reservoir pumping station or storage S S S S S S S S S X X S New and unscheduled utility and related services, Sec. 2.1 S S S S S S S S S X X S X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL USES Amusement, commercial outdoor-indoor S X X X S Country club S S S S S S S S S X X S Drag strip S CC CC Fairgrounds S CC CC CC Park playground similar public site X X X X X X X X X X X S Private club S S S S X X X X S Public recreation center S S S S S S S X X X X S Private tennis/swim club S S S S X X X X X X X S New and unscheduled entertainment and recreational use Sec. 2.1 CC CC CC X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval AUTOMOBILE AND RELATED SERVICE USES Auto wash X X X S Auto sales and repair (in building) X X X S Auto sales, new and used car lot (open) X X X S Auto painting and body shop X X S Convenience self-service stations X X X X Primary petroleum product X X S Secondary petroleum product X X X S Commercial parking lot or structure, auto X X X X S Sale, new auto parts in building X X S Seat cover or muffler installation shop X X S Tire retreading and capping X S Wrecking or salvage yard for autos or parts S Recreation vehicle/boat/auto storage rental facility X X New and unscheduled automobile related service uses Sec. 2.1 X S X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval RETAIL AND BUSINESS SERVICES Antique shop X X X X S Art supply store X X X X S Animal clinic or pet hospital (no outside pens) X X X S Bank or savings and loan office X X X X S Book and stationery store X X X X S Barber and beauty shop X X X X S Bakery/confectionery shop (retail sales) X X X S Cafeteria/restaurant (without alcoholic beverages) X X X S Restaurant (with alcoholic beverages) S X X S Camera shop X X X S Cleaning shop/laundry X X X S Cleaning/laundry pick-up station X X X S Cleaning/laundry self service shop X X X S Clinic, medical/dental X X X X S Drug store, pharmacy X X X X S Department store discount house X X S Grocery store X X X S Furniture/appliance store X X S Florist shop X X X X S Garden shop and plant sales X X X S Handcraft and art object sales X X X X S Hardware store X X X S Hobby shop X X X s Key shop X X X S Laboratory, medical or dental X X S Medical appliances fitting and sales X X S Mortuary X X S Office/professional general business X X X X S Optical shop X X X X S Package store S X X S Pawn shop X X S Pet shop-small animal, birds/fish S X X X S Personal custom services such as tailor, milliner, related X X X S Retail shops, apparel accessories, gifts and similar items X X X S Shoe repair X X X S Signs, business S S S S S Signs, billboard advertising X X Signs, pole type not exceeding 64 square feet on exposed face X X X S Signs, church and school X X X X X X X X X X S Signs, real estate Sec. 6, Art. XVII X X X X X X X X X X X S Studio, photographer, artist, music, drama dance X X X S Studio, health, reducing or similar service X X X S Studio, decorator and display of art objects S X X X S Tavern X X S Travel bureau or consultant X X X X X Veterinarian, office (no outside kennels) X X X S Variety store X X S Duplicating-copy service X X Testing laboratory S S S S S S S S S S S S Research laboratory S S S S S S S S S S S S New and unscheduled retail and business services Section 2.1 S S S X X S X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval COMMERCIAL AND RELATED SERVICE USES Bakery, wholesale X X S Building material sales X X S Cabinet or upholstery shop X X S Clothing manufacturing similar light manufacturing process X S Cleaning, dyeing/laundry plant commercial X S Contractors storage/equipment yard X S Dance hall/night club X X S Drive-in theater X X S Heavy machinery sale storage repair X S Laboratory, manufacturing X S Laboratory, scientific or research S S Maintenance and repair service X X S Milk depot, dairy/ice cream plant X S Open storage and sale of furniture, appliance and machinery X S Paint shop X X S Plumbing shop X X S Railroad/bus passenger station X X X S Storage warehouse (mini) X X X X Storage warehouse (commercial) X S Trade/commercial schools X X S Trailer and mobile home sales or rental only X X S Transfer storage and baggage terminal X S Veterinarian hospital/kennel (outside pens) X S Welding or machine shops X S Wholesale office storage sales X X S Recycling collection facility S S Commercial radiology clinic X X X X Medical appliances fitting and sales X X X X Medical laboratory X X X Dental laboratory X X X New and unscheduled commercial and related services Section 2.1 S X S X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval INDUSTRIAL AND RELATED USES Light manufacturing process X X Any manufacturing process S S Manufacturing, industrial storage or assembling process S S Job printing, lithographer, printing or blueprint plant X X Individualized manufacturing of medical equipment X X X New and unscheduled uses S S X-Normal 
S-Specific use permit 
CC-City Council Approval USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL USE PERMIT ONLY Asphalt or concrete batching plants S S Storage of shell, soil sand and gravel S S Commercial extraction of sand, soil, gravel S S Wrecking salvage yard S S  
(Ord. No. 477, § 10, XXIII, 2-23-82; Ord. No. 581, § 9, 5-8-84; Ord. No. 599, § 3, 10-5-84; Ord. No. 618, § 1, 3-12-85 Ord. No. 759, § 1, 12-8-87; Ord. No. 771, § 1, 3-8-88; Ord. No. 1577 , § 1, 3-26-19) 
APPENDIX B-1 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words as used herein are defined as follows. Words in the present tense include the future; singular words include the plural; and the word shall is mandatory. 
    Abutting property: Property abutting upon a street shall be understood as also abutting property on the other side of the street. 
    Accessory building: In a residential zoned district, a subordinate building, attached to or detached from the main building, without separate utilities, not used for commercial purposes and not rented or containing servants quarters, a storage room for domestic storage only or space for one or more automobiles. In other districts, a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to and used only in conjunction with the main building. 
    Agent: Person authorized by another to act for him, one entrusted with another's business. 
    Alley: A minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Apartment house: A multi-family dwelling containing three or more dwelling units within a single structure where the families live independently as separate housekeeping units which contain separate facilities for food preparation. 
    Automobile service station: Any premises used primarily for sales of petroleum products at retail direct to the customer, including accessories and service for vehicles. 
    Automobile and motor vehicle sales area: An open area, other than a street or required automobile parking space used for the display or sale of new or used automobiles or trailers, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises. 
    Babysitting: The caring for nine (9) or less non-resident children on an irregular basis. 
    Billboard: Any sign of advertisement used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything known, the origin or point of sale of which is remote from said display. 
    Block: An area within the city enclosed by streets or alleys and occupied by or intended for buildings. 
    Boarding (lodging) house: A building other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for three or more persons are provided for compensation. 
    Breezeway: A covered passage one story in height connecting two buildings. 
    Building: Any structure erected for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind. 
    Building inspector: The legally designated inspection authority of the city, or the authorized representative. 
    Building line: A building limit fixed at a specific distance from the front or side boundaries of a lot beyond which a structure cannot lawfully extend. 
    Building setback line: The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street line. 
    Building, main: A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
    Buffer zone: That portion of open space that separates residential districts from industrial and commercial districts. 
    Certificate of occupancy: A certificate issued by the building inspector for the use of a building, structure, and/or land complying with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
    City: City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Clinic: An establishment of offices in which a group of physicians, dentists, or other practitioners of the healing arts, and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of diagnosing and treating ill or injured persons. A clinic may include a medical or dental laboratory, but may not include facilities for providing room or board for patients, nor may a clinic include offices or facilities for veterinarians. 
    City official: The legally designated head of a city department or the authorized representative when acting in an official capacity. 
    Commercial amusement: Any enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity, where tickets are sold or fees collected at the gates of the activity. Commercial amusements include zoos, concerts, carnivals, expositions, miniature golf courses, driving ranges, arcades, fairs, exhibitions, athletic contests, rodeos, tent shows, ferris wheels, children's rides, roller coasters, skating rinks, ice rinks, traveling shows, bowling alleys, pool parlors, and similar enterprises. 
    Commercial radiology clinic: A facility devoted to conducting radiology processes including but not limited to nuclear medicine, ultrasound, CAT scanning, and routine radiography. 
    Commission: The planning and zoning commission of the City of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Common access route: A private way which affords the principal means of access to individual home lots or auxiliary buildings. 
    Common property: A parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the owners and occupants of the individual building sites in a Planned Unit. 
    Comprehensive master plan: A legal document often in the form of a map and accompanying text adopted by the local legislative body. The plan is a compendium of its general policies regarding the long-term development of its jurisdiction. It is also called a "general plan" or "city plan." 
    Convenience self-service station: An establishment for the retail sales of automotive petroleum products, but not including any type of automotive service and repair or body work. 
    Council: The City Council of Live Oak, Texas. 
    Court: An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space. 
    Crosswalk way: A public right-of-way, six (6) feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
    Cul-de-sac: A street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn-around. 
    Day nursery: A commercial enterprise where ten (10) or more children are left for care between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
    Dead-end street: A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
    District: A section of the City of Live Oak, for which regulations governing the zoning area, height, and use of buildings are uniform. 
    Drive-way: A minor entranceway off the common access route within the city, into an off-street parking area. 
    Duplicating-copy service: A retail facility for the reproduction of paper material by office type photocopiers, offset presses, and duplicators and shall not include the bulk printing of newspapers, magazines, books, etc. 
    Easement: An interest in land granted to the city by the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over and under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
    Engineer: A person duly authorized and properly registered under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
    Family: A group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption residing together; this is the basic occupancy intended for "single-family residence" district. 
    Farm: An area of ten (10) acres or more, which is used for the usual farm products such as vegetable, fruits, trees, and grain and their storage on the area as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating and storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of such accessory use shall be secondary to that the normal activities. 
    Fence: A visual barrier constructed to a height of not more than eight (8) feet. A chain link fence is not considered a visual barrier. 
    Fraternal club or lodge: A membership organization, excepting one whose chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business and excluding on-premises sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages, in the "B-1" through the "B-2" districts. Such use shall be nonprofit and with no retail sales of any nature being permitted in the "B-1" district. 
    Frontage: All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between and [an] intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Front yard: An open unoccupied space on a lot facing a street and extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof other than the projection of the usual steps or eave overhang. 
    Garage, commercial: A commercial garage is a premise and structure used for housing more than five (5) motor vehicles or where any vehicles are repaired for operation or kept for remuneration, hire, or sale. 
    Garage, private: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than four motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is necessary. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two-ton capacity. 
    Garage, public: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
    Garden home: Is an individually owned single-family home, separated from its neighbor by a minimum of ten (10) feet on a lot having a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
    Height, building: The vertical dimension measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building, to the highest point of ceiling of the top story in the case of a flat roof; to the deckline of a mansard roof; and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
    Home occupations: Any occupation that is customarily performed at home that does not involve a structural change in the building, that does not require the employment of help, the installation of equipment, and shall not include beauty culture schools, beauty parlors, barber shops, electrician shops, radio shops, plumber's shops, tinner shops, auto repair and/or painting, furniture repair, or other similar uses. 
    Hospitals: An institution or place where sick or injured in-patients are given medical or surgical care either at public (charity) or private expense. 
    Hotel/motel: A building or arrangement of buildings designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without means, in which the rooms are usually occupied singly for hire, in which there are no provisions for cooking in individual rooms or apartment, and in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping rooms. 
    Individualized manufacturing of medical equipment: A facility where the actual manufacturing of medical equipment is performed by bending, forming, sewing, or molding for the fitting of an individual's needs. 
    Job printing, lithographer, printing or blueprint plant: A facility for the commercial reproduction of written material or drawings on a bulk basis using lithography, offset printing, blueprinting, and similar methods. 
    Kennel: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, more than the age of six (6) months, are kept. 
    Kindergarten: Any school, private or parochial, operating for profit or not, attended by four (4) or more children at any one time during part of a twenty-four (24) hour day, which provides a program of instruction for children below the first grade level in which constructive endeavors, object lessons and helpful games are prominent features of the curriculum. 
    Laboratory: A facility devoted to the testing and/or analysis of any human or animal product. No manufacturing is conducted on the premises except for experimental or testing purposes. No testing or processing of any product that would be harmful to individuals or the environment shall be permitted. 
    Loading space: A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of 12 by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
    Lot: As used herein, a "lot" is the physical and undivided tract or parcel of land as shown on the duly recorded plat. 
    Lot area: The area of a lot between lot lines, including any portion of an easement which may exist within such lot lines. 
    Lot corner: A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents of the curve at the points of the intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, double frontage: A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior: A building lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Bexar County; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Bexar County. 
    Medical appliances fitting and sales: A retail or professional establishment where medical equipment or appliances are prescribed, rented, or sold. These items may include braces, wheelchairs, crutches, beds, and hearing aids, etc. 
    Mini storage: One story units with no more than 15 storage units per building. To be used only for storage of private property and not for warehousing purposes. 
    Mobile home: A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chassis over Texas Roads and Highways under special permit, connected to utilities, and designed without a permanent foundation, for year-round living. It may consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capability, or of two or more units separately towable but designed to joined into one integral unit. Travel trailers and campers shall be placed under this same section. 
    Mobile home park: A unified development of mobile home and travel trailer spaces arranged on a tract of land under single entity ownership, meeting all requirements of this ordinance. 
    Nonconforming use: The use of land or a building, or a portion thereof, which use does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated and which use was in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
    Occupancy: The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
    Open space: Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves or porches. 
    Parking space: A marked area measuring nine feet by eighteen feet (9' × 18') with sufficient area for backing or maneuvering to permit free ingress and egress. 
    Permit: An official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction authorizing performance of a specified activity. 
    Person: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation. 
    Planned unit: A land area which has individual building sites and common property such as a park, and is designed to be capable of satisfactory use and operation as a separate entity without necessarily having the participation of other building sites or other common property. The ownership of the common property may be either public or private. 
    Planned residential unit development: A single planned unit as initially designed; or such a unit as expanded by annexation of additional land area; or a group of continuous planned units, as separate entities or merged into a single consolidated entity. 
    Plot plan: A plan showing the use of the land, to include locations of buildings, drives, sidewalks, parking areas, drainage facilities and other structures to be constructed. 
    Plant nursery: A place where trees, shrubs, or flowering plants are raised from seed or otherwise in order to be transplanted or propagated. 
    Plat: A complete and exact plan for the subdivision of a tract of land into lots for building purposes, which, if approved, may be submitted to the county clerk for recording. 
    Public parking lot: Any premises used for the purpose of parking motor vehicles for remuneration. No repairs or sales will be permitted on the premises. 
    Recreational vehicle/boat/auto storage rental facility: A facility designed primarily for storage, on which recreational vehicles, pickup coaches, self-propelled motorized vehicles, ten trailers, travel trailers, boats, and automobiles are parked or situated and used for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for such vehicles. 
    Residence, one family: A detached building having accommodation for and occupied by one family and not more than two (2) boarders or lodgers. 
    Residence, two family: A dwelling or group of dwellings on one plat containing separate living units for two or more families, but which may have joint services or facilities. 
    Right-of-way: The right given to the general public or groups of the general public to utilize in the future, property or rights of another without compensation of any kind at any time. Rights-of-way are created by private instruments, plat or law. Utilization when such future time arrives of such right-of-way will be by ordinance, resolution, statute, conveyance of any easement or through any act of the planning commission, declaring that such right-of-way shall thereafter be utilized by the general public or groups of the general public. 
    Setback line: A line which marks the setback distance from the property line, and establishes the minimum required front, side and rear yard space of a building plat. 
    Shopping center: An integrated grouping of commercial activity, primarily of a retail and personal service nature, in a single building complex having the individual establishments joined by a common covered pedestrian mall. 
    Sign: Any device or surface on which figures, letters, illustrations, photographs, designs, logos, or outlines and used for such purposes as identification of individuals, partnerships or organizations; advising of products and/or location which is visible to the public. This includes lights, banners and similar devices to attract attention but excludes signs affixed to motor vehicles. 
    Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half: A partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four (4) feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker and his family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story. 
    Story, standard: One having eleven (11) feet, six (6) inches between floors. 
    Street: Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, and more than twenty (20) feet in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use. A city feeder street is one which is at least 50 feet wide. A collector street is one that is at least 60 feet wide. 
    Street line: A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or built, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Structure, principal: The principal structure which fulfills the purpose for which the building plot is intended. 
    Structure alterations: Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beams or girders. 
    Town house: A row of single-family dwelling units which are attached by one or more common walls. 
    Use: The purpose of activity for which the land or building thereby is designed arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this ordinance. 
    Variance: A legal deviation of a district zoning regulation whose strict enforcement will result in undue hardship. Pecuniary hardship to the owner, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
    Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street or place line and the main building or any projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered a parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
    Yard, rear: A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies, or unenclosed porches. 
    Yard, side: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main buildings or any projections thereto. 
    Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 10, 5-8-84; Ord. No. 599, § 3, 10-5-84; Ord. No. 618, § 2, 2-26-85; Ord. No. 771, § 2, 3-8-88) 
Appendix B - SIGN REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the city's sign regulations, originally adopted as § 1 of Ord. No. 777, adopted June 14, 1988. Formerly set out as App. A, Art. XVII, these provisions were renumbered as Appendix B by Ord. No. 1445, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 2010. The regulations are set out as enacted, except that material inserted in brackets has been added to correct obvious errors or to clarify the meaning where the same was ambiguous. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Amendatory ordinances are cited in parenthetical history notes at the end of affected provisions. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; electrical regulations, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; aboveground fires in multifamily housing units, § 8-5; flood damage prevention and protection, Ch. 9; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; planning, Ch. 17; plumbing, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 21; zoning regulations, App. A. 

Section 1 - Purpose. 
    The regulations enacted in this ordinance are to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city; and also provide in each area standards which promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony and pride, thereby strengthening the economic stability in Live Oak business, residential and cultural areas. 
(Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Section 2 - Objectives. 
    [The objectives of this article are] to pursue application of specific standards as follows: 
2.1  To insure safe sign construction. 
2.2  To prevent the construction of signs that would restrict the sight distance or confuse vehicle operators and or pedestrians to proceed in a safe manner. 
2.3  To prevent the obstruction of streets, alleys and other public places by signs. 
2.4  To identify individual business, residence and public use without creating confusion, unsightliness, or visual obscurity of adjacent buildings or businesses. 
2.5  To assure that all signs in terms of size, scale, height and location are properly related to the overall adjacent land use characteristics and development lot size. 
2.6  To assure all signs, the supports and bases are, in terms of color, form, material and design, compatible with other structural forms on development lots and adjacent areas. 
2.7  To assure, by permit and inspection, the construction of safe signs thereby preventing obstruction of streets, alleys or public places and not unduly restricting the sight or safety of vehicle operators and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Section 3 - General provisions. 
3.1  A sign permit shall be obtained prior to placement or erection of any sign not exempted herein. 
3.2  All signs shall pertain to the identification of the primary uses and/or primary services provided or primary products sold on the premises, except for billboards, auxiliary, governmental or community service signs as provided herein. 
3.3  All signs, where applicable, shall meet the standards of the city building code. 
3.4  Except as herein provided, no person or business firm, acting either as principal or agent, shall alter the copy face or lettering of any sign, (except for signs with temporary messages made from interchangeable characters attached to tracks or grooves on the sign board) either by changing the message or by renovating an existing message or shall erect any sign or sign structure until a sign permit for such work has been issued by the appropriate staff official. 
3.5  No sign, sign structure, or sign support shall project over any property line or into a public right-of-way except that a sign placed flat against the wall of a building which is on the property line may project eighteen (18) inches beyond the property line over public property. 
3.6  Trees, rocks, bridges, fences, towers, utility poles and dilapidated buildings shall not be used as sign supports. 
3.7  Business locations shall be identified by a street number attached to the building and must be clearly visible from the street. The characters will be a minimum of six (6) inches. Shopping malls and centers having a common address are exempt; however, the main sign for the mall or center must display the full street address. 
3.8  All residences shall be identified by a street number attached to the building and clearly visible from the street. Characters shall be a minimum of three (3) inches. Residences may also display a yard sign that includes address information not more than three and one-half (3.5) feet tall or three and one-half (3.5) feet in width. These yard signs shall only be made of masonry, stone, tile and ornamental metals. 
3.9  In the event that more than one (1) sign-related definition applies to an existing or proposed sign, resulting in conflicting regulations thereon, the most restrictive regulation shall apply. 
3.10  Clear sight triangle: Parking lot driveway. A clear sight triangle shall be formed on both sides of a driveway into a parking lot. Size shall be determined by measuring ten (10) feet along the property line and ten (10) feet along the driveway. No sign more than two (2) feet in height shall be erected or placed in this triangle. 
3.11  Clear sign triangle: Street corner. A clear sight triangle shall be formed by measuring twenty (20) feet along the property line in both directions from the corner of the lot adjacent to the intersecting streets. No sign or landscaping more than two (2) feet in height shall be erected or placed in this triangle. A single support with no sign structure or copy between a point thirty (30) inches and eighty-four (84) inches above the street grade is not considered a violation of clear sight triangle. 
Note: See Appendix "A" [of this appendix] for schematic of clear sight triangles. 
3.12  For the purpose of this ordinance and regulations within it, including digital displays and message boards, "sign" does not include signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function or required by law, ordinance or governmental regulation, including schools, community service organizations, educational facilities and libraries. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 1471, § 1, 7-31-12; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 8-27-13) 
Section 4 - Types of signs. 
4.1  Billboard. 
Any sign of advertisement used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything known, the origin or point of sale of which is remote from said display. Sign shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in face area. Billboards are permitted only in industrial districts I-1, I-2. 
4.2  Development sign. 
"Ground signs" announcing or describing a legally approved subdivision or land development may be temporarily erected until all homes in the subdivision are sold. Such signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in face area and may be indirectly lighted. Flashing or moving parts are not permitted. 
4.3  Political signs. 
a.  In this section, "private real property" does not include real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows a municipality to use the property for a public purpose. 
b.  A political sign placed on private real property may not: 
(1)  have effective area greater than 36 feet; 
(2)  be greater than eight feet high; 
(3)  be illuminated; or 
(4)  have any moving elements. 
c.  Political signs. In this section, "political sign" does not include a sign, including a billboard, that contains primarily a political message on a temporary basis and that is generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not primarily political. 
(Ord. No. 1445, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-10) 
4.4  Garage sales signs. 
Garage sale type signs in residential areas shall not exceed four (4) square feet in face area. They may not be illuminated, may not be erected earlier than two (2) days preceding the sale and shall be removed within two (2) days following the sale. Signs will show the date(s) of the sale. Signs shall not be posted on utility poles. 
4.5  For sale, for lease/rent signs. 
a.  In nonresidential areas, signs not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in face area advertising the sale or rental of buildings or the proposed use of property on which they are placed. Signs must be removed within fourteen (14) days following the date of sale or rental of the property. 
b.  In residential areas, one (1) unlighted sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in face area advertising the sale or rental of the building or premises on which the sign is located. Signs must be removed within fourteen (14) days following the sale of the property or rental or vacant space concerned. 
4.6  Canopy signs. 
Canopy signs shall be counted as part of and limited to the total square footage allowable for wall signs. 
4.7  Gasoline pump islands. 
May exhibit one (1) logo sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in gross face area and one (1) price sign per gasoline pump island not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in gross face area. 
4.8  Sloping roof signs. 
Sloping roof signs shall not project horizontally or vertically beyond the roof line. Not more than ten (10) percent of any sloping roof area shall be devoted to these signs. 
4.9  Freestanding signs. 
One (1) freestanding sign for each freestanding building, not to exceed one (1) freestanding sign per development lot. 
Area: The area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet of gross face area. All sixty-four (64) square feet may be composed of an Electronic Video Screen and an Electronic Message Center. 
Height: The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
Setback: The setback of a freestanding sign shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from lot lines. 
Corner lots: On corner lots the major or primary street shall be construed to be the development lot frontage, and no more than one (1) sign shall be permitted. On a development lot located at the intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares or two (2) expressways or a major thoroughfare and an expressway, a freestanding sign shall be permitted on each such thoroughfare or expressway. 
4.10  Temporary business promotional signs. 
Any temporary business promotional signs shall only be placed in or on windows and shall have a combined area not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the area of all the windows on the same wall. Said sign area shall not be counted against total permitted sign area. 
4.11  Community service signs. 
Any community service signs for seasonal celebration shall have no size limitation if placed in or on windows. Any community service signs, not of a seasonal celebration nature, shall be placed in or on windows and shall have a combined area not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the area of all the windows on the same wall. Such sign area shall not be counted against permitted wall sign area. 
4.12  Portable or wheeled signs. 
May be authorized for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for business openings. Each business may display a portable or wheeled sign for a period not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days in any calendar year. The thirty (30) calendar days may be broken into any combination of increments. Flashing parts, moving parts, or any appurtenance causing a visual distraction to motorists or pedestrians is prohibited. A permit must be obtained from the appropriate staff official. 
Three (3) years after the effective date of Ordinance No. 860, all existing portable or wheeled signs must be in compliance with the provisions contained herein. 
4.13  Miscellaneous signs. 
No trespassing or posted property type signs in residential zones shall not exceed two (2) square feet in face area. In nonresidential zones, these types signs may not exceed four (4) square feet. Signs placed with the intent of warning or advising the public of possible danger that may be encountered on private property shall not exceed two (2) square feet in face area. In nonresidential areas, this type sign may not exceed four (4) square feet in face area. An opening soon type sign may be placed in nonresidential areas provided it is advertising the property it is placed on and is not more than sixty-four (64) square feet in face area. 
[4.14  Electronic video screen. ] 
Electronic video screen means a sign or portion of a sign that displays an electronic video which may or may not include text including television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens, tri-vision technology, video boards and holographic displays. 
[4.15  Electronic message center. ] 
Electronic message center means a sign or portion of a sign that uses LED technology to form a sign message or messages in text form, with or without fixed images, wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 860, § 1, 3-27-90; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 8-27-13) 
Section 5 - Special district sign requirements. 
5.1  Residential districts. 
A person having a legal home occupation may display a nameplate on the face of the building or porch. The nameplate may contain only the name and occupation. It shall be attached directly to, and parallel to, the face of the building or porch. It shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area, shall not be illuminated in any way, and shall project not more than six (6) inches beyond the building or porch. No permit is required. 
No electronic video screen or electronic message center sign will be allowed in a Residential District. 
5.2  Mobile home park district. 
A ground sign or wall sign not more than one hundred (100) square feet in total area may be erected on property of the mobile home park, and may be indirectly lighted. 
5.3  Office and professional districts, neighborhood service districts, general business districts, light industrial districts, medium industrial districts. 
Signs, when attached to buildings, shall advertise only services or products which are offered within the building to which the sign is attached. No wall sign shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in gross face area. Wall signs shall project no more than two (2) feet perpendicular from the wall and not more than three (3) feet vertically above the wall of the building. 
5.4  Garden offices. 
One (1) pylon sign per complex may be erected advertising the total number of office tenants. If the complex is located on a corner lot, the corner lot provision contained in Section 4.9 shall apply. The face area of the sign may not be larger than ten (10) feet by thirty (30) feet, mounted six (6) feet above the ground with a maximum height of thirty-six (36) feet. The name of the complex and the street address with letters no less than six (6) inches high will appear at the top of the copy. There may be one (1) sign no larger than fifteen (15) square feet in face area identifying the tenant and placed flush on the wall near the office entrance. As an alternate one (1) hanging sign or one (1) ground sign containing no more than six (6) square feet in face area may be erected. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 860, § 2, 3-27-90; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 8-27-13) 
Section 6 - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited in all districts: 
6.1  Any signs and supports, other than those signs and supports required by governmental authority, or for which a street use license has been issued, which are located on the public right-of-way, including on public streets, alleys and parkways. This section shall not apply to signs on commercial vehicles or commercial trailers lawfully operated or parked in such areas, except that this exception shall not otherwise be used to legitimate the use of advertising vehicles and trailers prohibited herein. 
6.2  Signs with flashing, blinking or traveling lights. For regulations for electronic video screens and electronic message centers see Section 4, Definitions of this Article. 
6.3  Banners, pennants, search lights, business flags, banner flags, twirling signs, sandwich or "A" frame signs, sidewalk or curb signs, balloons or other inflatable objects. These types of signs may be authorized for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for business openings and thirty (30) days per calendar year for special occasions. Extensions will only be permitted to new businesses awaiting permanent sign fixture with proof of order. A permit must be obtained from the appropriate city official and follow the city's permitting process. 
6.4  Display of merchandise or examples of work is classified as a sign, and is not permitted in any residential district. 
6.5  Any signs which resemble an official traffic sign or signal or which bear the words of traffic control. 
6.6  Signs which, by reasons of their size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination, may be confused with or construed as a traffic control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle, or which hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal or device. 
6.7  Any sign which emits sound, odor or visible matter which serves as a distraction to persons within the public right-of-way. 
6.8  No billboards or signs shall be erected advertising products or services not available on the site except as noted in Section 4, paragraph 4.1. 
6.9  Signs may not be constructed of scrap materials, paper, or other such fragile materials which are non-weather-resistant. 
6.10  The use of fluorescent paint, metallic paint, or similar nonconventional paint emitting luminosity upon exposure to external radiation or bombardment by a stream of particles is expressly prohibited. 
6.11  Any sign in apparent compliance with this ordinance, but which staff deems is by design, construction or erection hazardous to persons, or not in good taste, will require approval of council. 
6.12  No electronic video screens and electronic message centers are permitted in a Residential District. 
6.13  Window border lights or other lighting directed to exterior of the building which outline doors, windows, attached columns or other parts of the building. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 1517, § 1 , 5-26-15) 
Section 7 - Parking of advertising vehicles. 
7.1  No person shall park an advertising vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way, on public property, or on private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, except in accordance with Section 4, paragraph 4.12. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Section 8 - Existing signs. 
8.1  Where existing signs are in newly annexed areas a permit shall be obtained. 
8.2  Where existing billboard signs do not comply with this ordinance with respect to location, height, size, area of display, minimum ground clearance and are not a hazard or nuisance and are in good condition, an exception may be granted upon filing of an application for a permit, payment of the annual billboard permit fees, when required, and passage of an inspection by the city staff official. 
8.3  An existing nonconforming sign may not be repaired or rebuilt in the case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other causes. In case of partial destruction by fire or other causes, not exceeding fifty (50) percent of its fair market value, the appropriate staff official may issue a "no fee" permit for the necessary repairs to be made to the sign. If the necessary repairs are not completed within sixty (60) days of the receipt of written notification to the sign owner, by the appropriate staff official then the sign shall be removed either by the owner or by the city at the sign owner's expense. Under unusual circumstances and/or where the sign owner has shown "good faith" in attempting to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, an extension period of thirty (30) days may be granted to the sign owner to facilitate repairs. If the cost of rebuilding or repair exceeds fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the sign, then the sign shall be removed at the sign owner's expense. If the sign is not removed within thirty (30) days of written notification to the sign owner, then it shall be removed by the city or its designated agent(s) at the sign owner's expense. A sign so removed under the provisions of this section shall be kept in storage for a period of sixty (60) days and if it is not claimed within said period it may be disposed of in a lawful manner by the city. 
8.4  All abandoned signs and their supports shall be removed within sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment. All damaged signs shall be repaired or removed within sixty (60) days. The appropriate staff official shall have the authority to grant a time extension not exceeding an additional sixty (60) days for an abandoned, nondamaged sign. 
8.5  Should the responsible party or parties after due notice fail to correct a violation of this section, the appropriate staff official shall cause such signs and supports to be removed. This official, on behalf of the city, shall also take necessary action to file against the property a lien in the amount of the cost of such work if such costs are not paid by the property owner within fifteen (15) days after he is billed. 
(Ord. No. 777, §1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Section 9 - Permits. 
9.1  Restrictions. 
Except as otherwise provided for herein, no sign shall be erected, posted, painted or otherwise produced, changed, reconstructed in whole or in part, retained or maintained within the City of Live Oak without first obtaining a permit. The City is authorized to charge a fee for issuance of sign permits in accordance with the City's Fee Schedule adopted by the City Council and as amended from time to time as necessary. 
9.2  Requirements. 
A sign requiring a permit shall be inspected annually by the appropriate staff official or his duly appointed agent, assistant or deputy to insure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and other relevant city ordinances. Additional inspections may be conducted at the discretion of the appropriate staff official during the term of the permit to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
9.3  Issuance. 
(1)  A permit shall not be issued when: 
a.  An existing billboard sign is in a deteriorated, unsafe or unsightly condition. 
b.  A sign is not in compliance with this ordinance. 
c.  A sign is proposed for construction in an area not zoned for such a sign. 
d.  Authorization of the property owner has not been obtained. 
(2)  A permit shall not be required for: 
a.  Displaying street numbers. 
b.  Political signs. 
c.  For sale, for lease/rent signs. 
d.  Simple routine maintenance, adjustments, replacement of light globes etc., on existing signs. 
e.  When a sign has been damaged by fire, windstorm or other causes, immediate work may be done to prevent damage to property or hazard to persons, and to this extent only. Notice will be given as soon as practical to the appropriate staff official. 
9.4  Fees. 
a.  Sign permit fees shall be charged in accordance with the Fee Schedule adopted by the City Council and as amended from time to time as necessary. 
b.  Billboard sign permits shall be issued on an annual basis and will expire one (1) year following their issuance. Applicants shall apply for an annual renewal permit. Such billboard sign permits and renewal permits shall be charged in accordance with the Fee Schedule adopted by the City Council and as amended from time to time as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Section 10 - Special sign use districts created. 
    The following special sign use districts (SSUDs) are created with specific requirements as specified: 
10.1  SSUD-1. 
The area extending two hundred (200) feet on both sides of the Toepperwein Road right-of-way from the intersection of Toepperwein Road and Miller Road west to the intersection of Toepperwein Road and Village Oak Drive is hereby designated as SSUD-1. 
The following criteria shall apply to all signs in SSUD-1: 
Area: No sign shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in gross face area. 
Height: No sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
Setback: All signs shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from lot lines. 
  All 64 square feet may be composed of an electronic video screen or an electronic message center. 
  Sign must be equipped with an auto-dimming feature, and should be dimmed thirty (30) minutes prior to dusk each night. 
  Moving animations with flashing or traveling images on the electronic video screen are prohibited. 
  Electronic video screens and electronic message centers shall be set so as to not cycle through messages more than once every ten (10) seconds. 
All other nonconflicting provisions of this ordinance shall apply to SSUD-1. 
10.2  SSUD-2. 
The area extending two hundred (200) feet on both sides of IH-35, Loop 1604, and Pat Booker Road within the city limits of the City of Live Oak is hereby designated as SSUD-2. 
The following criteria shall apply to all signs in SSUD-2: 
Area: No sign less than sixty (60) feet high shall exceed four hundred (400) square feet in gross face area. Signs above sixty (60) feet may be six hundred (600) square feet in gross face area. 
Height: No sign shall exceed ninety (90) feet in height. 
Setback: All signs shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from lot lines or as specified by the Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation if applicable. 
  Sign must be equipped with an auto-dimming feature, and should be dimmed thirty (30) minutes prior to dusk each night. 
  Moving animations with flashing traveling images on the electronic video screen are prohibited. 
  Electronic video screens and electronic message centers shall be set so as to not cycle through messages more than once every ten (10) seconds. 
  Sign must be equipped with an auto-dimming feature, and should be dimmed thirty (30) minutes prior to dusk each night. 
  Moving animations with flashing traveling images on the electronic video screen are prohibited. 
  Electronic video screen or an electronic message center shall be set so as to not cycle through messages more than once every ten (10) seconds. 
All other nonconflicting provisions of this ordinance shall apply to SSUD-2. 
10.3  SSUD-3. 
The area extending from the intersection of Hwy 218 (Pat Booker Rd.) and the Loop 1604 Eastbound access road, west 1,200 feet along both joining State roadways (Hwy 218 and Loop 1604) and connecting and encompassing the area between, within the City Limits of the City of Live Oak, shall be designated as SSUD-3. (See attached map for detail.) [Map is attached to Ord. No. 1489 and on file with the city.] 
The following criteria shall apply to all signs in SSUD-3: 
Area: No sign less than sixty (60) feet high shall exceed four hundred (400) square feet in gross face area. Signs above sixty (60) feet may be six hundred (600) square feet in gross face area. Combined free standing signage cannot exceed eight hundred (800) feet in gross square feet area. 
Height: No sign shall exceed ninety (90) feet in height. 
Setbacks: All signs shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from lot lines or as specified by the Texas Department of Transportation as applicable. 
Special Provisions: Development lots within SSUD-3 may have two (2) Freestanding Ground Signs as described by section 4.9, no more than one at the frontage of each State Highway. 
The Digital Display Regulations applicable in Section 15 shall apply to SSUD-3, as well as the following regulations: 
  Moving animations with flashing traveling images on the electronic video screen are prohibited. 
  Electronic video screens and electronic message centers shall be set so as to not cycle through messages more than once every ten (10) seconds. 
  Sign must be equipped with an auto-dimming feature, and should be dimmed thirty (30) minutes prior to dusk each night. 
All other non-conflicting provisions of this ordinance shall apply to SSUD-3. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 1489, § 1, 12-10-13) 
Section 11 - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article XVII shall be charged with a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be assessed a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Section 12 - Variance and appeal procedure. 
a.  A request for a variance of requirements as set forth in this ordinance may be made to the planning and zoning commission which in turn shall make a recommendation to the city council. Council, at the next regular meeting, may grant a variance based upon the merits of each case as then presented by the petitioner and the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. 
b.  Appeal of a decision by city staff may be made to the city council by notification, within ten (10) days to the city secretary. Hearing will be placed on council agenda as soon as practical. Staff shall notify the petitioner of appeal rights. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Section 13 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Section 14 - Definitions. 
    [For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:] 
    Animation: Shall mean the use of movement or some element thereof to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
    Area of sign: Shall be the total face area which includes the message and the border of the sign. It does not include the supporting super-structure. See Appendix "B" [to this article] for determining the face area of an irregular shape or other than a rectangle. 
    Development lot: Developed lot which is ground leased or which has structures for business in place for use as an established business. 
    Digital conversion: Shall mean the replacement of a previously installed static sign face with a digital display. 
    Digital display: Shall mean an Electronic Video Screen or Electronic Message Center. 
    Dwell time: Shall mean the interval of change between each individual message. Dwell time shall include the one (1) second or less required to change a message. 
    Electronic message center: Shall mean a sign or portion of a sign which uses LED technology to form a sign message or messages in text form, with or without fixed images, wherein the sequence of messages the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. 
    Electronic video screen: Shall mean a sign or portion of a sign which displays an electronic video which may or may not include text including television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens, tri-vision technology, video boards and holographic displays 
    Flashing: Shall mean a pattern of changing light illumination where the sign illumination alternates suddenly between fully illuminated and fully-non-illuminated, employs inverse illumination, or operates with transitory bursts for periods of less than one (1) second. This term shall include blinking, strobe, and twinkling illuminations. Animation, as defined, shall not fall under the definition of flashing. 
    Foot-candle: Shall mean a unit of light measurement equal to one (1) lumen per square foot. Foot-candle may be abbreviated "fc." 
    Full-motion video: Shall be defined as the use of live action footage shot with a video camera or similar device, and sized to fit and be displayed by an electronic message sign or similar device. 
    Ground sign: Any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. 
    Industrial districts: 
a.  Light industrial district (I-1). Light industrial processes which do not emit detectable dust, odor, smoke, gas, or fumes, beyond the boundary property lines of the lot or tract upon which the use is located or beyond the boundary line of the I-1 industrial district zoned lot. Emissions may not be above that which is generally perceptible in frequency or noise level in the adjacent areas. 
b.  Medium industrial district (I-2). Any manufacturing, industrial servicing or storage process not prohibited by law and upon approval by the city council in accordance with the specific use permit procedure, Article XIX. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 8-27-13) 
APPENDIX A TO APPENDIX B

APPENDIX B TO APPENDIX B

Section 15 - Digital display regulations. 
    This section applies to electronic messaging center and electronic video screens defined in Sections 4 and 14 above. 
15.1  Digital displays are restricted to the areas specified as special sign use districts in this ordinance. The minimum distance between digital displays for an individual business or property shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
15.2  Digital displays shall be illuminated at a level no greater than 0.3 foot-candles over ambient light levels for the location and time, and shall employ light cutoff devices such as, but not limited to, louvers to minimize light escaping above the horizontal plane. Foot-candle readings shall be measured at ground level at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the source. 
15.3  Digital displays in proximity to residential areas shall be illuminated at a level no greater than 0.2 foot-candles as measured from the nearest residential property line. 
15.4  All digital displays must be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell which automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions. 
15.5  All digital displays shall contain a default mechanism to turn off the sign in case of malfunction, or shall be manually turned off with twenty-four (24) hours of a reported malfunction. 
15.6  Digital displays, as defined, lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance are exempted from the provisions of this ordinance until such time the displays are replaced. 
15.7  Any sign related to a governmental function described in Section 3.12 is exempt from the times requirement of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 8-27-13) 
Section 16 - Master sign plan. 
16.l  Purpose. Master sign plans are authorized under this section to allow, within parcels as this section deems applicable, the following: 
(a)  the unified presentation of signage throughout applicable parcels; 
(b)  the authorization to deviate from the existing rules relating to number, height, dimensions, locations, or design characteristics of attached or freestanding signs within the master sign plan area when the design and quality components of the signs proposed in the master sign plan area exceed the existing rules in other aspects; 
(c)  the flexibility to provide for unique environments; and 
(d)  a pre-approval of designs and design elements process that will make subsequent applications for sign permits under an approved master sign plan more efficient. 
16.2  Applicability. An application for a Master Sign Plan Permit is authorized only for those developments located within the General Business District (B-3) that meet the criteria that follows: 
(a)  Single-use development: a single use development that exceeds 100,000 square feet of gross floor area; or 
(b)  Multi-tenant development: A multi-tenant development that exceeds 150,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
16.3  Definitions. In this Section, the terms below shall have the definitions that follow: 
(a)  Administrator shall mean the City Manager who shall be authorized to review and approve or reject master sign plan applications and have administrative authority over approved master sign plan applications. 
(b)  Applicable rules means the City's sign rules and regulations a sign would otherwise be subject to but for its inclusion in an approved master sign plan. 
(c)  Development means an existing or proposed single use development that exceeds 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or mulita-tenant development that exceeds 150,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(d)  No progress means that no sign authorized by an approved master sign plan has been installed. 
(e)  Section means this Section 16. 
(f)  Uniformed Codes means those national codes, including but not limited to the International Building Code and the International Electrical Code, that have been adopted by the City. 
16.4  Permit Application. 
(a)  The owner of a platted lot of real property on which a development is currently located or is proposed may submit a permit application, on such form as is provided by the Administrator and the permit application fee, as set out in the City's Fee Schedule adopted by City Council and amended from time to time as necessary. 
(b)  A master sign plan application shall include 3 copies of the site layout of the single-use or multi-tenant development and a narrative. 
(i)  Contents of site plan. The site plan shall depict the proposed signage for the entire development. For example, shopping center master sign plans shall include all tenants and out parcels; and office or industrial parks shall include all types of signs for way-finding and tenants or uses within the development. The site plan shall include the following: 
  Identification of development as single-use or multi-use with total square footage of gross floor area in the development; 
  A depiction of all proposed signs that will deviate from the underlying sign regulations; 
  Size, location, and number of all signs, including area, letter height, and height; 
  Materials, styles (letter colors, background colors, text, fonts, etc.), and colors for all signs subject to the master sign plan, including context of where signs are to be placed on any given façade; 
  Proposed illumination (external, internal, etc.), including illumination levels; 
  A design theme with illustrative examples of each sign type and the proposed general locations of each sign type; 
  Site plans for multi-tenant developments shall provide that wall signs displayed by two (2) or more businesses using common parking facilities shall be uniform in construction (i.e. channel letters, plaques) and lighting (i.e. direct, indirect); and 
  Landscaping and/or ornamental structures including fences, fountains, public art, ground cover, and other landscaping elements that are intended to complement those proposed signs that would deviate from the underlying sign regulations. 
(ii)  Narrative. The application shall include a narrative explaining the reasons for any deviation under existing rules from the number, height, dimensions, locations, or design characteristics of attached or freestanding signs that is sought under the under the master sign plan. The narrative should articulate design and quality components that exceeds the requirements of the existing rules, including but not limited to the use of brick or natural stone; uniformity of sign size, style, and color across the development; use of landscaping around a sign base; use of channel lettering; use of directional signs; greater spacing between signs along street frontages; signage in locations to assist with direction in a location not on the lot of the existing business; incorporation of retaining walls for signage; or use of entry signs. In additions the narrative should establish an integrated architectural vocabulary and cohesive theme for the applicable single-use or multitenant development. 
16.5  Permit Approval. 
(a)  Permit application shall be reviewed by the Administrator. Within ten (I 0) business days from the date of receipt of the application the Administrator shall verify the permit application is administratively complete and includes the application fee. An application that is not administratively complete shall not be processed. 
(b)  Upon determination that the application is administratively complete, the Administrator may issue a master sign plan permit if the Administrator finds the application demonstrates that the master sign plan will: 
(i)  result in a substantially improved, comprehensive, and unified use of signs within the applicable single or multi-tenant development, compared to what is allowed through strict compliance with the applicable rules and 
(ii)  provides for all signs to be architecturally integrated into or complimentary to the design of the buildings and character of the site, and use similar and coordinated design features, materials, and colors; and plans for multitenant developments provide for uniformity of signs. 
(c)  Permit expiration. An approved permit shall expire and shall expire two (2) years from the date of approval if no progress has been made towards completion of the placement of signs pursuant to the master sign plan. If a master sign plan permit expires it is of no further force and effect and a new application shall be required to implement a master sign plan for that development. 
16.6  Authorized deviation from applicable rules. The maximum deviation from the applicable rules that may be authorized under an approved master sign plan are as follows: 
(a)  Maximum sign height; 
(b)  Number of signs; 
(c)  Location of signs; 
(d)  Inclusion of multiple multi-tenant signs; wall signs; pylon signs; and monument signs; and 
(e)  Maximum sign area. 
16.7  Prohibited Signs and Sign Elements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized in this Section, signs and sign elements prohibited by the applicable rules are prohibited from inclusion in a master sign plan. 
(b)  Nonconforming Signs. Existing non-conforming signs are not permitted within a development that is subject of master sign plan. A master sign permit issued for a development on which an existing non-conforming sign is located shall require that that the existing non-conforming sign be eliminated or brought into conformance with the standards of the approved master sign plan before the installation of any new signs under the approved master sign plan. 
16.8  Conditional Approval. In issuing a permit the Administrator may impose reasonable conditions on the master sign plan relating to the design, materials, locations, placements, or orientations, and sign specifications; provided that such conditions are related to time, place and manner matters and does not attempted to regulate sign content. Reasonable conditions are conditions imposed on the master sign plan that promote the purpose of this section and the approval criteria set out in Section 16.4. 
16.9  Amendment. 
(a)  A valid master sign plan may be amended upon application by the permittee and approval by the Administrator. An amendment application may seek to alter the design, materials, locations, placements, orientations, and specifications of a sign or signs designated within an approved master sign plan; provided the amendment does not attempt to increase the area or height of any freestanding or wall sign subject to the original master sign program by more than 10 percent. 
(b)  To request an amendment the permittee shall submit a completed master plan permit amendment application, on such form as provided by the Administrator, and a site plan and narrative as is required for a master sign plan permit. The Administrator shall review the request for administrative completeness and may issue a master plan amendment permit if the Administrator finds the proposed amendment advances the objectives of this Section and the approval criteria stated in Section 16.4. the applicant may apply for. The City Manager or his/her designee may approve the amended master sign plan if it is consistent with this Section, and does not increase the area or height of any freestanding or wall sign subject to the original master sign program by more than 10 percent. 
16.10  Other permits. The issuance of a master sign plan permit shall not relieve the applicant from the requirements of the uniform codes, including permitting requirements required therein. 
(Ord. No. 1553 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-30-17; Ord. No. 1556 , § 1, 1-30-18) 
Appendix C - FEE SCHEDULE 
Development Services Department Fee Schedule 
Commercial Building Permits Fees Construction Costs: $1.00 to $1,000.00 $50.00 $1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $50.00 plus $6.00 per $1,000.00 $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $265.00 plus $5.00 per $1,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $465.00 plus $4.00 per $1,000.00 Greater than $500,000.00 $1,665.00 plus $3.00 per $1,000.00 Note: Building Permit fee is TOTAL cost of project for commercial building permits. For large projects requiring TDLR review the building permit fee will be figured on the cost that was sent to TDLR. Plan review fee is 1/2 the cost of the Building Permit Fee.  
    The two following Fee Schedules ONLY apply to New Commercial projects. 
    This Initial Inspection Fee will be applied to all NEW Commercial Construction. 
    The Building Permit Fee will be 50 percent of the Initial Inspection Fee. 
    The Initial Inspection Fee shall be paid at the same time the Building Permit is Paid Plans Review Fee will be paid at the time of Plans drop-off. 
Initial Inspection Fee 
Valuation Fee $1.00 to $10,000.00 $76.92 $10,001.00 to $25,000.00 $108.75 the first $10,000.00 plus $8.40 for each additional $1,000.00 25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $234.75 the first $25,000.00 plus $6.06 for each additional $1,000.00 50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $386.25 the first $50,000.00 plus $4.20 for each additional $1,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $596.25 the first $100,000.00 plus $3.36 for each additional $1,000.00 $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $1,940.25 the first $500,000.00 plus $2.85 for each additional $1,000.00 $1,000,001.00 and up $3,365.25 the first $1,000,000.00 plus $1.89 for each additional $1,000.00  
Plans Review Fee 
Valuation Fee $1.00 to $10,000.00 $50.00 $10,001.00 to $25,000.00 $70.69 the first $10,000.00 plus $5.46 for each additional $1,000.00 25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $152.59 the first $25,000.00 plus $3.94 for each additional $1,000.00 50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $251.09 the first $50,000.00 plus $2.73 for each additional $1,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $387.59 the first $100,000.00 plus $2.19 for each additional $1,000.00 $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $1,263.59 the first $500,000.00 plus $1.85 for each additional $1,000.00 $1,000,001.00 and up $2,188.59 the first $1,000,000.00 plus $1.23 for each additional $1,000.00  
Contractor's Registration Fee 
    $100.00 - Initial Registration 
    $75.00 - Yearly Renewal 
    Fee is prorated after May 31 of each year. 
Commercial Only 
Plumbing / mechanical / electrical / irrigation / foundation repairs (foundation repairs need engineer letter w/seal) / fire alarm systems / fire line permits / automatic fire sprinkler system /fire line underground/ curbs, gutters and sidewalks, Solar and any other permit under the building department not listed. 
    Copy of license may be required for certain permits. 
Permit Fees $1.00 to $1,000.00 $50.00 $1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $50.00 plus $6.00 per $1,000.00 $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $265.00 plus $5.00 per $1,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $465.00 plus $4.00 per $1,000.00 Greater than $500,000.00 $1,665.00 plus $3.00 per $1,000.00 Certificate Of Occupancy $50.00 Annual Permit (IAW Section 105.1.1 of the International Building Code). $500.00 Public Swimming Pool Annual Permit/Inspection $150.00 Swimming Pool Re-Inspections $75.00 each re-inspect Boilers Base fee $50.00 Plus 33,000 BTU (1BHP) to 165,000 (5BHP) $5.00 165,001 BTU to 330,000 (10BHP) $10.00 330,001 BTU to 1,165,000 (52BHP) $15.00 1,165,001 BTU to 3,300,000 (98BHP) $25.00 Over 3,300,000 BTU $35.00 Miscellaneous Permits Tent Permit $50.00 per month Construction Barricades  Partial Street $50.00  Full Street $100.00 Demolition Fee $100.00 Home Movers Fee $50.00 Plus Insurance and Surety Bond Signs: Base fee $200.00 plus job cost Base Fee $200.00 plus job cost $0.00 to $300.00 $5.00 $301.00 to $1,000.00 $10.00 $1,001 to $25,000.00 $15.00 $25,001.00 to $75,000.00 $25.00 Over $75,000.00 $50.00 Temporary Banner $20.00 (30 day permit) Billboard sign permits shall be issued on an annual basis and will expire one year following their issuance. Billboard sign permits shall be $50.00 per year. Gasoline Tank Permit 1-1,000 Gallons $50.00 Over 1,000 Gallons $80.00 Pump Exchange Permit $40.00 Food Establishment Permit - Annual Fee Food Establishment Permit $500.00 Private Food Service Facility $325.00 Temporary Establishments $50.00 per event Mobile Food Vendor and Seasonal Vendor permits $225.00 Health Re-Inspection $75.00-Failure Burn Permit 
(See Fire Department For Approved List) $50.00 Restamp Plans - Commercial $200.00 Restamp Plans - Residential $50.00 Reinspection Re-inspection Fee - any type of project 
(except as specifically noted in the fee schedule) $50.00 - 1st and $75.00 - 2nd and $100.00 - 3rd Multi Floor Automatic Fire Sprinkler System / Fire Alarm Systems Inspections 
A maximum of three partial inspections are allowed per floor. 
If more than three partials are required per floor a $50.00 fee will apply per inspection. Residential Building Permit Fees Minimum permit fee $50.00 New Single Family Residential (one and two family dwellings) per square foot $ .50 New Accessory structures per square foot $ .50 A plan check fee of 50% of the building permit fee is assessed to all permits for the review of residential construction documents and plans associated with a permit. Flatwork/Deck $150.00 Patio/Patio Covers $150.00 Carports $150.00 Roof Replacement $200.00 Swimming Pools  Above Ground $100.00  In Ground $500.00 Foundation Repairs $250.00 Fences - New $50.00 Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Permit Fees Repair/Replacement $60.00 New Construction Per Single Family Home $200.00 Multi Family Homes per unit $60.00 Irrigation Permit Fees  Permit Fee $60.00  Plus per sprinkler head $1.00  Plus per backflow preventer $3.00 Solar Panel Fees  Permit Fee $60.00  Per Panel Fee $10.00 Fire Sprinklers Per Unit $50.00 Fire Alarm System Per Building $150.00 Fire Line Per Building $200.00 This is brick and mortar cost ONLY. (One hard copy of the building plans to include MEP's and PDF)  
( Res. No. 1922, § 1(Exh. A) , 1-30-18; Ord. No. 1581 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-19) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superceded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 111A 11-8-77 1 17-16 4-8 17-19-17-23 114 7-1-69 I(A)-(D) 14-1-14-4 119 7-1-69 I(F) 14-5 III(C) 14-6 130 2-26-70 1 13-21 134 2-26-70 1 13-23 135 2-26-70 1 14-21 139 2-26-70 1 20-16 2 20-31 3 20-32 4 20-32 5 20-32 6 20-34 7 20-35 8 20-40 9 20-41 10 20-42 11 20-36 12 20-37 13 20-39 14 20-38 15 20-17 16 20-18 17 20-43 145 7-7-70 19-1 158 11-3-70 2 12-86 3 12-102 4 12-103 5 12-104 6 12-89 7 12-106 8 12-107 9 12-87 10 12-88 11 12-108 12 12-105 13 12-110 163 1-5-71 22 6-5 1, 15, 20, 21 6-71 2-10 6-46-6-54 12 6-56 13 6-21 14 6-75 16 6-76 17 6-77 18 6-72 19 6-74 23 6-6 24 6-73 55 6-29 56 6-22 57 6-24 58 6-25 59, 61 6-26 60 6-27 62 6-28 63 6-30 65 6-91 66 6-92 66-68 6-92 69 6-106, 6-107 71 6-108 72, 85 6-7 72 6-109 73-75 6-31 6-31 76-78, 80-82 6-1 83 6-2 84 6-3 165 1-5-71 10-1 1 10-2 2 10-3 4-7 10-4-10-7 8 10-18 9-18 10-8-10-17 166 1-5-71 1-3 15-1-15-3 8 20-2 13 15-4 17 15-5 19 15-6 172 2-23-71 6-7 6-109 188 10-12-71 1, 5 5-61 3 5-63 4 5-64 6 5-65 7 5-66 195 12-14-71 1 19-36 3 19-37 4 19-38 5 19-40 6 19-39 215 6-27-72 1-5 2-46 222 4-10-73 19-16-19-22 235 10-30-73 I 13-16 13-19 III(A) 13-38 III(B) 13-36 III(C) 13-37 V 13-1 V(B) 13-2 275 7-29-75 5-20 297 8-31-76 1 5-31 5-34-5-46 298 8-21-76 1 4-1 1-3 4-1-4-3 4 4-31 5 4-32 6-9 4-46-4-49 7(F) 4-33 10 4-34 11-22 4-4-4-15 23 4-17 24 4-18 307 10-26-76 1(a)(b) 4-34 310 1-25-77 2-16 A 2-17 B 2-18 C 2-19 D 2-20 E 2-21 311 2-8-77 2(a)-(e), (g), (h) 11-16 3 11-17 4(a) 11-36 4(d) 11-37 4(b) 11-38 4(c) 11-40 9 11-51 10 11-66 11 11-22 4(b), 12 11-39 13 11-52 14 11-53 15(a) 4-66 15(b) 4-67 15(c) 4-68 15(e) 4-70 15(f) 4-71 16(a)-(c) 11-106 16(d), (e) 11-107 16(f)-(h) 11-108 17(1) 11-1 17(a)(1)-(6) 11-81 17(b) 11-82 17(c) 11-83 17(d) 11-84 17(e) 11-85 17(f) 11-86 17(g) 11-87 17 11-88 17 11-89-11-91 314 4-12-77 22-2 315 4-12-77 Art. 1, § B 9-1 Art. 1, § C 9-2 Art. 1, § D 9-3 Art. 2 9-4 Art. 3, § A 9-5 Art. 3, § C 9-36 Art. 3, § D 9-6 Art. 3, §§ E-G 9-8-9-10 Art. 4, § A 9-21 Art. 4, § B 9-22 Art. 4, § C 9-37 Art. 4, § D 9-23 Art. 5, § A-C 9-51-9-53 318 4-26-77 1 12-36 2-7 12-61-12-66 6(c), 7(b) 12-68 6(c), 7(b) 12-109 8 12-69 9 12-70 10 12-37 11 12-38 12 12-39 13 12-67 14 12-40 15 12-71 16-22 12-41-12-47 24 12-48 332 9-13-77 1 8-27 333 9-13-77 1 13-17 356 7-7-78 14-22 359 7-25-78 1 13-72 2 13-71 4 13-73 360 7-25-78 1, 2 13-86, 13-87 3 13-90 4 13-91 5-7 13-92-13-94 8 13-96 9 13-97 10 13-101 11, 15 13-89 12 13-95 13 13-98 14 13-99 16 13-88 366 8-29-78 1, 2 22-1 367 9-12-78 1 8-41 2 8-43 3 8-45 4 8-44 6 8-42 8 8-46 377 11-14-78 1 12-101 380 12-14-78 1 10-51 1(a)-(d) 10-51 1(e) 10-52 2 10-71 3 10-72 4-7 10-53-10-56 7 10-73 8 10-74 9 10-57 10 10-58 386 1-30-79 1 10-31 15-7 1(g) 15-7 2 10-32 15-7 5 10-33, 15-7 6 10-35, 15-7 7 10-34, 15-7 396 6-12-79 1-8 5-116-5-123 9 5-125 10, 11 5-124 9 5-126 12, 13 5-126 14 5-127 15, 20, 22 5-128 16-19 5-129-5-131 19 5-132 21 5-133 406  8-28-79 18-5 408  8-28-79 1 20-1 419 11-27-79 5-81 5-96 18-1 1 5-16 8-1 3 5-83 5-98 8-3 18-3 4 5-84 5-99 8-4 18-6 420 12-11-79 1-3 13-39 2 13-39 427  3-25-80 17-17 431  8-26-80 1 22-16 2 22-23 3 22-17 3(a) 22-19 4 22-18 5 22-20 6 22-21 7, 8 22-22 437 10-14-80 1-6 23-16 438 10-14-80 1 16-16 2-5 16-17-16-20 7 16-21 442  1-27-81 I 16-37 II 16-37 II(1)(D) 16-38 III(1)(F) 16-39 IIIa 16-40 IV-VI 16-42-16-44 448  2-24-81 1-3 8-21 4-6 8-24 7 8-25 8 8-26 455  6- 9-81 1 5-17 456  6- 9-81 Art. XIV, § 2 App. A, § 2 XVIII App. A, Art. XVIII Art. XIV, § 3, 4 App. A, Art. XIV XV, § 1 App. A, Art. XV 457  6-30-81 1 16-16 2 16-17 470  3-30-82 1 22-3 477  2-23-82 1 App. A, Art. II, § 5.2 2 App. A, Art. XI, § 3 3 App. A, Art. XII, § 3.1 4 App. A, Art. XIII, § 3 5 App. A, Art. XVII, §§ 6.3.a., 6.4 6 App. A, Art. XVII, §§ 7.1, 7.2 7 App. A, Art. XVIII, § 4.3 8 App. A, Art. XII, § 1.1 9 App. A, Art. XXIII, § 3.b. 10 App. A, (App.) 480  4-13-82 1-7 12-16 5-7 12-20-12-22 481  5-25-82 1 16-36 484  2- 8-77 5-8 11-18-11-22 490  9-14-82 8-2 517  5-31-83 1 16-37 16-40 524  5-31-83 Art. I, §§ 1-9 21-1-21-9 Art. I, § 9.1 21-10 Art. I, § 9.2 21-11 Art. I, § 9.3 21-12 Art. II, § 1 21-41 Art. II, § 2 21-42 Art. II, § 2.1 21-42 Art. II, § 2.2 21-42 Art. II, § 3.1 21-43 Art. II, § 4 21-44 Art. III, § 1 21-61 Art. III, § 2 21-62 Art. III, § 2.1 21-62 Art. III, § 3 21-63 Art. III, § 4.1 21-64 Art. III, § 6 21-66 Art. III, § 7 21-67 Art. III, § 8 21-68 Art. III, § 9 21-69 Art. IV, § 1.1 21-86 Art. IV, § 2 21-87 Art. IV, § 3 21-28 Art. IV, § 4.1 21-89 Art. IV, § 5 21-90 Art. IV, § 6.1 21-91 Art. V, § 2 21-13 Art. V, § 3 21-14 Art. V, § 5 21-15 529  8-30-83 1 14-7 530  9-13-83 22-17 22-19 531  9-13-83 1 6-7 541  9-13-83 1 8-47 544  9-13-83 1 5-20 546  9-13-83 1 App. A, Art. XXV 549  9-27-83 1, 2 5-48 551 10-11-83 1 7-2 7-2 7-4 3 7-5 2, 4 7-3 5-8 7-6-7-9 9 7-1 10 7-10 11 7-12 12 7-11 567  2-28-84 1, 2 3-1 573  4-10-84 1 4-69 578  5-29-84 1, 2 21-62 581  5- 8-84 1 App. A, Art. V 3 App. A, Art. VI 5 App. A, Art. IX 6 App. A, Art. XI 7 App. A, Art. XII 8 App. A, Art. XX 9 App. A(App. A) 10 App. A(App. B-1) 582  6-12-84 1 5-82 18-2 584  6-26-84 1 5-82 5-82 585  6-26-84 I 22-20 I 22-21 II 22-22 586  7-10-84 1 21-65 587  7-12-84 1 5-18, 5-19  5-29-84 3 21-67 594  9-11-84 1 App. A, Art. II 599 10- 5-84 3 App. A(App. B-1) 601 10-30-84 1(1)-(11), (13), (14) 19-56 2 19-84 2(1) 19-81 2(4) 19-82 2(5) 19-85 2(6), 10 19-86 3(1) 19-57 3(2) 19-58 3(3) 19-59 4 19-88 4(1) 19-83 5 19-60 6-9 19-61-19-64 11 19-87 12-15 19-65-19-68 612  2-26-85 1 21-66 613  2-26-85 1 5-1 614  2-12-85 1 4-16 615  2-26-85 1, 2 18-4 616  2-26-85 5-97 617  2-26-85 5-62 618  2-26-85 2 App. B-1 619  4- 9-85 1 App. B-1 628  4-30-85 1 17-19 629  4-30-85 App. A, Art. XVIII 633  5-14-85 1, 2 App. A, Art. XVIII 641  7-23-85 1 5-16, 5-81, 5-96, 6-4, 8-1, 18-1 648 10- 8-85 1 21-10(b) 656 11-12-85 1 5-16, 5-81, 5-96, 5-150, 6-4, 8-1, 18-1 664  1-14-86 1 22-5 672  2-11-86 1, 2 16-41 682  3-25-86 1 21-10(b) 687  5-13-86 1 16-36 688  5-27-86 Adopting Ordinance, p. vii 707  9-30-86 1-7 2-2 714 11-25-86 14-01 722  2-24-87 1 6-4 723  2-24-87 Art. 1, §§ A-D 9-1-9-4 Art. 2 9-5 Art. 3, §§ A, B 9-6, 9-7 § C 9-31 §§ D-G 9-8-9-11 Art. 4, §§ A, B 9-21, 9-22 § C 9-32 § D 9-23 Art. 5, §§ A-E 9-41-9-45 Art. 6 Rpld 9-1-9-10, 9-21-9-23, 9-36, 9-37, 9-51-9-53 728  4-14-87 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 2 732  4-28-87 1 16-43 734  5-12-87 1 22-2 742  6-30-87 1 2-141 2, 3 2-142 4, 5 2-144 6 2-143 743  7-14-87 1(1) 19-6 2(1)-(3) 19-7(a)-(c) (4) 19-8(b) (5) 19-16, 19-17 (6) 19-19, 19-20(a) (7) 19-20(b) (8) 19-21 3(1) 19-8(a) 4(1)-(5) 19-9(a)-(e) 5(1) 19-10 6(1) 19-11 744  6-30-87 1 2-121, 2-122 2-4 2-123-2-125 745  6-30-87 1 2-161, 2-162 748  8-25-87 4-18, 5-84, 5-99, 6-7, 8-4, 14-22, 18-6, App. A, Art. XXIV, § 2.1 749  8-25-87 14-8 755 10-21-87 1, 2 4-12.1 759 12- 8-87 1 App. A(App. A) 771  3- 8-88 1 App. A(App. A) 2 App. A(App. B-1) 777  6-14-88 1 App. A, Art. XVII, §§ 1-14 778  3-29-88 1 6-7, 14-22 782  3-29-88 1 6-7, 14-22 785  3-29-88 1 4-18, 14-22 791  3-29-88 1 5-84, 5-99, 8-4, 14-22, 18-6 793  3-29-88 1 14-22, App. A, Art. XXIV, § 2.1 799  6-28-88 1 5-16, 5-81, 5-96, 8-1, 8-2, 18-1 802  7-12-88 1-7 20-71-20-77 807  8- 9-88 1 16-20(6) 808  8- 9-88 1 11-107(b), 11-108(a), (b) 812  9-27-88 1, 2 8-5 813 11-15-88 1 11-108(a) 814 12-13-88 1 19-2(3), (4), (6), (11), (17) 818  1-31-89 1 19-2(2), (7), (12), (18) 819  2-14-89 1-12 2-61-2-72 828  5-30-89 1 2-36(a) 2 2-36(b), (c) 831  6-27-89 1 2-1(a) 835  7-25-89 1 20-2(b) 840  9-12-89 A-F App. A, Art. XVII.5, §§ 1-6 841  9-12-89 A 12-201 B-D 12-221-12-223 E 12-203 F-J 12-224-12-228 K-N 12-204-12-207 O 12-202 P, Q 12-208, 12-209 845  9-26-89 1-3 4-1-4-3 4, 5 4-31, 4-32 6-9 4-46-4-49 10 4-34 11-22 4-4-4-15 23, 24 4-17, 4-18 25-27 4-72-4-74 28 4-67 847 10-10-89 1 10-1 2 10-2.1 3, 4 10-15, 10-16 5 10-19 848 10-10-89 1 2-49 849 10-10-89 1 2-48.1(a)-(c) 2 2-48.1(d) 851 11-14-89 1 14-22 853 12-12-89 1-4 6-4 854  1- 9-90 1 22-4 860  3-27-90 1 App. A, Art. XVII, § 4.12 2 App. A, Art. XVII, § 5.6 867  5- 8-90 1-4 5-61-5-64 869  6-26-90 1 13-71 870  6-26-90 1, 2 13-86, 13-87 3-7 13-90-13-94 8, 9 13-96, 13-97 10 13-101 11 13-89(a) 12 13-95 13 13-98 14 13-99, 13-100 15 13-89(b) 16 13-88 17 13-102 871  6-12-90 1 19-2(25) 875  7-10-90 1-6 23-16 895 12-11-90 1-16       Added 2-5 896  1- 8-91 1-11 22-16-22-26 903  3-12-91 1-6 23-16 907  5-11-91 1 5-16, 5-81, 5-96, 5-151, 8-1, 8-2, 18-1 909  8-13-91 1 14-20 2 14-20(note) 912  9-10-91 1 14-6.1 915  9-24-91 1(1)-(15) 19-56 2(1), (2) 19-81 2(3) 19-84 2(4) 19-82 2(5) 19-85 2(6) 19-86(a) 3(1)-(3) 19-57-19-59 4 19-83, 19-88 5-9 19-60-19-64 10 19-86(b)-(e) 11 19-87 12-15 19-65-19-68 16 19-67.1 916 10- 8-91 1 14-22(note) 918 10- 8-91 1, 2 2-48.1 920 10-29-91 1-6 4-56-4-61 921 10-29-91 1 4-9(a) 2 4-19 922 12-10-91 1, 2 2-22 930  3-31-92 1 15-31, 15-32 2, 3 15-33, 15-34 935  6- 9-92 1 10-2.2 2 10-19 936  6-30-92 1-3 5-17 942 11-24-92 1 8-21 2 8-26 943 11-24-92 1, 2 10-19 944  1-26-93 20-3 945  1-26-93 14-22(note) 950  4-27-93 1-4 15-41-15-44 954  5-25-93 2-36 955  5-25-93 1 4-18 959  8-10-93 13-39 961  8-31-93 14-22(note) 962  8-31-93 1 4-5 2 4-8 976  3-29-94       Rpld 15-1-15-6, 20-2 1-15 15-1-15-15       Rnbd 15-7 as 15-16 984  8- 9-94 2-50 985  8- 9-94 1, 2 2-51 986  8- 9-94 2-52 992  9-13-94 1-5 15-51-15-55 998 10-11-94 2-3 1006  2-28-95 1 15-51 1007  4-11-95 2-16 1 A-E 2-17-2-21.4 2 2-21.5 1009  6-13-95 1 2-17 1014 11-14-95 1, 2       Added 2-48.2 1020  1-30-96 13-39 1022  1-30-96 Arts. 1-3 9-1-9-12 Art. 4 9-21-9-24 Art. 5 9-41-9-45 1025  2-27-96       Added 2-4 1034  7- 9-96 1-6 23-16 1037  8-13-96 1, 2 4-12.1 1041  8-27-96 1-3       Added 2-181-2-183 1047  6-10-97 1 2-21.5(5)e. 1057  1-27-98 14-22 1058  1-27-98 1 5-16, 5-81, 5-96, 5-151, 8-1, 8-2, 18-1 1059  1-27-98 1 6-4 1072 10-27-98 1 4-47(a) 2 4-9(b) 1073 10-27-98 1 17-19 1074 11-24-98 1-22       Added Ch. 22.5, §§ 22.5-26-22.5-47 1082  5-29-99 1-5 10-2.2 1089  7-27-99 1       Added 15-17 1090  8-31-99 1-5, 7       Added 14-9 1091  8-31-99 1-4       Added 14-10 1096 10-12-99 1-9 Ch. 14, Art. I, §§ 14-1-14-8 1097 10-12-99 1 14-20 1099 12-20-99 1 6-4(a) 1115  7-25-00 1       Added App. A, Art. VI, § 7 1120 10-10-00 I-XV       Added Ch. 5, Art. IX, §§ 5-181-5-195 1123 10-10-00 1 4-10 1125 12-12-00 1-17 Ch. 13, Art. IV, Div. 3, §§ 13-86-13-102 1129  3-13-01 1-5 Ch. 15, Art. III, §§ 15-41-15-44 1134  8-28-01 1-14       Added Ch. 24, Art. II, §§ 24-26-24-40 1135  8-28-01 16-43(2) 1146  3-26-02 1-43 Ch. 4, §§ 4-1-4-43 1154  7-30-02 1       Added 14-11 1158  9-24-02 1, 3, 4       Added Ch. 5, Art. X, §§ 5-211-5-213 1159 10-29-02 13-87 13-90(1) 13-95(2) 1161 11-12-02 15       Rpld 12-86-12-89, 12-101-12-110 1       Added 12-86 2-11       Added 12-101-12-110 12-14       Added 12-87-12-89 1162 11-26-02 14-22 (note) 1217  1-25-05 1-6 13-41 1218  2- 8-05 1 5-16 5-81 5-96 5-211       Added 5-2 8-1 2       Rpld 8-2 18-1       Rpld Ch. 5, Art. VII, § 5-151 1219  2- 8-05 1-3       Added 5-21 1221  4-12-05 1       Rpld Ch. 12, Art. III, §§ 12-36-12-71       Rpld 12-109 1224  4-26-05 1       Rpld 5-21(c)(5) 1231  8- 9-05 1 10-15 2 10-16       Added 10-16.5       Added 10-16.6 1232  9-13-05 13-39 1233  9-13-05 1       Added 19-12 1242 12-13-05 1-4       Added Ch. 5, Art. XI, §§ 5-221-5-229 1245  1-10-06 Ch. 11, Art. II, Divs. 1-4 1250  4-11-06 I 16-43 1251  5- 9-06 1-46 Ch. 4, §§ 4-1-4-46 1254  5- 9-06       Added Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4, §§ 2-81-2-90 1255  5-30-06 1-4       Added 23-16 6       Rpld 23-16 1266  7-25-06 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4, §§ 2-81-2-90 1302  3-13-07 1-44 Ch. 4, §§ 4-1-4-44 1345 10-30-07       Added 2-23 1347 11-27-07 1-5 Ch. 15, Art. III, §§ 15-41-15-45 1348 11-27-07 14-22 (note) 1358 I 2-81 II 2-88 1362  2-13-08 14-22 (note) 1365  3-11-08 I       Rpld Ch. 12, Art. II, §§ 12-16-12-22 II, III       Added Ch. 12, Art. II, §§ 12-16-12-19 1375  6-24-08 1-8, 10 Ch. 7, §§ 7-1-7-9 1377  7-29-08 I       Rpld Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4, §§ 2-81-2-90 II(Exh. A)       Added Ch. 2, Art. III, §§ 2-81-2-89 1385 10-14-08 1-3       Added 15-18 1387  1-13-09 I, III-VI       Added Ch. 23, Art. III, §§ 23-31-23-35 1389  2-24-09 I-IV       Added 23-36 1401  3-12-09 I       Rnbd App. A, Arts. XXIV, XXV       as App. A, Arts. XXV, XXVI II       Added App. A, Art. XXIII, § 3 e. III       Added App. A, Art. XXIV, §§ 1-12 1403 10-11-09 1       Rpld Ch. 21, Arts. I-IV       Added Ch. 21, Arts. I-V, Exh. A 1405  8-25-09 I       Rpld 15-18 1408  9- 8-09 1 15-18 (note) 1411  9-29-09 Adopting ordinance 1412  9-29-09 2 16-36 1417 10-27-09 Arts. I-XIII       Added Ch. 23, Art. IV, §§ 23-51-23-63 1423  2-23-10 1 2-17 1426  5-11-10 Arts. 1-5       Rpld Ch. 9, Arts. I-III       Added Ch. 9, Arts. I-III 1433  8-10-10 Arts. I-XVII Ch. 5, Art. XIII 1439  9-28-10 I       Rpld Ch. 6, Arts. I-IV       Rpld Ch. 18 II 5-2 III 5-16, 5-17 IV 5-96, 5-97 V 5-211 VI       Rnbd 5-212, 5-213       as 5-213, 5-214       Added 5-212 VI       Added Ch. 5, Art. XII, 5-250, 5-251 1440 10-12-10 1       Added 15-19 3 15-19(7) 1445 12-14-10 1       Rnbd App. A, Art. XVII, §§ 1-14       as App. B, §§ 1-14 2 App. B, § 4.3 1447  2-22-11 24-28, 24-29 24-34, 24-35 1451  5-31-11 I 19-56 19-60       Rpld 19-68       Added 19-68 19-83 19-86 19-87(a) III 19-88 1452  6-28-11 I, II       Added 24-1 1454  7-26-11 I Ch. 13, Art. IV, Div. 3(title) 13-86, 13-87 13-89 13-95 13-102 1458 10-25-11 II 23-36(b)(3)d. 1460  1-10-12 I 19-60 19-83 1461  1-10-12 1, 3       Added 13-22 1464  2-14-12 1 13-22 1466  6-12-12 I 5-2 5-16 5-17 5-81 5-82 5-96 5-97 5-211 5-212 5-250 5-251 1467  6-12-12 I App. A, Art. XXIII, §§ 1-7 1469  6-26-12 I 11-108(a) 1471  7-31-12 1 App. B, § 3.8 1842(Res.)  6-12-12 art. I(Exh. A)       Added Ch. 6, Appendix 1475  1- 8-13 I, II Ch. 21, Exh. A, §§ B, C 1483  8-13-13 1       Rpld 10-2, 10-2.1 10-2.2       Rpld 10-4-10-16 10-19(b) 2       Rpld 11-1, 11-81-11-91, 
11-106-11-108 3       Rpld 5-221-5-229 4       Added 18-1, 18-2 1484  8-27-13 1       Added App. B, §§ 3.12, 4.14, 4.15, 6.12, 
15.1-15.7 App. B, § 4.9 App. B, § 5.1 App. B, § 6.2 App. B, §§ 10.1, 10.2 App. B, § 14 1487 10-29-13 1 App. A, Art. V, § 4 2 App. A, Art. VI, § 4.7 3 App. A, Art. VII, § 4 4       Added App. A, Art. XVI, § 3 1488 11-12-13 I       Added 22-27 1489 12-10-13 1       Added App. B, § 10.3 1492  1-28-14 23-36(b)(3)c. 1509  1-27-15 I 5-2 5-16, 5-17 5-81, 5-82 5-96, 5-97 5-211, 5-212 5-250, 5-251 8-1 1517  5-26-15 1 App. B, § 6.3       Added App. B, § 6.13 1518  6- 9-15 1 18-2 1521  8-11-15 1       Added 16-45 1524  9-29-15 1(Exh. A)       Added 13-121-13-27 13-141-13-165 1530  5-10-16 I 14-2 1531  5-10-16 I 4-34 4-39 1533  7-12-16 1       Added 13-23 1539  9-27-16 I       Added 23-36(c)(3) 1541 11- 8-16 1       Added 20-101-20-104 20-106-20-111 20-113-20-120 20-141-20-143 20-145-20-184 20-201-20-203 20-221-20-227 20-241, 20-242 20-261 20-263-20-266 20-281 2       Rpld 22.5-26-22.5-47 1551  9-26-17 1       Rpld 13-23 1552  9-26-17 1 App. A, Art. II, § 5.2 1553 10-30-17 1(Exh. A)       Added App. B, § 16 1556  1-30-18 1 3-1(a) Ch. 4(title)       Rpld 4-7       Added 4-7       Added 4-23(b) 4-24(4)       Added 4-45       Added 5-3 Ch. 5, App. 5-81       Added 8-28 11-37(a)       Rpld 12-104       Added 12-104       Rpld 16-42       Added 16-42       Added 19-3       Rpld 19-60       Added 19-60       Rpld 19-83       Added 19-83       Rpld App. A, Art. XXII, § 1       Added App. A, Art. XXII, § 1 App. A, Art. XXII, § 3 App. B, § 9.1 App. B, § 9.4 App. B, § 16.4(a) 1922 (Res.)  1-30-18 1(Exh. A)       Added App. C 1559  3-27-18 I 5-2       Rpld 5-16       Added 5-16 5-17 5-81, 5-82 5-96, 5-97 5-211, 5-212 5-250, 5-251 1560  3-27-18 I 8-1       Added 8-2 1563  5-29-18 I 16-17 16-20 1565  6-26-18 I       Rpld 15-14 1566  6-26-18 I       Rpld 19-2 1577  3-26-19 1 App. A 1578  3-26-19 1 App. A, Art. VI(title) 2 App. A, Art. VI, § 6.7 3 App. A, Art. VI, § 7.7 4 App. A, Art. XVI, § 3 5 App. A, Art. XVI, Exhibit 1 1579  4-30-19 2(Exh. A)       Rpld 5-271-5-288       Added 5-271-5-286       Added 5-300-5-308 1580  4-30-19 I       Added 20-301-20-317 1581  6-11-19 1 Ch. 5, App. 2(Exh. A) App. C  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Vern. Ann. 
Civ. Stats. 
Article Section  Section 
this Code 179d 3(d)2 32-5 970a Char., Art. I 1066c 4A 22-1 2372W § 4 Ch. 12, Art. III(note) 4413 29bb 4-16 4-61(c) 4477-6A 4-12.1(a), (b) 3.09 4-12.1(2)(c) 4477-9a 5.08(a) 13-90 5.09(n) 13-89 6228f 19-20(b) 6252c 4(a)-(c), (e) 12-68 6252-13d 2, 3 12-16 6252-19 2-65(a) 11 13-87 2h 13-39 6687-1 13-87 6701d 2h 13-39 104 13-22 143A(a) 14-8 8802(1), 8814 12-19  
Administrative 
Code 
Section Section 
this Code Tit. 16, § 86 13-122 Tit. 16, § 86.710 13-127 Tit. 25, §§ 161-171 11-16 11-20 11-46 Tit. 25, § 169.25 Ch. 4 Tit. 25, § 169.27 Ch. 4 Tit. 25, § 169.29 Ch. 4 Tit. 25, § 169.30 Ch. 4 Tit. 25, § 170(a)-(k) 11-61 Tit. 25, §§ 173-175 11-16 11-20 11-41 Tit. 30, § 70.7 5-279 Tit. 30, Ch. 305 5-279 Tit. 30, § 305.44 5-277 Tit. 30, § 305.128 5-276 5-285 Tit. 30, Ch. 311 5-279 Tit. 31, Ch. 307 23-51 Tit. 37, § 7.12 Ch. 7 Tit. 37, § 7.23 Ch. 7 Tit. 37, § 7.24 Ch. 7 Tit. 37, § 7.26 Ch. 7 Tit. 37, § 221.3 Ch. 19, Art. II, 
Div. 2  
Alcoholic 
Beverages 
Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.38 Ch. 3 61.36 Ch. 3 Ch. 106 14-2 108.55 Ch. 3 109.31 et seq. Ch. 3 251.01 et seq. Ch. 3  
Civil Practices 
and Remedies 
Code 
Section Section 
this Code 6.002 Char., § 2.06 101.101 2-1  
Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure 
Section Section 
this Code 14.06(d) 14-22 27.14 14-22 45.059 Ch. 15, Art. V 62.001(5) 15-19 62.152 15-19  
Election Code 
Section Section 
this Code 41.001 Char., § 9.01(c) 141.031(k) Char., § 9.02  
Family 
Code Section 
this Code Tit. 3 15-44  
Government 
Code 
Section Section 
this Code 29.001 et seq. Ch. 14 Ch. 418 7-2 418.001 et seq. Ch. 7 418.103 Ch. 7 419.071 Ch. 8 Ch. 551 2-48.2(a)(2) 23-36 Ch. 551 et seq. Char., § 4.10(a) Ch. 553 2-87 573.022 2-81 573.023 2-81 573.024 2-81 573.025 2-81 791.001 et seq. 19-1 Ch. 803 2-50 853.305 2-50 853.502(b) 2-51 853.503 2-51 853.505 2-51 854.202(g) 2-48.2(a) 854.203 2-52 854.404 2-52  
Health and 
Safety Code Section 
this Code 342.001 et seq. Ch. 11, Art. IV 342.004 Ch. 11, Art. IV 361.032-361.033 5-285 361.037 5-285 481.134 15-19 756.012 15-1 821.001 et seq. Ch. 4 821.003 Ch. 4 822.101 et seq. Ch. 4 822.101 4-30 822.116(b) Ch. 4 Tit. 10, Ch. 826 4-22 826.001 et seq. Ch. 4 826.016 Ch. 4 826.031 et seq. Ch. 4 826.033(a)(1) Ch. 4 826.045 4-22  
Local 
Government 
Code 
Section Section 
this Code 22.003 Char., § 9.01(c) Ch. 42 21-2 53.001 1-1 1-7 Ch. 54, Subch. B 5-193 14-2 54.001 1-7 Ch. 171 2-87 2-89 Ch. 176 2-86 2-87 176.003 2-86 176.004 2-86 211.001 et seq. App. A 211.005 App. A 211.007 Ch. 17, Art. II App. A 211.008-211.013 App. A Ch. 212 21-2 212.003 Char., § 1.02 212.006 Ch. 17, Art. II 212.0065 21-33 21-35 212.014 21-34 212.0145 21-34 212.015 21-34 212.016 21-35 213.001 et seq. Ch. 17, Art. II 213.002 App. A Ch. 214 5-193 Ch. 214, Subch. A 14-2 214.001 et seq. Ch. 5 5-183 5-185 214.001 5-229 214.001, subch. A 5-184 214.001(h) 5-185 214.001(i) 5-185 214.001(k) 5-185 214.001(l) 5-185 5-186 214.001(m), (n) 5-183 214.001(1) 5-186 214.0011 5-191 214.0015 5-183 214.101 Ch. 5 214.212 Ch. 5 214.216 Ch. 5 214.901 Ch. 5 214.904 Ch. 5 215.075 Ch. 12, Art. IV 216.901 App. A 216.903 App. A Ch. 242 21-2 21-29 243.001 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. V Ch. 245 5-3 250.002 App. A, Art. XXIV, § 4 Ch. 283 20-102 20-104 283.001 et seq. Ch. 20 283.057 20-266 Ch. 284 20-302 284.003 20-309 284.005 20-313 284.107 20-309 284.157 20-308 284.302 20-316 331.001 Ch. 16 331.007 Ch. 16 341.012(a) Ch. 19, Art. II, Div. 2 341.012(b) Ch. 19, Art. II, Div. 2 342.011 Ch. 8 370.002 Ch. 15, Art. III Ch. 402, Subch. C 23-31 23-32 23-36 402.044(8) 23-34 402.046 23-33 402.049 23-36 Ch. 418 7-2  
Occupations 
Code 
Section Section 
this Code Ch. 1001 21-29 2154.004 Ch. 8  
Penal Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.07(14) 15-19 Art. 6.03 10-2.2 12.23 1-7 Ch. 21       12-222(a)(10)a.2. 21.01 12-226(b)(7) Ch. 22       12-222(a)(10)a.3. Ch. 25       12-222(a)(10)a.4. 30.05 2-4(c)(4) 36.02 2-87 36.08 2-87 38.10 14-22 39.02 2-87 39.06(a) 2-87 Ch. 43       12-222(a)(10)a.1. 46.01 2-4(a)(3) 46.05(a) 2-4(a)(3)  
Property Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21.001 Char., § 11.01  
Revised 
Civil Statutes 
Title Article Section 
this Code 8 853.401 2-48.1(f) 853.402 2-48.1(a) 853.402(c) 2-48.1(c) 853.404 2-48.1(a) 853.404(d), (e) 2-48.1(e) 853.601 2-48.1(b) 110 61.001-65.605 2-46 110B 63.401-63.403 2-48.1(a) 63.401(d) 2-48.1(c) 63.601 2-48.1(b) 64.202(f) 2-49, 2-49(1) 64.204 2-49 64.204(b) 2-49(2) 64.301-64.308 2-49(6) 64.405 2-49 64.406 2-49 64.408 2-49(5) 64.409 2-49(5) 64.410 2-49, 2-49(5)  
Tax Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.13 22-2 11.20 23-36 33.07 22-3 33.91 et seq. 10-16.5 182.025 20-102 351.001 22-24  
Transportation 
Code Section 
this Code 311.001 et seq. Ch. 20 311.004 Ch. 20 316.001 et seq. Ch. 20 472.022 13-2 Ch. 501 et seq. 13-87 502.001 13-41 542.202(a)(3) Ch. 20 543.003 14-22 545.302 13-37 547.383 13-38 Ch. 683 13-122 13-163 Ch. 683, Subch. E 14-2 683.001 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. IV, Div. 2 683.011 Ch. 13, Art. IV, Div. 2 683.071-683.078 Ch. 13, Art. IV 683.072 Ch. 13, Art. IV  
Utilities Code Section 
this Code 11.003 20-302 51.002 20-302 Ch. 66 20-102 20-104 66.012 20-266  
Water Code Section 
this Code 16.315 Ch. 9 9-1 Ch. 26 5-271 Chs. 26-28 5-285 26.014 5-285 26.136 5-285 26.212 5-285 26.213 5-285  
