THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LAKE JACKSON, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: June 19, 1995 
Effective: July 1, 1995 
____________ 
Published in 1995 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LAKE JACKSON, TEXAS 
____________ 
Bob Sipple 
Mayor 
____________ 
Matthew Broaddus 
Jon J.B." Baker 
Ralph "Buster" Buell, III 
Gerald Roznovsky 
Vinay Singhania 
City Council 
____________ 
William P. Yenne 
City Manager 
____________ 
Pam Eaves 
Director of Finance 
____________ 
Sherri Russell 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Alice A. Rodgers 
City Secretary 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LAKE JACKSON, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Doris Williams 
Mayor 
____________ 
C. E. Golden 
Gerald Andrews 
Ron Dipprey 
Jim Martin 
Stacy Lewis 
City Council 
____________ 
William P. Yenne 
City Manager 
____________ 
Pam Eaves 
Director of Finance 
____________ 
John Dewey 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Chas. H. Smith 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1958 Code, as supplemented through December 7, 1992, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1958 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. William P. Yenne, City Manager, Mr. John Dewey, City Attorney, Mr. Mark McDaniel, former Assistant City Manager, and Ms. Alice Rodgers, Administrative Assistant, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 95-1337 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a Revised Code of Ordinances for The City of Lake Jackson, Texas; Clarifying the Status of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty of $500.00 for the Violation of Ordinances Therein Except That Violation of Fire Safety, Zoning Public Health or Sanitation (Including Dumping of Refuse) Shall Not Exceed $2,000.00 Per Day for Each Offense; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; Providing a Savings Clause, and Providing That This Ordinance Shall Take Effect and be in Force Five Days After Its Descriptive Caption is Published Within Ten Days of Final Passage in the Brazosport Facts and Brazorian Laws. 
Be It Ordained By The Council of The City of Lake Jackson, Texas: 
Section 1: The Code entitled "The Code or [of] Ordinances, City of Lake Jackson, Texas" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 110, each inclusive, is adopted, and attached hereto for all purposes. 
Section 2: All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 19, 1994, and not included in the Code or recognized are continued in force unless repealed by an ordinance dated on or before December 19, 1994. In each case, the original ordinance adopted by the council survives and prevails in its entirety, except to the extent the original ordinance has been amended or repealed by a subsequent ordinance. 
Section 3: The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4: Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. However, a fine for the violation of a provision of this Code or an ordinance of the city that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall not exceed $2,000.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5: Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6: Ordinances adopted after December 19, 1994, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7: This ordinance does not supersede any ordinance pertaining to the annexation or disannexation of territory. 
Section 8: If any part or portion of this ordinance shall be invalid or unconstitutional such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair any remaining portions or provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 9: The City Secretary shall publish the caption of this ordinance within ten days of final passage in the official newspaper of the city. This ordinance shall become effective July 1, 1995, or 5 days after its descriptive caption is published within ten days of final passage in the Brazosport Facts and Brazorian News, whichever date occurs last. 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Council of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas on the 5th day of June, 1995. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Council of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, on this the 19th day of June, 1995. 
	/s/ Doris Williams 
 	 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Chas H. Smith 	
 	 
City Secretary 
APPROVED AT TO FORM: 
/s/ John Dewey 	
 	 
City Attorney  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
HOME RULE CHARTER 
CITY OF LAKE JACKSON, TEXAS 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the City Charter as approved by the voters of the city on January 30, 1954. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The original title page and a letter from the Charter commission have been omitted. 
 
PREAMBLE 
We, the citizens of Lake Jackson, Texas, in order to establish a home rule municipal government, provide for the future progress of our city and obtain more fully the benefits of local self-government, do hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter in accordance with the statutes of the State of Texas; and do hereby declare the residents of the City of Lake Jackson in Brazoria County, Texas, living within the legally established boundaries of the said city to be a political subdivision of the State of Texas incorporated forever under the name and style of the "City of Lake Jackson" with such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided.  
ARTICLE 1. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the statutes of this state and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the "city council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the city manager, who in turn shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the state constitution or the statutes of the state. 
Charter cross reference—Governing body designated as the "council of the City of Lake Jackson," § 3.01.  
Sec. 1.02. - The boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Lake Jackson are hereby established as follows: Located and situated in the County of Brazoria, State of Texas, and being described by metes and bounds in a document titled, "Metes and Bounds of the Corporate Limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, as of September 25, 1953," which document is filed in the city hall of the City of Lake Jackson and is recorded in Book No. 575, Page No. 403, of the Plat Records of Brazoria County, Texas.  
Sec. 1.03. - Extension of boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Lake Jackson may hereafter be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory as authorized under the terms and provisions of Texas Local Government Code ch. 43, as it now exists or may be hereafter amended, in any one (1) of the methods hereinafter designated: 
(a)  Extending limits in accordance with Texas Local Government Code ch. 43. Where such additional territory adjoins the corporate limits of the city and contains three (3) or more inhabitants qualified to vote for members of the state legislature, such adjacent territory may be annexed to the city in the manner and in conformity with the procedure set forth in Texas Local Government Code ch. 43, as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  Extensions of limits by election. The city council shall have the power to order an election or elections for the purpose of annexing territory lying adjacent to the City of Lake Jackson. Such order shall include the survey notes of the area sought to be annexed. The city council shall give notice of the date and place of balloting at such election by publication of the order in the official newspaper of the city at least thirty (30) days prior to the date on which such election is ordered. The residents of the City of Lake Jackson and the territory sought to be annexed, who are qualified to vote for members of the state legislature, shall be qualified to vote at such election. The city council shall, at its next meeting, canvass the return of such election and if a majority of the votes cast at such election by the residents of Lake Jackson, and if a majority of the votes cast at such election by the residents of said territory being considered for annexation, favor such annexation, the council shall declare the said territory annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, and the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson shall thereafter be extended and fixed so as to include such territory. 
(c)  Annexation of unoccupied lands on petition of owners. The owner or owners of any land which is without residents, contiguous and adjacent to the city may, by petition in writing to the city council, request the annexation of such contiguous and adjacent land, describing it by metes and bounds. The city council shall thereafter, and not less than five (5) and not more than thirty (30) days after the filing of such petition, hear such petition and the arguments for and against the same, and grant or refuse such petition as the city council may see fit. If the city council grants such petition, it may by proper ordinance receive and annex such territory as a part of the city. 
(d)  Annexation by amendment to Charter. The boundary limits of the city may be fixed and additional territory added or annexed thereto by amendment to the Charter of the city. 
(e)  Extending limits by action of the city council. The city council shall also have the power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson and to provide for the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said city, with or without the consent of the inhabitants of the territory annexed, in a manner consistent with procedural rules prescribed by law applicable to cities operating under Charters adopted or amended under article XI, section 5, of the constitution of the State of Texas. Said ordinance, in original or amended form, as said city council in its judgment may determine, may be finally passed, and any territory so annexed shall be a part of the City of Lake Jackson. 
(f)  Annexation by any other method provided by law. Additional territory may also be annexed to the city in any manner and by any procedure that may now be provided by law or that may be hereafter provided by law. Same shall be in addition to the methods hereinabove provided. 
(g)  Annexed territory to become part of the city. Upon completion of any one (1) of the procedures hereinabove provided, the territory so annexed shall become a part of the city, and said land and its residents and future residents shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the city and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 64-301, § 1, 3-2-64; Ord. No. 72-461, § 1, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 1, 15), 3-3-2014) 
Editor's note— Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a has been transferred primarily to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 42 and 43. Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 974 has been transferred to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.024. 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 64-301, § 1, amended § 1.03 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held April 4, 1964. Ord. No. 72-461, § 1, approved at a referendum held April 6, 1962, amended § 1.03(e) by providing that additional territory lying adjacent to the city may be annexed in a manner not inconsistent with procedural rules prescribed by state law. Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 1, 15), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 1.03(a) and (e) to read as set out.  
Sec. 1.04. - Contraction of boundaries. 
Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson any territory not suitable or necessary for city purposes, the city council may, upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory if the same be inhabited, or without any such petition if the same be uninhabited, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of said city; said petition and ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from the city and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that the same can be definitely ascertained; and when said ordinance has been duly passed the same shall be entered upon the minutes and records of said city, and from and after the entry of such ordinance said territory shall cease to be a part of said city, but said territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts incurred while said area was a part of said city, and the city shall continue to levy, assess and collect taxes on the property within said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the city as though the same had not been excluded from the boundaries of the city.  
ARTICLE 2. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Sec. 2.01. - General. 
The City of Lake Jackson may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters whatsoever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof, the federal government or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas; and shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple or in any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation and may sell, lease, hold, manage and control any property now owned by it or which it may hereafter acquire; and may construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities; may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issuance and sale of bonds or notes of the city; may appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations; and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace and welfare of the city, for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its residences; and may provide suitable penalties for the violation of any ordinance enacted by the City of Lake Jackson; and, except as prohibited by the constitution and laws of this state or restricted by this Charter, the city may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.  
Sec. 2.02. - General powers adopted. 
The enumeration of the particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the city shall have and may exercise all power of local self-government and all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. The City of Lake Jackson shall have and may exercise all the powers enumerated in the laws of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), 3-3-2014) 
Editor's note— Many of the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175 have been transferred to various sections of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code. 
Amendment Note—Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 2.02 to read as set out.  
Sec. 2.03. - Eminent domain. 
The city shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 1, 5-21-2012) 
Amendment note—Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 1, amended § 2.03 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012.  
ARTICLE 3. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Number, selection and term. 
The legislative and governing body of the city shall consist of a mayor and five (5) councilmen and shall be known as the "Council of the City of Lake Jackson." 
(a)  The mayor shall be elected to office from the city at large. 
(b)  The other members of the city council shall be elected to office by position from the city at large. There shall be five (5) council positions, which shall be designated Position One, Position Two, Position Three, Position Four and Position Five. Each council position shall constitute a separate office. A candidate for the office of councilman shall be elected only to the council position for which he has filed an application as a candidate in the manner provided in article 5 of this Charter. Every qualified voter in the city shall be entitled to vote on a candidate for each council position. 
(c)  In each even-numbered calendar year a mayor and councilman for Position Two and Position Four shall be elected, and in each odd-numbered year councilmen for Position One, Position Three and Position Five shall be elected. 
(d)  The mayor and each councilman shall hold office for a period of two (2) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. All elections shall be held in the manner provided in article 5 of this Charter. 
(e)  The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city council and shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor shall be entitled to vote on all matters under consideration by the city council. 
(f)  (1)  A person who has served four (4) terms as a councilmember shall not be eligible to serve in such office thereafter for a period of 18 months, at which time that person's eligibility to serve another four (4) terms for that office shall be restored. A person who is elected as a councilmember at any city election or who is appointed or elected to serve an unfinished term of office shall be not deemed to have served one (1) term for term limit calculations. 
(2)  A person who has served one (1), two (2), three (3), or four (4) terms as a councilmember shall be eligible to serve another three (3) terms as mayor. 
(3)  A person who has served three (3) of terms as mayor shall not be eligible to serve as a councilmember or as mayor thereafter for a period of 18 months, at which time that person's eligibility to serve the maximum number of terms allowed in those offices shall be restored. A person who is elected as mayor at any city election or who is appointed or elected to serve an unfinished mayoral term of office shall not be deemed to have served one (1) term for term limit calculations. 
(g)  Persons serving in the positions of mayor or councilmember on May 1, 1996, shall be deemed to be serving in the actual number of consecutive terms they have actually consecutively entered into to that point. 
(Ord. No. 70-411, § 1, 3-2-70; Ord. No. 92-1193, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 92-1196, § 1, 4-2-92; Ord. No. 96-1367, 5-4-96; Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3, (Exh. A, Amnds. 4, 5), 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 1, 3), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 70-411, § 1, approved by the voters at an election on Apr. 4, 1970, amended § 3.01 by adding provisions for election of councilmen by numbered position. 
Ord. No. 92-1196, § 1, approved by the voters at an election on May 2, 1992, added subsections (g) and (h), which provided for a limitation of terms. 
Ord. No. 96-1376, § 4, adopted May 6, 1996, approved by the voters at an election on May 4, 1996, added subsections (g) and (h), which provided for a limitation of terms. 
Ord. No. 08-1877, adopted Feb. 18, 2008, and approved at referendum held May 19, 2008, amended § 3.01 by deleting subsection (d) and relettering subsections (e)—(h) as subsections (d)—(g). 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 4, 5), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 3.01(f) to read as set out. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 1, 3), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 3.01(f)(1)—(3) as set out herein. 
Charter cross reference—Council referred to as the "city council," § 1.01.  
Sec. 3.02. - Qualifications. 
Each member of the city council shall be a resident citizen of the City of Lake Jackson, shall be a qualified voter of the State of Texas, shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, shall have been such a resident of the City of Lake Jackson for a period of not less than twelve (12) months preceding his election, and shall not be indebted to the City of Lake Jackson; provided, however, that any person with all of the above qualifications, except as to residence, who shall have been a resident for a period of not less than twelve (12) months immediately preceding his election of any of the territory not formerly within the corporate limits of said city but which is annexed under the provisions of Section 1.03 of the Charter, shall be eligible for said office. If the mayor or any councilman fails to maintain the foregoing qualifications or shall be absent from three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without valid excuse, the city council must at its next regular meeting declare a vacancy to exist and shall fill said vacancy as set forth in Section 3.06 of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 72-461, § 1, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 86-996, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-1691, § 5, 5-8-2002) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 86-996, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1986, amended § 3.02 of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at referendum held Apr. 5, 1986. 
Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2002, amended § 3.02 of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at referendum held May 4, 2002.  
Sec. 3.03. - Council to be judge of election and qualification. 
The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members and other elected officials of the city.  
Sec. 3.04. - Compensation. 
(a)  The city council shall fix the compensation to be received by its members for attendance at its meetings; provided, however, that not more than thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) per meeting shall be allowed per councilmember and that no councilmember shall receive more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) in any one (1) month for attendance at such meetings; and that the mayor shall not receive more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in any one (1) month. 
(b)  The city council may, by ordinance, provide for the payment of or the reimbursement of expenses incurred by the mayor and councilmen when all or any of them are required to be out of the city attending to the business of the city. 
(c)  No other compensation, salary, fee or expense allowance of any kind shall be paid to the mayor or councilmen. 
(d)  A city councilmember may, at his or her discretion, waive receiving compensation for attendance at its meetings. 
(Ord. No. 76-580, § 1, 2-16-76; Ord. No. 90-1120, § 1, 2-5-90; Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-1689, § 1, 5-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-1691, § 5, 5-8-2002; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3, (Exh. A, Amnd. 7), 3-3-2014) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 90-1120, § 1, amended § 3.04(a) of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 5, 1990. 
Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2002, amended § 3.04(a) of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at referendum held May 4, 2002. 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 7), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 2.02 to read as set out.  
Sec. 3.05. - Mayor pro-tem. 
The city council, at its first meeting after election of councilmen, shall elect one (1) of its number mayor pro-tem, and he shall perform all the duties of the mayor in the absence or disability of the mayor.  
Sec. 3.06. - Vacancies. 
(a)  If a vacancy on the city council occurs with less than 31 days before the next election filing deadline, the vacancy shall be filled at the next regular city election. 
(b)  At all other times, the council can fill a vacancy on the city council. 
(c)  There can be no more than two appointed council members on city council at any time. 
(Ord. No. 94-1284, § 1(2), 2-21-94; Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 1), 2-16-2016) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 1), approved at referendum May 7, 2016, amended § 3.06 to read as set out herein.  
Sec. 3.07. - Powers of the city council. 
All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the city council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(a)  Remove from any office or position of employment in the city government, any officer or employee or member of any board or commission, unless that person reports to the city manager or is employed in one (1) of the city departments under the direction of the city manager. 
(b)  Establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions. 
(c)  Adopt the budget of the city. 
(d)  Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance. 
(e)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(f)  Provide for such additional boards and commissions, not otherwise provided for in this Charter, as may be deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this Charter, by city ordinance or by law. 
(g)  Adopt and modify the zoning plan and the building code of the city. 
(h)  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. 
(i)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
(j)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
(k)  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city. 
(l)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein, and provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within said limits, and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings, or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard and prescribe the manner of their removal or destruction within said limits. 
(m)  Fix the salaries and compensation of the city officers and employees. 
(n)  Provide for a sanitary sewer and water system and require property owners to connect their premises with such sewer system, and provide for penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections. 
(o)  Provide for sanitary garbage disposal, and set fees and charges therefor, and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges. 
(p)  Exercise exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, highways, boulevards and public grounds of the city and provide for the improvement of same as provided in Texas Transportation Code ch. 313, as now or hereafter amended. 
(q)  Compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the City of Lake Jackson. 
(Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3, (Exh. A, Amnd. 15), 3-3-2014) 
Amendment note—Provisions of § 3.07(a) were amended by Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, adopted February 6, 1984 and approved by the electorate April 7, 1984, to read as herein set forth. 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 3.07(p) to read as set out.  
Sec. 3.08. - City council not to interfere in appointments. 
Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to office by the city manager or by any of his subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately.  
Sec. 3.09. - Meetings of the city council. 
The city council shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at a time to be fixed by it for such regular meetings, and may hold as many additional meetings during the month as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the city and its citizens. All meetings of the city council shall be public and shall be held at the city hall, except that the city council may designate another place for such meetings after publishing due notice thereof in one (1) issue of a newspaper in general circulation in the City of Lake Jackson. The mayor or any two (2) members of the city council may call special meetings of the city council at any time.  
Sec. 3.10. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may compel the attendance of its members. Two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the qualified members of the city council shall constitute a quorum to do business and the affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution. Minutes of the proceedings of all meetings of the city council shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times and which shall constitute one (1) of the archives of the city. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by the "ayes" and "nays" and entered upon the minutes, and every ordinance or resolution, upon its final passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of the city secretary.  
Sec. 3.11. - Procedure for passage of ordinances. 
The city council shall only consider ordinances and resolutions that are in written or printed form. All ordinances, except ordinances making appropriations and ordinances codifying or rearranging existing ordinances or enacting a code of ordinances, shall be clearly expressed in the title. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of the appropriations. No ordinance shall be finally passed until it has been read on two (2) separate regular meetings of city council, unless the requirements for reading it on two (2) separate regular meetings of city council are dispensed with by an affirmative vote of all of the councilmembers present. If the second reading is dispensed with, the reason shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. The final reading of each ordinance shall be in full, unless written or printed copy thereof shall have been furnished to each member of the city council prior to such reading. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Lake Jackson. 
(Ord. No. 90-1120, § 1, 2-5-90; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 2, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3, (Exh. A, Amnd. 8), 3-3-2014) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 90-1120, § 1, amended § 3.11 to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 5, 1990. 
Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 2, amended § 3.11 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012. 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 8), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 3.11 to read as set out.  
Sec. 3.12. - Official bonds for city officers and employees. 
The city manager and the city secretary and such other city officers and employees as the city council may require, shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in a sum to be determined by the city council, payable to the City of Lake Jackson and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of such persons and upon the faithful accounting for all monies, credits, and things of value coming into the hands of such persons, and such bonds shall be signed as surety by some company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Texas, and the premium on such bonds shall be paid by the City of Lake Jackson, and such bonds must be acceptable to the city council.  
Sec. 3.13. - Investigation by the city council. 
The city council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, officer or employee of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed two hundred ($200.00) dollars.  
Sec. 3.14. - Audit and examination of city books and accounts. 
The city council may require a special audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the city at any time during the year. At the close of each fiscal year a complete audit shall be made by a certified public accountant, who shall be selected by the city council, and such audit shall include a recapitulation of all audits made during the course of each fiscal year, and all audit reports shall be filed with the city council, shall be available for public inspection and shall be made a part of the archives of the city. Such accountant, so selected, shall not maintain or keep any of the city's accounts or records. 
(Ord. No. 78-646, § 1, 1-16-78)  
Sec. 3.15. - Publication of ordinances. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this chapter [sic], the city secretary shall give notice of the enactment of every penal ordinance and every other ordinance required by causing the descriptive title or caption of the same to be published at least one (1) time within ten (10) days after final passage thereof in some newspaper of general circulation in the city and to be posted on the city's website. Proof of such publication or posting by the printer or publisher of such newspaper or administrator of the website made by affidavit before any officer authorized to administer oaths and filed with the city secretary shall be conclusive evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance in all courts and elsewhere. Such publication shall contain a substantive condensed statement of the nature and purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof. The penalty, fine or forfeiture shall apply five (5) days after publication. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 2-18-58; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Section 1 of Ord. No. 222, enacted February 18, 1958, was approved by the voters of the city on April 5, 1958; as a result, § 3.15, as hereinabove set out, was added to the Charter. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 3.15 as set out herein.  
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 4.01. - City manager. 
(a)  Appointment and qualifications. The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all the affairs of the city. He shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City of Lake Jackson. No member of the city council shall, during the time for which he is elected and for one (1) year thereafter, be appointed city manager. 
(b)  Term and salary. The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council by a vote of the majority of the entire council. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the city council. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council. 
(c)  Powers and duties of the city manager: 
(1)  Appoint, and when necessary for the welfare of the city, remove any employee of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council, and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendation as may seem desirable. 
(5)  Perform such duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or may be required of him by the city council, not inconsistent with this Charter.  
Sec. 4.02. - Department of police. 
There shall be established and maintained a department of police to preserve order within the city and to secure the residents of said city from violence and the property therein from injury or loss. 
(Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008) 
Editor's note— The statute cited in subsection (b) has been transferred to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 141.006, 341.001 and 341.012. None of such laws pertain to the election or appointment of the chief of police. 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 4.02 to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 4.03. - City secretary. 
The city manager shall appoint the city secretary and such assistant city secretaries as the city council shall deem advisable. The city secretary, or an assistant city secretary, shall give notice of council meetings, shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of such meetings, shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a book kept and indexed for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign to him, and those elsewhere provided for in this Charter.  
Sec. 4.04. - Municipal court. 
(a)  There shall be established and maintained a court designated as a municipal court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal courts. 
(b)  The judge of said court shall: 
(1)  be a citizen of the United States, 
(2)  be a resident of the State of Texas, 
(3)  not meet any of the disqualifications to vote under either the Texas Constitution or state law, 
(4)  be a duly licensed attorney in the State of Texas, 
(5)  hold no other city office or city employment during the term for which that person is appointed judge of municipal court. 
(c)  The judge shall be appointed by the city council, shall hold this office at the pleasure of the city council, and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city council. 
(d)  The city manager shall appoint the clerk of the municipal court. 
(e)  The clerk of said court and his deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by the clerk of courts in issuing process of said courts and conducting the business thereof. 
(f)  To adequately provide for judicial service the city council may appoint temporary, alternate or relief judges in case of disability, absence, or other unavailability of the judge of said court. All temporary, alternate or relief judges must meet the same qualifications as the judge of said court. 
(Ord. No. 72-461, § 1, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 78-646, § 1, 1-16-78; Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 10-1927, Exh. A, 2-16-2010/Res. No. 10-959, Att. A, 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3, (Exh. A, Amnd. 9), 3-3-2014) 
Amendment note—Res. No. 10-959, Exh. A, Amnds. 2—5, amended § 4.04 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 8, 2010. 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 4.04(d) to read as set out.  
Sec. 4.05. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a competent attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Texas, who shall be the city attorney. He shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council and shall hold his office at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney, or such other attorneys selected by him with the approval of the city council, shall represent the city in all litigation. He shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the city and all officers and departments thereof. 
(Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008)  
Sec. 4.06. - Department of health and sanitation. 
The city council shall appoint a board of health, which shall be the governing board of the department of health and sanitation. 
(a)  Appointment and qualifications: The board of health shall be composed of five (5) members, of which one (1) such member shall be a qualified physician, licensed to practice medicine in the State of Texas; one (1) member shall be the city manager; and three (3) additional members shall be appointed from any occupation the city council desires with the exception of medicine and city management. They shall receive such compensation for their services on the board as the city council shall determine and shall serve for a period of two (2) years, or until their successors shall have been appointed and qualified. The first such board shall be appointed within sixty (60) days after the adoption of this Charter and each succeeding board shall be appointed or reappointed within 45 days after the regular city election in each even-numbered year. 
(b)  Administration: The city health officer and presiding officer of the board shall be the member who is licensed to practice medicine in the State of Texas; the city manager shall be responsible for the general administration of the department of health and sanitation and the supervision of the employees thereof. 
(c)  Duties of the board of health: The board shall advise with the city council on a program of public health; shall cooperate in the preparation of a sanitary code; shall cooperate with nearby cities on problems of health and sanitation; shall cooperate with the Commissioner's Court of Brazoria County and its agencies, and with the state health department and other departments of the state government in matters pertaining to health and sanitation. 
(d)  Sanitary code: The Texas Health and Safety Code or such sanitary code provided for by state law shall be used as the basis for the city's sanitary code. Such code shall provide for timely inspections to assure that its provisions are complied with; said inspections to be made in the manner designated, and by persons selected by the city manager. The powers of the city council to establish necessary rules and regulations for the purposes of this Code shall include, but not to the exclusion of other powers, the following: 
(1)  The power to establish quarantine stations and pest houses and to adopt ordinances necessary for the control of contagious or infectious diseases. 
(2)  The power to regulate, license and inspect persons, firms, corporations, common carriers or associations operating any public place where food or drink or candies or manufactured sweets are served, sold or otherwise handled within the corporate boundaries of Lake Jackson; to prescribe health regulations with reference to any employees or workers used in any such place; to regulate, license and inspect the sanitary condition of such places; and to condemn all articles not wholesome or fit for human consumption. 
(3)  The power to define all nuisances and prohibit the same within the city and outside the city limits for a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet; to prohibit the pollution or stoppage of any stream, draw or drainage ditch; to work in cooperation with the drainage commissioners for the improvement of the drainage system and mosquito control. 
(4)  The power to license, regulate and inspect producers, carriers and retailers of meats and dairy products inside or outside the city limits from which meat or milk is furnished to the residents of the city. 
(5)  The power to require property owners to make connections with the sanitary sewer system; to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make such connection and to provide for fixing a lien against any property owner's premise who fails or refuses to make such connection and to charge the cost against said owner and make it a personal liability. 
(6)  The power to inspect restrooms open to the public and require their maintenance in a condition of cleanliness. 
(7)  The power to provide for the fixing of penalties for the failure of any person, firm or corporation to comply with such rules and regulations as are prescribed by the city council under the provisions of this article or the laws of the State of Texas, it being the intent of this Charter to vest in the city council not only the powers expressly enumerated in this article but all other powers, express or implied, granted under the general laws and constitution of the State of Texas in matters pertaining to health and sanitation. 
(e)  Rules of open meetings; records: Meetings shall be held as needed, shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which record shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-1691, § 5, 5-8-2002; Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3, (Exh. A, Amnds. 10, 11), 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 4, 10), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2002, amended § 4.06(a)(e) of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at referendum held May 4, 2002. 
Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 4.06(a) to read as herein set out. 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 10, 11), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 4.06(d) to read as set out. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 4, 10), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 4.06(a) and (e) as set out herein.  
Sec. 4.07. - Other departments. 
The city council may abolish or consolidate such offices and departments as it may deem to be to the best interest of the city, and may divide the administration of any such departments as it may deem advisable; may create new departments, and may discontinue any offices or departments at its discretion, except those specifically established by this Charter.  
Sec. 4.08. - Park and recreation board. 
There shall be established and maintained a city park and recreation board consisting of five (5) or more members who shall be residents of the city, shall serve without compensation and shall not hold any other position in city government. 
(a)  Selection. The members of the park and recreation board shall be appointed by the city council; half of the members shall be appointed each year, within 45 days following the regular city election. In the event of an odd number of members, the extra member will be appointed in even-numbered years. The term of office of each member shall be two (2) years. 
(b)  Vacancies. Membership on the board shall be accompanied by active participation in the activities of the board, and the city council may by ordinance provide attendance requirements. The board shall at once notify the city council that a vacancy in the board exists. Vacancies occurring in the board, for whatever reason, shall be filled within thirty (30) days by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Rules of procedure; quorum; open meetings; records. The board shall elect, annually, one (1) of its number chairman, and shall establish its own rules of procedure which shall include the following: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the board and an affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon any question. Meetings shall be held, each month unless cancelled by the chair following meeting posting requirements, shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which record shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The board shall have the power to and shall be required to: 
(1)  Draft, and recommend to the city council for adoption, policies for use of the city's parks and recreational facilities. 
(2)  Submit annually to the city manager, not less than ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of the budget year, a proposed operating budget; and a list of recommendations for capital improvements which, in the opinion of the board are necessary or desirable to be constructed during the forthcoming five (5) years. Such list shall be arranged in order of preference, with the recommendations of the board as to which projects shall be constructed in which year. 
(3)  Review any proposed acquisition of land, buildings or other properties, and construction or capital improvements of facilities, or any grant or devise of real estate or personal property for use as a park, playground or other recreational purpose; and recommend appropriate action to the city council. 
(4)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time authorize. 
(e)  Liaison with city council. The city manager or his representative shall attend the meetings of the park and recreation board and the city manager or his representative or any member of council appointed by the city council shall serve as liaison between the board and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 64-301, § 1, 3-2-64; Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, 2-11-80; Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-1691, § 5, 5-8-2002; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 3, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 10), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 64-301, § 1 amended the Charter to add § 4.08 above. Such amendment was approved at referendum Apr. 4, 1964. 
Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 1980, and approved by the electorate Apr. 5, 1980, amended § 4.08 to read as set out herein. 
Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2002, amended § 4.08(b) of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at referendum held May 4, 2002. 
Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 3, amended § 4.08(c) of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 10), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 4.08(a) as set out herein.  
Sec. 4.09. - Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission. 
There shall be established and maintained a Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission for the restoration, preservation, and enhancement of scenic beauty, consisting of five (5) or more members who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve without compensation. 
(a)  Selection. The members of the Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission shall be appointed by the city council; half of the members shall be appointed each year within 45 days following the regular city election. In the event of an odd number of members, the extra member will be appointed in even-numbered years. The term of office of each member shall be two (2) years. In addition, the director of parks and recreation, as a representative of the city manager, shall be an ex officio member of the commission, and shall serve the commission in an advisory capacity, but shall have no voting rights and shall attend the meetings of the Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission. 
(b)  Vacancies. Membership on the commission shall be accompanied by active participation in the activities of the commission and the city council may by ordinance provide attendance requirements. The commission shall at once notify the city council that a vacancy exists. Vacancies occurring in the commission, for whatever reason, shall be filled within thirty (30) days by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Rules of procedure; quorum; open meetings; records. The commission shall annually elect one (1) of its members as chairman, and shall establish its own rules and procedures which shall include the following: A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members of the commission and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon questions. Meetings shall be held, each month unless cancelled by the chair following meeting posting requirements, shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission shall be and is hereby vested with the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the landscaping, the placement of trees, grass, shrubs, flowers and decorations within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, including public parks and private property used for public purposes. 
(2)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies concerning the aesthetic qualities that are involved in preserving and enhancing scenic beauty in planning and zoning the future development and redevelopment of the municipality. 
(3)  Make recommendations concerning the aesthetic placement of trees, grass, shrubs, flowers and decorations within the city and hold public hearings as necessary. 
(4)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time authorize. 
(e)  Liaison with city council. The director of parks and recreation as representative of the city manager shall also coordinate the activities of the Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission and those of the parks and recreation board and the director of parks and recreation as representative of the city manager or any member of council appointed by the city council shall serve as a liaison between these boards and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 76-580, § 1, 2-16-76; Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, 2-11-80; Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-1691, § 5, 5-8-2002; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 3, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3, (Exh. A, Amnds. 12—14), 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 10), 2-5-2018) 
Cross reference— Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission, § 2-226 et seq. 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 76-580, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 1976 amended the Charter to add § 4.09. Such amendment was approved at a regular city election held Apr. 3, 1976. 
Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 1980, and approved at referendum on Apr. 5, 1980, further amended § 4.09 to read as herein set forth. 
Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2002, amended § 4.09(b) of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at referendum held May 4, 2002. 
Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 3, amended § 4.09(c) of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012. 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 12—14), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 4.09 to read as set out. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 10), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 4.09(a) as set out herein.  
Sec. 4.10. - Traffic commission. 
There shall be established and maintained a traffic commission of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, consisting of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the city, and who shall serve without compensation. 
(a)  Selection. Seven (7) members of the traffic commission shall be appointed by the city council, four (4) such members to be appointed in each even numbered year, and three (3) such members to be appointed in each odd numbered year, the appointments to be made each within 45 days following the regular election. The term of office of each such member shall be two (2) years. In addition, there shall be three (3) ex-officio members of the traffic commission, consisting of a city councilman, to be designated by the city council, the chief of police and the city attorney. Ex-officio members shall serve the commission in an advisory capacity but shall [have] no voting rights, and shall attend meetings as requested by the council or the traffic commission. 
(b)  Vacancies. Membership on the commission shall be accompanied by active participation in the activities of the commission and the city council may by ordinance provide attendance requirements. The commission shall immediately notify the city council that a vacancy on the commission exists. Vacancies occurring on the commission, for whatever reason, shall be filled within thirty (30) days by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Rules and procedures. The commission shall annually elect one (1) of its number as chairman and shall establish its own rules and procedures which shall include the following: 
[(1)]  A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members of the commission and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon questions. 
[(2)]  Meetings shall be held, each month unless cancelled by the chair following meeting posting requirements, shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(d)  General powers and duties. The traffic commission shall be and is hereby vested with the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the operation and parking of vehicles within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, including private property used for public purposes. 
(2)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, by causing to be erected or placed proper signs or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  Recommend to the city council the location of all necessary signs or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part thereof when said commission shall deem the same necessary. 
(4)  Initiate studies on all vehicular and pedestrian traffic problems within the city, and hold public hearings as necessary with regard to these studies. 
(5)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time authorize. 
(Ord. No. 90-1120, § 1, 2-5-90; Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-1691, § 5, 5-8-2002; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 3, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 10), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 90-1120, § 1, added § 4.10 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 5, 1990. Ord. No. 02-1682, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2002, amended § 4.10(b) of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at referendum held May 4, 2002. 
Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 3, amended § 4.10(c) of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 10), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 4.10(a) as set out herein.  
ARTICLE 5. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Elections. 
Regular municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities and shall be held on a uniform election date set out in state law. The city council shall fix the hours and place for holding such election. The city council may, by resolution, order a special election, fix the time and place for holding same and provide all means for holding such special election. 
(Ord. No. 88-1064, § 1, 2-15-88; Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 4, 5-21-2012) 
Editor's note— Voting hours are determined by V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.031 et seq. 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 88-1064, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1988 and approved at a regular city election on May 7, 1988, amended § 5.01 by changing the annual election date from the first Saturday in April to the first Saturday in May. 
Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 5.01 to read as herein set out. 
Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 4, amended § 5.01 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012.  
Sec. 5.02. - Regulation of elections. 
The city council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities who shall also have power to make regulations not inconsistent with this Charter or with any regulations made by the council or the laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 5.03. - Filing for office. 
Any person having the qualifications set forth for councilman under section 3.02 of this Charter shall have the right to file an application in writing, signed by such candidate and accompanied by his loyalty affidavit as prescribed by V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.031, and filed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Election Code § 143.007, with the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 88-1064, § 1, 2-15-88; Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 5), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 88-1064, adopted Feb. 18, 1988, and approved at a regular city election on May 7, 1988, amended § 5.03 to read as herein set out. 
Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 5.03 to read as herein set out. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 5), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 5.03 as set out herein.  
Sec. 5.04. - The official ballot. 
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall appear on the official ballots without party designations in the order determined in a drawing of lots as determined by the Texas Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 6), 2-5-2018) 
Editor's note— As provided in V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 81 et seq., "absentee voting" has been changed to "early voting." 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 6), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 5.04 as set out herein.  
Sec. 5.05. - Election by majority. 
At any regular or special municipal election, where no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast for that particular office, a runoff election shall be required between the two candidates receiving the highest and second highest number of votes. 
(Ord. No. 78-646, § 1, 1-16-78; Ord. No. 88-1064, § 1, 2-15-88; Ord. No. 00-1624, § 1, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 7, 8), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 88-1064, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 1988, and approved at a regular city election on May 7, 1988, amended § 5.05 to read as herein set out. 
Ord. No. 00-1630, § 4, adopted May 9, 2000, and approved at a regular city election on May 6, 2000, amended § 5.05 to read as herein set out. 
Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 5.05 to read as herein set out. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 7, 8), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 5.05 as set out herein. 
State Law reference— Runoff election day, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 2.025.  
Sec. 5.06. - Laws governing city elections. 
All city elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal elections.  
Sec. 5.07. - Conducting and canvassing elections. 
The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall be appointed by the city council. The election judges shall conduct the elections, determine, record and report the results as provided by the general election laws of Texas. Within the time set by state law, the city council shall meet, open the returns, canvass and officially declare the result of election as to candidates and questions and issue certificates of election to candidates election [elected] as hereinbefore provided. 
(Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 5.07 to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 5.08. - Oath of office. 
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of office, take the oaths or affirmations of office as set forth in the Texas Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 92-1196, § 1, 4-2-92; Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 5, 5-21-2012) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 92-1196, approved by the voters at an election held on May 2, 1992, amended § 5.08 in its entirety to read as herein set forth. 
Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 5, amended § 5.08 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012. 
State Constitution reference— Similar provisions, art. XVI, § 1.  
ARTICLE 6. - RECALL OF OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Scope of recall. 
Any elected city official, whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the city or elected by the city council to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the city on the grounds of incompetency, corruption, misconduct, or malfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 78-646, § 1, 1-16-78; Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 6.01 to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 6.02. - Petitions for recall. 
Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city, a petition demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of the city secretary; which said petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election of the city, but in no event less than six hundred (600) such petitioners. Each signer of such recall petition shall personally print his or her name, sign his name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after his name his place of residence, giving name of street and number, or place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the month and year his signature was affixed. 
(Ord. No. 76-580, § 1, 2-16-76; Ord. No. 86-996, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 2), 2-16-2016) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 86-996, § 1, adopted February 3, 1986, amended § 6.02 of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held April 5, 1986. 
Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 6.02 to read as herein set out. 
Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 2), approved at referendum held May 7, 2016, amended § 6.02 to read as set out.  
Sec. 6.03. - Form of recall petition. 
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the city council of the City of Lake Jackson, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one (1) ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed, notice of the matters and things with which he is charged. The signature shall be sworn to and notarized in Brazoria County and verified by oath in the following form: 
I, _______, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
(Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 3), 2-16-2016) 
Amendment Note—Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 3), approved at referendum held May 7, 2016, amended § 6.03 to read as set out.  
Sec. 6.04. - Various papers constituting petition. 
The petition may consist of one (1) or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other papers attached thereto. Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this article may be made by one (1) or more petitioners, and the several parts or copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of the city secretary. All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary on the same day, and the said secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to his Lake Jackson address.  
Sec. 6.05. - Presentation of petition to city council. 
Within ten (10) business days of the filing of a petition, the city secretary shall review the petition to determine the existence of the requisite number of signatures of qualified voters and whether the form of the petition complies with the provisions of this Charter. The city secretary shall also review the petition to determine the genuineness of the signatures. The city attorney shall review the petition for legal sufficiency. If the city attorney and city secretary find the petition is sufficient, it shall be presented to city council at its next regular meeting with a certification from the city secretary to that effect and notify the officer sought to be recalled of such impending action. If the petition is insufficient, the reason for the insufficiency shall be set forth in the certification of the city secretary stating the particulars in which the petition is defective and the city secretary shall at once notify the person who filed the petition of such findings. 
(Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 6, 5-21-2012) 
Amendment note—Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 6, amended § 6.05 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012.  
Sec. 6.06. - Public hearing to be held. 
The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the city council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the city council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.  
Sec. 6.07. - Election to be called. 
If, after presentation of the petition to city council, the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the city council to order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election on the next uniform election date. 
(Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 7, 5-21-2012) 
Amendment note—Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 7, amended § 6.07 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012.  
Sec. 6.08. - Ballots in recall election. 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: 
Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall? 
(b)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two (2) following propositions, one (1) above the other, in the order indicated: 
FOR the recall of (name of person). 
AGAINST the recall of (name of person).  
Sec. 6.09. - Result of recall election. 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled as vacancies in the city council are filled, as provided in section 3.06 of this Charter.  
Sec. 6.10. - Recall, restrictions thereon. 
No recall petition shall be filed against any elected official of the City of Lake Jackson within 6 months after his election, nor within 6 months after an election for such officer's recall. 
(Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008)  
Sec. 6.11. - Failure of city council to call a recall election. 
In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the city council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said city council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then any resident of the city may bring suit or application to the appropriate district court or institution to ensure that any such duties herein provided be discharged by the person performing the duties of city secretary or by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, adopted February 6, 1984, and approved at a referendum on April 7, 1984, amended § 6.11 to read as herein set out.  
ARTICLE 7. - LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
Sec. 7.01. - General power. 
The qualified voters of the City of Lake Jackson, in addition to the method of legislation hereinbefore provided, shall have the power of direct legislation by the initiative and referendum.  
Sec. 7.02. - Initiative. 
Qualified voters of the City of Lake Jackson may initiate legislation by submitting a petition addressed to the city council which requests the submission of a proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of the qualified voters of the city. Said petition must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to twenty (20) percent of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election of the city, or four hundred (400), whichever is greater, and each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. The petition shall be signed in the same manner as recall petitions are signed, as provided in section 6.02 of this Charter, and shall be verified by oath in the manner and form provided for recall petitions in section 6.03 of this Charter. The petition may consist of one (1) or more copies as permitted for recall petitions in section 6.04 of this Charter. Such petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary. The city secretary and city attorney shall follow the procedures set out in section 6.05 of this Charter. Upon presentation of the petition and draft of the proposed ordinance or resolution, it shall become the duty of the city council, within ten (10) days after the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolution without alteration as to meaning or effect in the opinion of the persons filing the petition, or within the time frames established by law, call a special election, to be held on the next uniform election date under state law by which lawful notices can be given and full absentee balloting had, at which the qualified voters of the City of Lake Jackson shall vote on the question of adopting or rejecting the proposed legislation. 
(Ord. No. 90-1120, § 1, 2-5-90; Ord. No. 06-1808, § 1, 2-21-2006; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 8, 5-21-2012) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 90-1120, § 1, amended § 7.02 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 5, 1990. 
Ord. No. 06-1808, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, and approved at a regular city election on May 13, 2006, amended § 7.02 to read as herein set out. 
Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 8, amended § 7.02 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012.  
Sec. 7.03. - Referendum. 
Qualified voters of the City of Lake Jackson may require that any ordinance or resolution passed by the city council be submitted to the voters of the city for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for the purpose within 30 days after final passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within 30 days after its publication; provided, however, that ordinances submitted by the city council to the qualified voters of the city for approval in fulfillment of requirements of state law and approved by said voters in an election called for that purpose shall not be subject to such referendum action. Said petition shall be addressed, prepared, signed and verified as required for petitions initiating legislation as provided in section 7.02 of this Charter and shall be submitted to the person performing the duties of city secretary. Immediately upon the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present said petition to the city council. Thereupon the city council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or resolution and, if it does not entirely repeal the same shall submit it to popular vote as provided in section 7.02 of this Charter. Pending the holding of such election, such ordinance or resolution shall be suspended from taking effect and shall not later take effect unless a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon at such election shall vote in favor thereof. 
(Ord. No. 72-461, § 1, 2-7-72) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 72-461, § 1, approved April 1, 1972, amended section 7.03 by adding the proviso in the first sentence.  
Sec. 7.04. - Voluntary submission of legislation by the council. 
The city council, upon its own motion and by a majority vote of its members, may submit to popular vote at any election for adoption or rejection any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure, or may submit for repeal any existing ordinance, resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this article for submission on petition, and may in its discretion call a special election for this purpose.  
Sec. 7.05. - Form of ballots. 
The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinances, resolutions or measures, shall set forth their nature sufficiently to identify them and shall also set forth upon separate lines the words: 
FOR the ORDINANCE, and 
AGAINST the ORDINANCE, or 
FOR the RESOLUTION, and 
AGAINST the RESOLUTION.  
Sec. 7.06. - Publication of proposed and referred ordinances. 
The person performing the duties of city secretary shall publish at least once in the official newspaper of the city and post on the city's website the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other things relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election. 
(Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 7.06 as set out herein.  
Sec. 7.07. - Adoption of ordinances. 
If a majority of the qualified voters voting on any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon, or at any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order to the city council.  
Sec. 7.08. - Inconsistent ordinances. 
If the provisions of two (2) or more proposed ordinances or resolutions approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.  
Sec. 7.09. - Ordinances passed by popular vote, repeal or amendment. 
No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the city council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this article shall be repealed or amended except by the city council in response to a referendum petition or by submission as provided in section 7.04 of this Charter.  
Sec. 7.10. - Further regulations by city council. 
The city council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this article not consistent herewith.  
Sec. 7.11. - Franchise ordinances. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of article 10 of this Charter, pertaining to ordinances granting franchises when valuable rights shall have accrued thereunder.  
ARTICLE 8. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Platting of property. 
(a)  Hereafter, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, who may divide the same in two (2) or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision or any addition to the city, shall comply with the provisions of Texas Local Government Code ch. 212, as now or hereafter amended, and said Texas Local Government Code ch. 212, as now or hereafter amended is hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes. 
(b)  The provisions of section 8.01(a) above shall apply similarly to the owner of any tract of land situated within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City of Lake Jackson. 
(Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), 3-3-2014) 
Editor's note— Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 974a has been transferred to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 42.021 and 212.003 the extraterritorial jurisdiction extends one mile outside the city. 
Amendment Note—Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 8.01(a) to read as set out.  
Sec. 8.02. - Development of property. 
The city council shall cooperate in every manner possible with persons interested in the development of property within or beyond the city limits. No expenditure of public funds, however, shall be authorized for the development of privately-owned subdivisions situated within or beyond the corporate limits of the city except for the extension of utilities or services to such areas. Any ordinance or resolution authorizing expenditures for such extensions of utilities or services beyond the city limits shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city as provided in section 7.04 of this Charter.  
Sec. 8.03. - Planning commission. 
The city council shall appoint a city planning commission consisting of six (6) members who shall be residents of the City of Lake Jackson, shall serve without compensation, and shall not hold any other position in the city government. 
(a)  Term of office. Of the six (6) members first appointed, three (3) shall be appointed to serve until April 30, 1954, and three (3) to serve until April 30, 1955. Beginning in 1954, three (3) members shall be appointed within 45 days after each regular city election to serve a term of two (2) years. 
(b)  Rules of procedure. The commission shall elect, annually, one (1) of its number chairman, and shall establish its own rules of procedure which shall include the following: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the commission and an affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon any question. All meetings shall be open to the public and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which record shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(c)  Vacancies. Membership on the planning commission shall be accompanied by active participation in the activities of the commission, and the city council may by ordinance provide attendance requirements. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The commission shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Make, amend, extend and add to the master plan for the physical development of the city. 
(2)  Approve or disapprove plats of proposed subdivisions submitted in accordance with section 8.01 of this Charter. In considering such plats, the planning commission shall require that the proposed subdivisions shall meet, so far as is practicable, all the standards of layout and street and sidewalk construction on comparable property within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, and shall further require that restrictions be placed on the use of the property which are consistent with the restrictions on comparable property within the City of Lake Jackson. 
(3)  Make, and recommend to the city council for adoption, a zoning plan and recommend or disapprove proposed changes in such plan. 
(4)  Make, and recommend to the city council for adoption, plans for the clearance and rebuilding of blighted districts and blighted areas which may develop within the city. 
(5)  Meet each month unless cancelled by the chair following meeting posting requirements; meetings to be held at the city hall unless prior notice of change of meeting place be given by publication in a newspaper in general circulation in the City of Lake Jackson and posted on the city's website. 
(6)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time prescribe. 
(e)  Liaison with city council. The city manager or his representative shall attend the meetings of the planning commission and the city manager or any member of council appointed by the city council shall serve as liaison between the planning commission and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 2-18-58; Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, 2-11-80; Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 3, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 17, 18), 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 4), 2-16-2016; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 9, 10), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Section 1 of Ord. No. 222, enacted February 18, 1958, was approved by voters on April 5, 1958; as a result, § 8.03(c) was amended to read as herein set out, in effect deleting the attendance requirements and authorizing the city council to establish them. 
Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, adopted February 11, 1980, and approved by the voters on April 5, 1980, amended § 8.03(e) to read as herein set out. 
Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 3, amended § 8.03(d)(8), (9) to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012. 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 17, 18), approved at referendum May 10, 2014, amended § 8.03 by deleting subsections (d)(3), (6) and (7), and relettering subsections (d)(4), (5), (8) and (9) as subsections (d)(3)—(6). 
Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 4), approved at referendum held May 7, 2016, amended § 8.03(d)(2) to read as set out. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnds. 9, 10), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 8.03(a) and (d)(5) as set out herein.  
Sec. 8.04. - Zoning board of adjustment. 
The city council shall appoint a zoning board of adjustment of five (5) members who shall be citizens of the City of Lake Jackson, shall be appointed to serve for a term of two (2) years, shall adopt rules in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the city, shall select one (1) of their number chairman and shall meet at the call of said chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. All meetings of such board shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept of all proceedings, showing the vote of each member present upon every question. The board shall have all powers granted in Texas Local Government code ch. 211 as now or hereafter amended, which shall include the power to hear and determine appeals from refusal of building permits, and to permit exceptions to or variations from the zoning regulations in classes of cases or situations in accordance with the principles, conditions and procedure specified in the zoning ordinance. Of the number first appointed to the zoning board of adjustment, three (3) members shall be appointed to serve until April 30, 1954 and two (2) to serve until April 30, 1955. Thereafter three (3) members shall be appointed 45 days after the regular city election each even-numbered year, and two (2) members shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after the regular city election each odd-numbered year. 
(Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 10), 2-5-2018) 
Editor's note— Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1011a through 1011j have been transferred to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211. 
Amendment note— Section 8.04 was amended to read as set out herein by Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, adopted February 6, 1984, and approved by the electorate on April 7, 1984. 
Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 8.04 to read as set out. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 10), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 8.04 as set out herein.  
ARTICLE 9. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the City of Lake Jackson shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.  
Sec. 9.02. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
The city manager, between sixty (60) and ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, shall submit to the council a proposed budget, which budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and shall contain the following: 
(a)  A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous fiscal year in expenditure and revenue items, and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. 
(b)  A consolidated statement of anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures for all funds. 
(c)  An analysis of property valuations. 
(d)  An analysis of tax rate. 
(e)  Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least five (5) years. 
(f)  General fund resources in detail. 
(g)  Special fund resources in detail. 
(h)  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department, and activity. 
(i)  (Deleted Election April 7, 1956.) 
(j)  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support the summaries, nos. (h) and (i), above. Such estimates of expenditures are to include an itemization of positions showing the number of persons having each title and rate of pay. 
(k)  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds. 
(l)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued and amount outstanding. 
(m)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds. 
(n)  The appropriation ordinance. 
(o)  The tax levying ordinance.  
Sec. 9.03. - Anticipated revenues compared with other years in budget. 
In preparing the budget, the city manager shall place in parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue: the actual amount of each item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Sec. 9.04. - Proposed expenditures compared with other years. 
The city manager in the preparation of the budget shall place in parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures: the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Sec. 9.05. - Budget a public record. 
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary, submitted to the city council and shall be a public record. The city manager shall provide copies for distribution to all interested persons.  
Sec. 9.06. - Notice of public hearing on budget. 
At the meeting of the city council at which the public hearing on the tax rate is called, the city council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the City of Lake Jackson and posted on the city's website, a notice of the hearing on the budget, setting forth the time and place thereof at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 76-580, § 1, 2-16-76; Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 9.06 as set out herein.  
Sec. 9.07. - Public hearing on budget. 
At the time and place set forth in the notice required by section 9.06, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the submitted budget, before or on the same day that the city council holds a public hearing on the tax rate to meet the timing requirements of the State of Texas, and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained. 
(Ord. No. 82-840, § 1, 2-1-82; Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 86-996, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 86-996, § 1, adopted February 3, 1986, amended § 9.07 of the Charter to read as set out herein. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held April 5, 1986.  
Sec. 9.08. - Proceedings on budget after public hearing. 
After the conclusion of such public hearing, the city council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law, but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for an increase in the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such proposed expenditures.  
Sec. 9.09. - Vote required for adoption. 
The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the whole city council.  
Sec. 9.10. - Date of final adoption. 
The budget shall be finally adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, and should the city council fail to so adopt a budget, the then existing budget together with its tax-levying ordinance and its appropriation ordinance, shall remain in effect for the ensuing fiscal year, but only until such time as the council passes a budget and tax-levying ordinance for the new fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 82-840, § 1, 2-1-82) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 82-840, § 1, adopted February 1, 1982 by the city council and approved by the electorate April 3, 1982, amended § 9.10 to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 9.11. - Effective date of budget; certification; copies made available. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and the county clerk of Brazoria County. The final budget shall be printed or otherwise reproduced and copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations. 
(Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 9, 5-21-2012) 
Amendment note—Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 9, amended § 9.11 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012.  
Sec. 9.12. - Budget establishes appropriations. 
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.  
Sec. 9.13. - Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax. 
From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the city in the corresponding tax year; provided, however, that in no event shall such levy exceed the legal limit provided by the laws and constitution of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 9.14. - Contingent appropriation. (Amended Election April 7, 1956) 
Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount not more than three (3) per centum of the budget, to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditure. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the city manager and distributed by him, after approval of the city council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported.  
Sec. 9.15. - Estimated expenditures shall not exceed estimated resources. 
The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt service fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund (prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions will permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting or some other nationally accepted classification.  
Sec. 9.16. - Emergency appropriations. 
The city budget may be amended and appropriations altered in accordance therewith in cases of public necessity, the actual fact of which shall have been declared by the city council.  
Sec. 9.17. - Department of taxation. 
There shall be established a department of taxation to collect taxes. The head of which shall be the city collector of taxes which office shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. The collector of taxes shall give a surety bond for faithful performance of his duties, including compliance with all controlling provisions of the state law bearing on the functions of his office, in a sum which shall be fixed by the city council at not less than $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, adopted February 6, 1984, and approved by the electorate on April 7, 1984, amended § 9.17 to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 9.18. - Power to tax. 
The city council shall have the power under the provisions of the state law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon real and personal property within the city to the maximum provided by the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. However, the city council shall not make, permit, or approve any increase in ad valorem taxes in any one (1) year exceeding five (5) percent of the city's immediate prior year's ad valorem tax without approval by the electorate at an election held for that purpose. Such five (5) percent limitation shall not prevent increased taxation of taxable property when subsequent improvements are made, nor prevent taxation of annexed property, nor shall it effect [affect], limit or apply to debt service requirements and bond obligations. 
(Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, 2-11-80) 
Amendment note— Section 9.18 was amended to read as herein set forth by Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, adopted by the council on February 11, 1980, and passed by the electorate on April 5, 1980.  
Sec. 9.19. - Property subject to tax; method of assessment. 
All real and personal property within the City of Lake Jackson not expressly exempted by law, shall be subject to annual taxation. 
(Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84) 
Amendment note— Section 9.19 was amended to read as herein set out by Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, adopted February 6, 1984, and approved at referendum on April 7, 1984.  
Secs. 9.20—9.23. - Reserved. 
Amendment note—Sections 9.20—9.23, which pertained to the board of equalization, were repealed by Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, adopted February 6, 1984, and approved by the electorate on April 7, 1984.  
Sec. 9.24. - Taxes; when due and payable. 
All taxes due the City of Lake Jackson shall be payable at the office of the city collector of taxes and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall be not later than October 1. Taxes shall be paid before February 1, and all such taxes not paid on or prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as the city council may provide by ordinance. The city council may provide further by ordinance that all taxes, either current or delinquent, due the City of Lake Jackson may be paid in installments. Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approved tax roll shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from obligation to pay such current or past-due taxes as shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 2, 2-18-58; Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84) 
Amendment note—Sections 9.24 and 9.25 were amended by Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, adopted February 6, 1984, and approved at referendum held April 7, 1984, to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 9.25. - Seizure and sale of personal property. 
The collector of taxes shall, by virtue of his tax rolls, have power and authority to seize and levy upon all personal property and sell the same to satisfy all taxes, together with all penalty, interest and costs due on said personal property by said delinquent to the city. When he seizes personal property for such purposes, he shall keep the same at the expense of the owner until sale is made, and shall give notice of the time and place of same by posting notice as required by law. A sale of personal property for delinquent taxes shall convey with it an absolute title, and the owner shall have no right to redeem the same. 
(Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008) 
Amendment note—See amendment note following § 9.24.  
Sec. 9.26. - Tax liens. 
The tax levied by the city is hereby declared to be a lien, charge or encumbrance upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the city is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same, and the lien, charge or encumbrance on the property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this state or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against nonresidents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can ever defeat such lien.  
ARTICLE 10. - FRANCHISE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Powers of the city. 
In addition to the city's power to buy, own, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utility operations, the city shall have further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 10.02. - Franchise; power of city council. 
The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and extend, all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City of Lake Jackson. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at two (2) separate regular meetings of the city council, and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first reading; and no such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be publisher [published] once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the City of Lake Jackson and posted on the city's website, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the city council expressed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 10.02 as set out herein.  
Sec. 10.03. - Franchise value not to be allowed. 
No value shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the City of Lake Jackson under this Charter in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the city and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the city for public utility property which the city may acquire by condemnation or otherwise.  
Sec. 10.04. - Right of regulation. 
All grants, removals, extensions, or amendment of public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city council of the City of Lake Jackson: 
(a)  To repeal the same ordinance at any time upon the failure of the grantee to comply with any provision of the ordinance, the franchise, the Charter of the City of Lake Jackson, any applicable statute of the State of Texas or the rule of any applicable governmental body; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports, including reports on operations within the City of Lake Jackson; 
(e)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(f)  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 10.05. - Grant not to be exclusive. 
No grant or franchise to construct, maintain or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive.  
Sec. 10.06. - Consent of property owners. 
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; but nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law.  
Sec. 10.07. - Extensions. 
All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 10.04(a) of this Charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
(Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 10, 5-21-2012) 
Amendment note—Res. No. 12-639, Exh. A, Amnd. 10, amended § 10.07 of the Charter to read as set out. Such amendment was approved at a referendum held May 12, 2012.  
Sec. 10.08. - Other conditions. 
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Lake Jackson and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the City of Lake Jackson to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for, to regulate the rates and services of a grantee which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the city council or voters of the city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant.  
Sec. 10.09. - Accounts of municipally-owned utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets and all liabilities, appropriately subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show actual capital cost to the city of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements, and the source of funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any city government department. The city council shall cause an annual report to be made by a certified public accountant and shall publish such report showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such other data as the city council shall deem expedient.  
Sec. 10.10. - Sales of water and sewer services. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power and authority to sell and distribute water and to sell and provide for sewer services to any person, firm or corporation outside the limits of the City of Lake Jackson, and to permit them to connect with said system under contract with the city, under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best interests of the city; provided the charges fixed for such services outside the city limits shall be reasonable when considered in the light of all circumstances, to be determined by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall have the power and authority to prescribe the kind of water or sewer pipes within or beyond the limits of the City of Lake Jackson, where it furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to be kept in good order and condition at all times and to make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for noncompliance with same.  
Sec. 10.11. - Regulation of rates and service. 
The city council shall have the power, after due notice and hearing, to regulate by ordinance the rates and services of every public utility operating in the City of Lake Jackson; and shall have power to employ at the expense of the grantee, expert assistance and advice in determining a reasonable rate and equitable profit to the grantee.  
ARTICLE 11. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Publicity of records and open meetings. 
Records of the city shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the press in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas, commonly referred to as the Texas Freedom of Information Act. Meetings of the council and boards or commissions appointed by the council shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas, commonly referred to as the Texas Open Meeting Act. Minutes of all such open meetings shall be kept and such minutes shall constitute public records. 
(Ord. No. 08-1877, §§ 1—7, 2-18-2008/Res. No. 08-560, Att. A, 5-19-2008)  
Sec. 11.02. - Personal interest. 
No officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, nor shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies or service. The above provision shall not apply where the interest is represented by ownership of stock in a corporation involved, provided such stock ownership amounts to that percentage of the corporation stock permitted by state law. Any violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, 2-6-84) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 84-918, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 1984, and approved at referendum on Apr. 7, 1984, amended § 11.02 to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 11.03. - Drilling operations. 
The city council may, by ordinance, prohibit the drilling of water wells for commercial, industrial and agricultural purposes, and may provide regulations for the drilling and use of water wells for commercial, industrial, agricultural and domestic purposes. 
(Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 5), 2-16-2016) 
Amendment Note—Ord. No. 16-2088, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 5), approved at referendum held May 7, 2016, amended § 6.03 to read as set out.  
Sec. 11.04. - Relatives of officers shall not be appointed or employed. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to any elected officer of the city, or the city manager, shall be appointed to any office, position, clerkship, or other service of the city, whenever such appointed person shall receive payment for his services. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to any person who shall be employed by the city for at least six (6) months immediately prior to the election of the elected officer or appointment of the city manager so related to him or to the reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses actually incurred by any person so related who may be serving in such office, position, clerkship or other service without pay. 
(Ord. No. 00-1624, § 1, 2-7-2000)  
Sec. 11.05. - Public library. 
The city council shall have the authority to establish and maintain a free public library within the city and to cooperate with any person, firm, association or corporation under such terms as the city council may prescribe for the establishment of such free public library. For budget purposes, the library shall be considered as a department of the city and the appropriations therefor shall comply with all the budgetary requirements as outlined in this Charter and as may be prescribed from time to time by the city council.  
Sec. 11.06. - Provisions relating to assignment, execution and garnishment. 
The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ or garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors.  
Sec. 11.07. - City not required to give security or execute bond. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Lake Jackson is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law.  
Sec. 11.08. - Special provisions covering damage suits. 
Before the city shall be liable to damage claim or suit for death, personal injury, or damage to property, the person, who is claiming damages or who is injured or whose property is damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall give the city manager or the person performing the duties of city secretary, notice in writing within six (6) months after the occurrence of the death, alleged injury, or damage, stating specifically in such notice (1) when, where, and how the death, injury, or damage was sustained, and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible, and (2) giving the names of the person who is dead, injured, or damaged, and addresses of all parties and witnesses upon whose testimony such person is relying to establish the death, injury, or damage, and (3) a statement of how the city was at fault, producing or contributing. No action at law for damages shall be brought against the city for death, personal injury, or damage to property prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after the notice hereinbefore described has been filed with the city manager or the person performing the duties of city secretary, nor later than two (2) years after the occurrence of the death, injury, or damage to property. Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean that the City of Lake Jackson waives any rights, privileges, defenses, or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law, the constitution, and general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 76-580, § 1, 2-16-76; Ord. No. 96-1367, § 1, 5-4-96) 
Editor's note— Exceptions to the above section are provided in V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101(c).  
Sec. 11.09. - Separability clause. 
If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply.  
Sec. 11.10. - Effect of this Charter on existing law. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force under the city government of Lake Jackson and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended or repealed by the council after this Charter takes effect; and all rights of the City of Lake Jackson under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect to the City of Lake Jackson.  
Sec. 11.11. - Interim municipal government. 
From and after the date of the adoption of this Charter, the persons then filling elective offices which are retained under this Charter will continue to fill those offices for the terms to which they were elected. At the first regular city election after the adoption of this Charter, a mayor and three (3)councilmen shall be elected. The councilman, so elected, having the least number of votes shall serve a term of one (1) year; the other two councilmen and mayor, so elected, shall serve terms of two (2) years. In the event a tie vote makes it impossible to determine which councilman shall serve the one-year term, those councilmen having the same number of votes shall draw lots for the one-year term. Thereafter, the city council shall be elected as provided in section 3.01 of this Charter. Persons, who on the date this Charter is adopted are filling appointive positions with the City of Lake Jackson which are retained under this Charter, may continue to fill these positions for the term for which they were appointed, unless removed by the city council or by other means provided for in this Charter. Persons, who on the date this Charter is adopted are filling the offices of city secretary and corporation court judge, shall continue to serve in those offices until the appointment of their successors, which appointment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the adoption of this Charter. The person who, on the date this Charter is adopted, is serving as city marshal shall fill the office of chief of police until the next regular city election, at which time the chief of police will be selected as provided in section 4.02 of this Charter.  
Sec. 11.12. - Applicability of general laws. 
(a)  The constitution of the State of Texas, the statutes of said state applicable to home-ruled municipal corporations as now or hereafter enacted, this Charter and ordinances enacted pursuant hereto shall, in the order mentioned, be applicable to the City of Lake Jackson, but the city shall also have the power to exercise any and all powers conferred by the laws of the State of Texas upon any other kind of city, town or village, not contrary to the provisions of said home-rule statutes, Charter and ordinances, but the exercise of any such powers by the City of Lake Jackson shall be optional with it, and it shall not be required to conform to the law governing any other cities, towns or villages unless and until by ordinance it adopted same. 
(b)  Any reference in this Charter to the masculine includes the feminine; the word "he" should be read as "he/she." 
(Ord. No. 88-1064, § 1, 2-18-88) 
Amendment note—Ord. No. 88-1064, § 1, adopted February 18, 1988, and approved at a regular city election on May 7, 1988, amended § 11.12 by adding the provisions designated as subsection (b).  
Sec. 11.13. - Amending the Charter. 
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided by Texas Local Government Code ch. 9, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), 3-3-2014) 
Editor's note— The statutes pertaining to amendments to the Charter have been transferred to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 
Amendment Note—Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 11.13 to read as set out.  
Sec. 11.14. - Charter review commission. 
The city council shall appoint within forty-five (45) days after the regular city election of each odd-numbered year, a Charter review commission of five (5) citizens of the City of Lake Jackson. 
(a)  Duties of the commission: It shall be the duty of such Charter review commission to: 
(1)  Inquire into the operation of the city government under the Charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions require revision. To this end public hearings may be held; and the commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the city and to require the submission of any of the city records which it may deem necessary to the conduct of such hearing; 
(2)  Propose any recommendations it may deem desirable to insure compliance with the provisions of the Charter by the several departments of the city government; 
(3)  Propose, if it deems desirable, amendments to this Charter to improve the effective application of said Charter to current conditions; 
(4)  Reports its findings and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the city council. 
(b)  Action by the city council: The city council shall receive and have published in the official newspaper of the city and posted on the city's website any report presented by the Charter review commission, shall consider any recommendations made, and if any amendment or amendments be presented as a part of such report, may order such amendment or amendments to be submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 9, as now or hereafter amended. 
(c)  Term of office: The term of office of such Charter review commission shall be six (6) months, and, if during such term no report is presented to the city council, then all records of the proceedings of such commission shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and shall become a public record. 
(Ord. No. 78-646, § 1, 1-16-78; Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), 2-5-2018) 
Amendment Note—Ord. No. 14-2033, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 15), approved at referendum held May 10, 2014, amended § 11.14 to read as set out. 
Ord. No. 18-2152, § 3(Exh. A, Amnd. 9), adopted Feb. 5, 2018, and approved at referendum held May 5, 2018, amended § 11.14(b) as set out herein.  
Sec. 11.15. - Submission of Charter to voters. 
The Charter commission in preparing this Charter finds and decides that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the Charter commission directs that the said Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Lake Jackson at an election to be held for that purpose on the 30th day of January, A.D. 1954. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election, the city council shall cause the city secretary to mail a copy of this Charter to each qualified voter of the City of Lake Jackson as appears from the latest tax collector's roll. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall become the Charter of the City of Lake Jackson, and after the returns have been canvassed, the same shall be declared adopted and the city secretary shall file an official copy of the Charter with the records of the city. The secretary shall furnish the mayor a copy of said Charter, which copy of the Charter so adopted, authenticated and certified by his signature and the seal of the city, shall be forwarded by the mayor to the secretary of state of the State of Texas and shall show the approval of such Charter by majority vote of the qualified voters voting at such election. 
We, the undersigned members of the Lake Jackson Charter Commission heretofor duly elected to prepare a Charter for the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, do hereby certify that this publication constitutes a true copy of the proposed Charter for the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, as adopted by a majority thereof. 
E.C. REA, Chairman 
K.L. COOPER, Secretary 
GEORGE F. McGOVNEY 	T.J. WALKER 
H.T. YOUENS 	JACK SAMPSON 
G.B. RASCO 	JASPER L. WILSON 
S. GUICE STEWART 	J.H. McCULLOUGH 
HOWARD W. BROWN 	BASIL JONES 
  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number 	 Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
222 	 2-18-58 	1 	3.15 
		1 	8.03 
		2 	9.24 
64-301 	 3- 2-64 	1 	1.03 
			4.08 
70-411 	 3- 2-70 	1 	3.01 
72-461 	 2- 7-72 	1 	1.03 
			3.02 
			4.04 
			7.03 
76-580 	 2-16-76 	1 	3.04 
4.09 
			6.02 
			9.06 
			11.08 
78-646 	 1-16-78 	1 	3.14 
			4.04 
			5.05 
			6.01 
			11.14 
80-726 	 2-11-80 	1 	4.08, 4.09 
			8.03 
			9.18 
82-840 	 2- 1-82 	1 	9.07 
			9.10 
84-918 	 2- 6-84 	1 	3.07 
			6.11 
			8.04 
			9.07 
			9.17 
			9.19 
			9.24, 9.25 
			11.02 
86-996 	 2- 3-86 	1 	3.02 
			6.02 
			9.07 
88-1064 	 2-18-88 	1 	5.01 
			5.03 
			5.05 
			11.12 
90-1120 	 2- 5-90 	1 	3.04 
			3.11 
			4.10 
			7.02 
92-1193 	 3-16-92 	1 	3.01 
92-1196 	 4- 2-92 	1 	3.01 
			5.08 
94-1284 	 2-21-94 	1(2) 	3.06 
96-1367 	 5- 4-96 	1 	3.01(g)(h) 
			11.08 
00-1624 	 2- 7-00 	1 	5.05 
			11.04 
02-1682 	 2- 4-02 	1 	3.02 
			3.04(a) 
			4.06(a) 
		      Added 	4.06(e) 
			4.08(b) 
			4.09(b) 
			4.10(b) 
02-1689 	 5- 8-02 	1 	3.04(a) 
02-1691 	 5- 8-02 	1 	3.02 
			3.04(a) 
			4.06(a) 
			4.06(e) 
			4.08(b) 
			4.09(b) 
			4.10(b) 
06-1808 	 2-21-06 	1 	4.02 
			4.06 
			5.01 
			5.03 
			5.05 
			5.07 
			6.01 
			6.02 
			7.02 
08-560(Res.) 	 5-19-08 	Att. A 	3.01 
			3.06 
			4.02(intro.) 
		      Rpld 	4.02(a)—(d) 
			4.04 
			4.05 
			5.04 
			5.08 
			6.07 
			6.10 
			8.01 
			9.06 
			9.07 
			9.25 
			11.01(tit.) 
10-1927 	 2-16-2010 		4.04 
10-959(Res.) 	 5-17-2010 	Att. A 	4.04 
12-639(Res.) 	 5-21-2012 	Exh. A, 
Amnd. 1 	2.03 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 2 	3.11 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 3 	4.08(c) 
			4.09(c) 
			4.10(c) 
			8.03(d)(8), (9) 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 4 	5.01 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 5 	5.08 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 6 	6.05 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 7 	6.07 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 8 	7.02 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 9 	9.11 
		Exh. A, 
Amnd. 10 	10.07 
14-2033 	 3- 3-2014 	3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 1) 	1.03(e) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnds. 4, 5) 	3.01(f) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 7)       Added 	3.04(d) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 8) 	3.11 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 9) 	4.04(d) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnds. 10, 11) 	4.06(d) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnds. 12—14) 	4.09 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 15) 	1.03(a) 
			2.02 
			3.07(p) 
			8.01(a) 
			8.04 
			11.13 
			11.14(b) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnds. 17, 18) 	8.03(d) 
16-2088 	 2-16-2016 	3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 1) 	3.06 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 2) 	6.02 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 3) 	6.03 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 4) 	8.03(d) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 5) 	11.03 
18-2152 	 2- 5-2018 	3(Exh. A, 
Amnds. 1, 3) 	3.01(f)(1)—(3) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 4) 	4.06(e) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 5) 	5.03 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 6) 	5.04 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnds. 7, 8) 	5.05 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 9) 	3.15 
			7.06 
			8.03(d)(5) 
			9.06 
			10.02 
			11.14(b) 
		3(Exh. A, 
Amnd. 10) 	4.06(a) 
			4.08(a) 
			4.09(a) 
			4.10(a) 
			8.03(a) 
			8.04 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Boundaries, § 1.02 et seq.; general provisions, art. 11. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code to be designated. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, City of Lake Jackson, Texas," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1958, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 3.11. 
State Law reference— Power to codify ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" is to be construed as if the words "of Lake Jackson" followed them. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. 
(1)  If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
(2)  If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
Council. Whenever the words "council" or "this council" or "the council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Brazoria. 
Gender. Words of one gender include the other genders. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.012(c). 
Highway. The word "highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 13(a). 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Judge. The word "judge" refers to the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 29. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and co-partnerships, whether acting by themselves or as servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(7). 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.012(b). 
Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation. The words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(1). 
Officers, departments, boards and commissions. Any reference to the title of an officer, department, board or commission shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" includes any individual, corporation, company, firm, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association and any other legal entity. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(2). 
Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property except real property as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, and all beaches, canals or other waterways. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term "roadway" refers to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
State Law reference— "Roadway" defined, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 13(c). 
Shall and may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference— "Sidewalk" defined, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 13(d). 
Signature and subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" include any symbol executed or adopted by a person with present intention to authenticate a writing. 
State Law reference— "Signed" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(6). 
State. The words "the state" and "this state" mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The word "street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 13(a). 
Tenant and occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.012(a). 
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. The term "Vernon's Ann. C.C.P." means Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended from time to time. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The term "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
V.T.C.A. The term "V.T.C.A." means Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as amended from time to time. 
Written and in writing. The words "written" and "in writing," include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference— "Written" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(11). 
Year. The word "year" means twelve (12) consecutive months. 
State Law reference— "Year" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(12). 
(Code 1958, §§ 1-2, 13-27(b)) 
State Law reference— Code Construction Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.001 et seq.; construction of Local Government Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 1.002; application of Penal Code definitions, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.03.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1958, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Headings in state codes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024.  
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code or its application to any persons or circumstances shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or other invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, sections and applications of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 1-4) 
Charter reference— Separability clause, § 11.09. 
State Law reference— Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.032, 312.013.  
Sec. 1-5. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). However, a fine for the violation of a provision of this Code or an ordinance of the city that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any such offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state, then the maximum penalty for violation as provided by state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this Code. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be by the city abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed the amount authorized by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 12.23 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(e)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds the amount authorized by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 12.23 shall require a culpable mental state of "criminal negligence." 
(Ord. No. 88-1060, § 11, 1-18-88; Code 1958, § 1-5; Ord. No. 06-1830, § 1, 11-20-2006) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to provide penalties for the violation of ordinances, § 2.01. 
State Law reference— Amount of fine or penalty imposed by the city, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; abatement of health nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.011 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003.  
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:_____." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1958, § 1-6) 
Ordinances generally, §§ 3.11, 7.06 through 7.09.  
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget. 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right. 
(5)  Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates to be charged by utility companies. 
(6)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract or agreement. 
(7)  Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, improving, vacating or otherwise relating to any specific street or easement. 
(8)  Any ordinance accepting any plat of a subdivision. 
(9)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning. 
(10)  Any ordinance dealing with the compensation, retirement, pensions or other benefits of city officers or city employees not codified. 
(11)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect. 
(12)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect. 
(13)  Any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Form of government, § 1.01; powers of the city, art. 2; administrative services, art. 4; recall of officers, art. 6; general provisions, art. 11. 
Cross reference— Administration of animal chapter, § 10-31 et seq.; board of electrical examiners, § 14-76 et seq.; electrical inspector, § 14-111 et seq.; plumbing inspector, § 14-159; civil emergencies, ch. 22; courts, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floodplain administrator, § 46-30; law enforcement, ch. 54; parks and recreation, ch. 66; personnel, ch. 74; administration of solid waste chapter, § 82-2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; taxation, ch. 94; traffic commission, § 98-31 et seq.; utilities, ch. 102; administration of zoning ordinance generally, § 110-3. 
State Law reference— Cities, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 969a-2 et seq.; open meetings, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17; public access to records, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17a; elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.001 et seq.; home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq.; extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.; municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq.; compensation of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 141.004. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Reimbursement of expenses. 
Members of city boards or commissions and employees of the city shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred by the member and employee when such members and employees are required to be out of the city attending to the business of the city. Spouses, children and other family members are welcome at meetings, but the portion of the expenses attributable to them is not reimbursable, and shall be borne by them or the member. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 3, 5-12-44; Ord. No. 82-862, § 1, 6-21-82; Code 1958, § 2-14(c))  
Secs. 2-2—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, art. 3; recall of officers, art. 6; initiative and referendum, art. 7. 
State Law reference— Compensation of officers in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 141.004. 
 
Sec. 2-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1983, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 2012, repealed § 2-26, which pertained to compensation for attendance at meetings—mayor and derived from Code 1958, § 2-1; and Ord. No. 92-1200, § 2, adopted June 1, 1992.  
Sec. 2-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1983, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 2012, repealed § 2-27, which pertained to compensation for attendance at meetings—councilmen and derived from Ord. No. 7, § 2, adopted May 12, 1944; Code 1958, § 2-2; and Ord. No. 92-1200, § 2, adopted June 1, 1992.  
Sec. 2-28. - Extra compensation of officers prohibited; limited expense reimbursement permitted. 
(a)  Neither the mayor, nor any councilmember shall receive any salary, fee, or compensation, except as provided by ordinance as required by the City Charter, for any services rendered the city; nor shall they or any of them receive any compensation for any extra duties performed or services rendered to or for the city. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall be reimbursed only for actual bona fide official expenses incurred by the mayor and councilmembers when all or any of them are required to be out of the county attending to the official business of the city or when they incur the in-county cost, for the meal, at BCCA meetings. All other expenses and costs (including travel, food, and admissions) incurred in-county by the mayor or councilmember are to be paid by the mayor or councilmember. Spouses, children, and other family members are welcome at out of the county or in-county meetings, but the portion of the expenses attributable to them is not reimbursable, and shall be borne by them or the councilmember. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 3, 5-12-44; Ord. No. 82-862, § 1, 6-21-82; Code 1958, § 2-14(a), (b); Ord. No. 96-1373, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 2-29. - Vote required on application for alcoholic beverage on-premises permit. 
(a)  All applications for an on-premises alcoholic beverage permit shall be filed with the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall place such application on the agenda of a regularly scheduled city council meeting, said meeting to be not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of application, and shall post a notice of the meeting and the agenda item in at least one of the official newspapers of the city ten (10) days prior to the council meeting. 
(b)  The city council shall vote on each application for an on-premises alcoholic beverage permit, and shall send its recommendation to the county liquor control agent and to the county judge. 
(Ord. No. 78-673, § 1, 12-4-78; Code 1958, § 2-16)  
Sec. 2-30. - Joint public hearings with planning commission. 
(a)  Any public hearing required to be held by the city council may, after proper notice, be held jointly with any public hearing required to be held by the city planning commission, provided that such joint hearing shall be with respect to the same subject matter. 
(b)  Subsequent to a joint hearing of the city council and city planning commission, no action shall be taken by the city council prior to receiving the final report or recommendation of the city planning commission with respect to the matters considered. 
(Ord. No. 69-395, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-69; Code 1958, § 2-18) 
State Law reference— Notice of meetings held by governmental body, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17, § 3A.  
Sec. 2-31. - Procedures for council inquiries and investigations. 
(a)  In exercise of its power to inquire and investigate in furtherance of its legislative function and supervisory powers, the council may conduct inquiries or investigations into matters set out in section 3.13 of the City Charter, to wit: into the conduct of any office, department, agency, officer or employee of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs. The council may authorize a subcommittee of the council to inquire or investigate matters outlined in section 3.13 of the Charter, or it may appoint a legally qualified person or persons to inquire or investigate such matters. 
(b)  A subcommittee of the council or a legally qualified person(s) appointed by the council to inquire or investigate matters that may be assigned by the council shall provide a report to the council of their inquiry or investigation findings and advise whether there may be a future need for legislation in the subject matters investigated. 
(c)  The council, a subcommittee of the council or a legally qualified person(s) appointed by the council shall have and be able to exercise all the powers outlined in section 3.13 of the City Charter, subject to the limitations set out herein, including the power to administer oaths to witnesses. 
(1)  In all investigations and inquiries conducted by the city council or any person or committee authorized by the council for the purpose of making investigations as to municipal affairs, the city council, by majority vote of its eligible members, shall for that purpose be able to authorize the subpoena of witnesses and compel production of books, papers and other evidence that is material to such investigation or inquiry in the same manner as is now prescribed by the laws of this state for compelling the attendance of witnesses and production of evidence in the municipal court. 
(2)  A witness who attends a proceeding under process is entitled to the same mileage and per diem as a witness who appears before a grand jury in the State of Texas, and to be paid by the City of Lake Jackson. 
(3)  The municipal court of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, shall be the forum for hearings concerning subpoenas and other matters under this section, and the Texas Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply to any such hearings or matters. There shall be a right of appeal from decision of the municipal court and said appeal shall follow the rules for appeals from municipal courts as outlined in the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(d)  All documents, books, papers and other document evidence, during the investigation, that is subpoenaed and received by the council, subcommittee of the council or a person(s) appointed by the council shall at all times be safeguarded and made secure so that there is no comingling with other documents and so that the documents are not lost. At the conclusion of the investigation, or the testimony, the evidence collected by the council, subcommittee, or person, may be returned to those witnesses who possessed the evidence if the investigative body or person determines that it is proper to return the material. Under oath testimony shall be taken in a forum open to the public. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person has been summoned as a witness to testify or produce papers and refuses to appear with no valid reason given. An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(f)  The municipal court of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, shall be the forum for the prosecution of all violations of this section. 
(g)  (1)  The rules of evidence for any inquiry or investigation under section 3.13 of the Charter shall be the Texas Rules of Evidence. 
(2)  The rules of procedure, if not established herein, shall be the Texas Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(h)  (1)  The investigative body or investigator may require a person to testify or produce a document concerning a matter under inquiry unless the person claims that the testimony or document may incriminate him. 
(2)  If a person testifies or produces a document while claiming that the testimony or document may incriminate him, the person may not be prosecuted for any transaction, matter, or thing by using the testimony or document by which the person truthfully testified or produced evidence. 
(3)  A witness has a right to counsel while testifying before the Council or person investigating hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 97-1418, § 1, 5-19-97)  
Secs. 2-32—2-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Compensation of officers and employees, § 3.07(m); official bonds for officers and employees, § 3.12. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-46. - Cost of defense of city officers, employees to be incurred by city. 
(a)  As a matter of public policy, if any official or employee of the city, whether elected or appointed, is sued or made a defendant in a lawsuit in any court or forum for any reason arising out of the performance of the duties of office, which suit is based on an act or omission arising out of the good faith performance of the duties of such official or employee or within the scope and course of his employment for the city, and unless legal defense is otherwise provided by insurance coverage, the city shall indemnify and provide the public official or employee of the city with such legal defense, together with expenses incident thereto. 
(b)  If damages are recovered by the party bringing the suit in the nature outlined in subsection (a) of this section, and if such recovery stems from the performance of duties which are imposed upon such public official by law or by order of the city council, or the employee becomes personally liable for the payment of damages because of the good faith performance of his official duties or duties within the course and scope of his employment, the city council shall authorize the payment of such damages on behalf of such public official or public employee from the city treasury, provided such action on the part of the city council is authorized under the constitution and laws of the state. This section shall not apply to action for damages which are covered by insurance coverage of the employee, the city or the public official. 
(c)  The city council shall determine and make findings relating to whether such officer or employee was engaged in the good faith performance of his duties and acting within the course and scope of his employment at the time of the act or omission in question and shall not indemnify or provide the legal defense for any officer or employee found not to have been so acting. 
(Ord. No. 76-581, §§ 1, 2, 3-1-76; Ord. No. 88-1062, § 2, 2-2-88; Code 1958, § 2-15)  
Sec. 2-47. - Emergency action. 
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
(Ord. No. 85-993, § 1, 11-18-85; Code 1958, § 2-15.1)  
Secs. 2-48, 2-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 1.5. - CODE OF CONDUCT 
 
Sec. 2-50. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the city; that no officer, employee or member of any standing committee or board shall permit any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engagement in any business, transaction or professional activity to conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest; that public office not be used for personal gain. To implement such a policy, the city council deems it advisable to enact a code of conduct for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the city's public servants, but also a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms, the overriding interest being that officers and employees of the city shall at all times strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety. 
(Ord. No. 95-1354, § 1, 11-20-95)  
Sec. 2-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings subscribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Employee means any person employed by the city, including those individuals on a part-time basis, but shall not mean any independent contractor hired by the city. 
Officer or official means any member of the city council and any appointed member of a board, commission, or committee set up by ordinance, charter, state law or otherwise, on a temporary or permanent basis. 
Relative means any person related to an officer or employee within the first degree by consanguinity or affinity and shall include a spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother or sister. 
City council means the legislative and governing body of the city consisting of the mayor and council members. 
(Ord. No. 95-1354, § 1, 11-20-95)  
Sec. 2-52. - Standards of conduct—Officers and employees. 
No council member, board member or employee of the city nor a relative of a council member, board member or employee shall: 
(1)  Have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, nor shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies, or service. 
The above provision shall not apply where the interest is represented by ownership of stock in a corporation involved, provided such stock ownership amounts to that percentage of the corporation stock permitted by state law, (see 171.002(a)(1) of Texas Local Government Code [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.002(a)(1)]). 
(2)  a. 
Represent or appear in behalf of private interests of others before any agency of the city or any city board, commission or committee, nor shall he represent any private interest of others in any action or proceeding involving the city, nor voluntarily participate on behalf of others in any litigation to which the city might be a party. 
b.  Represent or appear in behalf of the private interests of others before the board, commission or committee of which he is a member, or before the city council or other board on an appeal from such board, commission or committee concerning such matter. 
(3)  Accept any gift, or favor from any person that might reasonably tend to influence him in the discharge of his official duties, or grant in the discharge of his official duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. 
(4)  Use his official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others. 
(5)  Disclose information that could adversely affect the property, government, or affairs of the city; nor directly or indirectly use any information gained solely by reason of his official position or employment for his own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of others. 
(6)  Disclose confidential information. 
(7)  Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with, or will be incompatible with his position as an officer of the city, the duties assigned to him in his employment with the city, or in which his employment in the city will give him an advantage over others engaged in a similar business, vocation, or activity. 
(8)  In any planning or zoning matter which may appear before the planning commission or the city council, any commission member or city council member who has a financial interest in any property within two hundred (200) feet of the zoning request shall disclose the existence of such interest to the other commission or council members and thereafter abstain from voting in the matter and refrain from attempting to influence the vote of any other commission or council member. 
(9)  In the event that any matter comes before the planning commission or city council involving directly or indirectly the interest of a present business client/customer of any commission or city council member or the interest of a person or entity who has been a business client/customer of any commission or council member within the prior twelve (12) months and funds received by the commission or council member, or the entity for which he is employed, from past/present business client/customer amount to the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more in gross income during such twelve-month period and such fact is known to the commission or council member, then that commission or council member shall disclose the existence of such interest to the other commission or council members and thereafter abstain from voting in the matter and refrain from attempting to influence the vote of any other commission or council member. 
(Ord. No. 95-1354, § 1, 11-20-95)  
Sec. 2-53. - Disclosure of interest. 
Any officer or employee, whether elected, appointed, or hired, who has a prohibited financial interest in any matter pending before the city, shall disclose such interest to other members of the city council, committee, commission or board, of which he is a member, or, in the case of an employee, to his supervisor and shall refrain from further discussion of the matter and shall not be physically present when the subject is discussed in Executive Session; and shall not vote on or participate further therein in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 95-1354, § 1, 11-20-95)  
Sec. 2-54. - Contracts with the city/affidavit. 
All contracts in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) entered into by any person, corporation or entity seeking to do business with the city shall contain an affidavit executed by a legally authorized party to the effect that no person included within the ordinance defined term of "officer or employee" has or will have during the term of said contract, any prohibited interest as defined in section 11.02 of the City Charter and the Code of Conduct Ordinance of the City of Lake Jackson. The affidavit shall include an acknowledgment and acceptance by the affiant that the existence of a prohibited interest at any time during the term of said contract will render the contract voidable. 
(Ord. No. 95-1354, § 1, 11-20-95)  
Sec. 2-55. - Violations—Council members. 
The failure of any city council member to comply with or who violates one (1) or more of the standards of conduct in this article, which apply to him, shall constitute grounds for reprimand. Such reprimand shall require a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the eligible council members. Offenses committed in violation of the City Charter shall be punished in accordance with the terms of the City Charter, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 95-1354, § 1, 11-20-95)  
Sec. 2-56. - Violations—Appointed board members and employees. 
(a)  The failure of a board member to comply with or who violates one (1) or more of the standards of conduct in this code of conduct shall constitute grounds for expulsion, reprimand, or removal from office to the extent allowed by law. 
(b)  In the case of any employee of the city, disciplinary action and appeals therefrom shall be in conformance with procedures established by the City Charter and personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 95-1354, § 1, 11-20-95)  
Sec. 2-57. - Adoption of state statute. 
Section 171.001 et seq., [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 171.001 et seq.] as amended, being the statute which regulates conflicts of interest of officers of municipalities in the State of Texas, is hereby adopted and made a part of this code of conduct for all purposes with the provision that in the case of a conflict between the provisions of this code of conduct and the state statute, then in that event the more restrictive provision shall govern. 
For purposes of clarity and information Section 171.001 et seq. [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 171.001 et seq.] is set out herein as follows: 
Section 171.001. Definitions. 
(1)  "Local public official" means a member of the governing body or another officer, whether elected, appointed, paid or unpaid, of any district (including a school district), county, municipality, precinct, central appraisal district, transit authority or district, or other local governmental entity who exercises responsibilities beyond those that are advisory in nature. 
(2)  "Business entity" means a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, or any other entity recognized by law. 
Section 171.002. Substantial Interest in Business Entity. 
(a)  A person has a substantial interest in a business entity if: 
(1)  The person owns ten (10) percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the business entity or owns either ten (10) percent or more or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more of the fair market value of the business entity; or 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the business entity exceed ten (10) percent of the person's gross income for the previous year. 
(b)  A person has a substantial interest in real property if the interest is an equitable or legal ownership with a fair market value of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more. 
(c)  A local public official is considered to have a substantial interest under this section if a person related to the official in the first degree by consanguinity or affinity, as determined under Article 5996h, Revised Statutes [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5996h], has a substantial interest under this section. 
Section 171.003. Prohibited Acts; Penalty. 
(a)  A local public official commits an offense if the official knowingly: 
(1)  Violates Section 171.004; 
(2)  Acts as surety for a business entity that has work, business or a contract with the governmental entity; or 
(3)  Acts as surety on any official bond required of an officer of the governmental entity. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a class A misdemeanor. 
Section 171.004. Affidavit and Abstention From Voting Required. 
(a)  If a local public official has a substantial interest in a business entity or in real property, the official shall file, before a vote or decision on any matter involving the business entity or the real property, an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the interest and shall abstain from further participation in the matter if: 
(1)  In the case of a substantial interest in a business entity the action on the matter will have a special economic effect on the business entity that is distinguishable from the effect on the public; or 
(2)  In the case of substantial interest in real property, it is reasonably foreseeable that an action on the matter will have a special economic effect on the value of the property, distinguishable from its effect on the public. 
(b)  The affidavit must be filed with the official record keeper of the governmental entity. 
(c)  If a local public official is required to file and does file an affidavit under subsection (a), the official is not required to abstain from further participation in the matter requiring the affidavit if a majority of the members of the governmental entity of which the official is a member is composed of persons who are likewise required to file and who do file affidavits of similar interests on the same official action. 
Section 171.005. Voting on Budget. 
(a)  The governing body of a governmental entity shall take a separate vote on any budget item specifically dedicated to a contract with a business entity in which a member of the governing body has a substantial interest. 
(b)  Except as provided by Section 171.004(c), the affected member may not participate in that separate vote. The member may vote on a final budget if: 
(1)  The member has complied with this chapter; and 
(2)  The matter in which the member is concerned has been resolved. 
Section 171.006. Effect of Violation of Chapter. 
The finding by a court of a violation under this chapter does not render an action of the governing body voidable unless the measure that was the subject of an action involving a conflict of interest would not have passed the governing body without the vote of the person who violated the chapter. 
Section 171.007. Common Law Preempted; Cumulative of Municipal Provisions. 
(a)  This chapter preempts the common law of conflict of interests as applied to local public officials. 
(b)  This chapter is cumulative of municipal charter provisions and municipal ordinances defining and prohibiting conflicts of interests. 
Section 171.008. Renumbered as Section 171.006 by Acts 1989, 71st Leg., ch.1, Section 40(a), effective August 28, 1989. 
Section 171.009. Service on Board of Corporation for no Compensation. 
It shall be lawful for a local public official to serve as a member of the board of directors of private, nonprofit corporations when such officials receive no compensation or other remuneration from the nonprofit corporation or other nonprofit entity. 
(Ord. No. 95-1354, § 1, 11-20-95)  
Secs. 2-58—2-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— City council not to interfere in appointments, § 3.08; city manager, § 4.01; attendance at meetings of planning commission, § 8.03(e). 
State Law reference— Form of government in home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 2-66. - Appointment. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 1, 11-29-48; Code 1958, § 2-4) 
Charter reference— Appointment of city manager, § 1.01.  
Sec. 2-67. - Residence in city required. 
The city manager may or may not be a resident of the city when appointed, but during the term of his office shall reside in the city. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 2, 11-29-48; Code 1958, § 2-5)  
Sec. 2-68. - Term of office. 
The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 3, 11-29-48; Code 1958, § 2-6)  
Sec. 2-69. - Compensation as fixed. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 6, 11-29-48; Code 1958, § 2-7)  
Sec. 2-70. - Acting city manager. 
During the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of such office. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 4, 11-29-48; Code 1958, § 2-8)  
Secs. 2-71—2-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY SECRETARY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— City secretary, § 4.03. 
 
Sec. 2-86. - Salary. 
The compensation of the city secretary shall be fixed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 92-1200, § 2, 6-1-92; Code 1958, § 2-3)  
Secs. 2-87—2-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY TREASURER 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Office created. 
There is created hereby the office of city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 1, 1957; Code 1958, § 2-9)  
Sec. 2-107. - Qualifications. 
The city treasurer must have either the qualifications required of members of the city council as provided in the city charter or the qualifications required for city manager as provided in the city charter. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 2, 1957; Code 1958, § 2-10)  
Sec. 2-108. - Disposition of receipts and expenditures. 
The city treasurer shall receive and securely keep all moneys belonging to the city, and make all payments for the same upon the order of the mayor, attested by the secretary under the seal of the city. He shall render a full and correct statement of his receipts and payments to the city council once each month and whensoever, at other times, he may be required by them so to do. At the end of every year he shall cause to be published, at the expense of the city, a statement showing the amount of receipts and expenditures for the twelve (12) months next preceding, and the general condition of the treasury. He shall do and perform such other acts and duties as the city council may require. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 3, 1957; Code 1958, § 2-11)  
Sec. 2-109. - City manager may act. 
The city manager shall be the city treasurer, or at the direction of the city council, he shall appoint the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 4, 1957; Code 1958, § 2-12)  
Secs. 2-110—2-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CITY COLLECTOR OF TAXES 
 
Sec. 2-126. - Bond. 
The city collector of taxes shall be required to give bond for the faithful performance of his official duties, such bond to be separate and distinct from the official bond of any other office. Such bond shall be in such amount as required by law. 
(Code 1958, § 2-13) 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 94.  
Secs. 2-127—2-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3.07(a), (f). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-146. - Participation of members; vacancies. 
Membership on all city boards and commissions shall be accompanied by active participation in the activities of the commission or board and any member who is absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the commission or board or whose overall attendance at regular meetings for any twelve-month period falls below seventy-five (75) percent, shall automatically be dismissed from membership unless the chairman of the board writes a letter or appears before the city council and informs the council of the reason why the member should not be dismissed, and the council decides to permit the member to continue to serve. Vacancies occurring in the commission or board, for whatever reason, shall be filled within thirty (30) days by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members of the commission or board shall be considered at will appointees. 
(Ord. No. 80-743, § 1, 7-7-80; Code 1958, § 2-17; Ord. No. 95-1338, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 98-1570, § 1, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 01-1677, § 1, 11-19-2001; Ord. No. 10-1939, § 1, 5-17-2010)  
Secs. 2-147—2-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-166. - Established. 
There shall be established and maintained an employee commission of the city consisting of four (4) members, who shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 75-547, §§ 1—5, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 92-1200, § 1, 6-1-92; Code 1958, § 2-24(a))  
Sec. 2-167. - Members; term of office. 
(a)  One (1) member of the employee commission shall be a city councilman appointed by the city council to be appointed in each odd-numbered year; and three (3) members shall be elected, one (1) each from the department of police, salaried employees and hourly wage employees. The member from the department of police shall be elected in each odd-numbered year and the members from the salaried employees and hourly wage employees shall be elected in each even-numbered year. The appointment and elections shall be made or held each year within thirty (30) days following the regular election. 
(b)  The term of office of each such member shall be two (2) years. 
(c)  In addition, there shall be four (4) alternate members of the employee commission, consisting of a city councilman to be designated by the city council; and three (3) elected alternates, one (1) each from the department of police, salaried employees and hourly wage employees. The alternates shall be appointed or elected at the same time and in the same manner as the voting member. Alternate members shall have no voting rights, unless the voting member is absent and shall attend meetings as requested. 
(d)  Any city employee with the supervisory power to recommend hiring or firing of other employees shall not be eligible for membership of the employee commission and shall not vote in elections of members. 
(Ord. No. 75-547, §§ 1—5, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 92-1200, § 1, 6-1-92; Code 1958, § 2-24(b))  
Sec. 2-168. - Election process. 
Elections for positions on the employee commission shall be conducted by the city secretary under the same rules as exist in city elections to include: 
(1)  Candidates listed on a ballot in alphabetical order. 
(2)  Ballots numbered. 
(3)  Eligible voters on a voter's list. 
(4)  Secret ballot. 
(5)  If no candidate receives a majority of the ballots cast, then a runoff election shall be held immediately. 
(Ord. No. 75-547, §§ 1—5, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 92-1200, § 1, 6-1-92; Code 1958, § 2-24(c))  
Sec. 2-169. - Officers; rules of procedure. 
(a)  The chairman of the employee commission shall be the city council member or his alternate and the commission shall establish its own rules and procedures. 
(b)  A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members of the commission and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, except that on tie votes, the chairman's vote shall be determinative, the chairman being entitled to vote only on a tie vote. 
(c)  Meetings shall be held at least every six (6) months and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary. 
(d)  The substantial evidence rule shall be the standard or proof required, and the commission may meet in executive session on subjects for which such sessions are permitted under the Texas Open Meetings Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17). Other evidentiary and procedural rules shall be as chosen by commission. 
(Ord. No. 75-547, §§ 1—5, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 92-1200, § 1, 6-1-92; Code 1958, § 2-24(e))  
Sec. 2-170. - Duties. 
The employee commission shall be in the nature of an advisory and reviewing body reporting, if appropriate, to the city council in executive session or if not appropriate to the proper authority. The employee commission is not a quasijudicial body. The employee commission is empowered to perform the following duties: 
(1)  Hear complaints or grievances from workers in an informal (nonjudicial) atmosphere with regard to work environment, safety equipment or personnel and the commission may then make a recommendation to the proper authority. 
(2)  Review all activity relating to work stoppages and strikes and recommend appropriate punishment, if necessary, to the city council, or the proper authority. 
(3)  Study employee proposals for increases in pay and other benefits; present results of study and recommendations to, if any, to the city council. 
(4)  Study and entertain proposals for improving working conditions; present results of study and recommendations, if any, to the city council or the proper authority. 
(5)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time authorize. 
(Ord. No. 75-547, §§ 1—5, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 92-1200, § 1, 6-1-92; Code 1958, § 2-24(f))  
Secs. 2-171—2-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LIBRARY BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Public library, § 11.05. 
 
Sec. 2-186. - Established. 
There shall be established and maintained a library board of the city, consisting of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 79-687, § 1, 3-5-79; Code 1958, § 2-25(a))  
Sec. 2-187. - Appointment and term of members; ex officio members. 
(a)  All members of the library board shall be appointed by the city council, two (2) such members to be appointed in each even-numbered year, and three (3) such members to be appointed in each odd-numbered year, the appointments to be made each year within thirty (30) days following election. The term of office of each such member shall be two (2) years. 
(b)  In addition, a representative of the city manager shall be an ex officio member of the board and shall serve the board in an advisory capacity, but shall have no voting rights, and shall attend meetings as requested. The city librarian and the county librarian shall be invited to attend all meetings. 
(Ord. No. 79-687, § 2, 3-5-79; Code 1958, § 2-25(b))  
Sec. 2-188. - Officers; rules and procedures. 
A library board chairman and secretary shall be elected by the board annually. The board shall establish its own rules and procedures, which shall include the following: 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members of the board; and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon all questions. 
(2)  Meetings shall be held as needed but not less than once each quarter; and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 79-687, § 4, 3-5-79; Code 1958, § 2-25(d))  
Sec. 2-189. - Representative to county commissioner's court. 
The library board shall nominate one of its members subject to appointment by commissioner's court of the county to be a representative to the county library board. 
(Ord. No. 79-687, § 5, 3-5-79; Code 1958, § 2-25(e))  
Sec. 2-190. - Duties. 
The library board shall be in the nature of an advisory and reviewing body, reporting to the city council. The library board is empowered to perform the following duties: 
(1)  Encourage participation of citizens' groups who are interested in contributing to a quality library in the city. 
(2)  Report on: 
a.  Furnishings. 
b.  Security. 
c.  Books. 
d.  Insurance coverages. 
(3)  Advise the city council and the city staff on the needs of the library, to include: 
a.  Maintenance. 
b.  Utilities. 
(4)  Establish policies for the use of the meeting rooms of the library (not to include the library proper). 
(5)  Represent the city at the county library board meetings and report back and communicate the actions and activities of the county board. 
(6)  Communicate with the county library board and the county libraries and branch librarian. 
(7)  Recommend and establish policies for the acceptance of gifts of materials and equipment (other than circulating materials and/or equipment) to the library in the name of the city as provided for in contract between the city and county. 
(8)  Recommend contract provisions between the city and the county library. 
(9)  Recommend library programs and changes in existing programs for the city. 
(10)  Advise the city staff and the city council on budget needs of the library. 
(Ord. No. 79-687, § 6, 3-5-79; Code 1958, § 2-25(f))  
Secs. 2-191—2-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission, § 4.09. 
Cross reference— Vandalizing beautification projects, § 62-10. 
 
Sec. 2-206. - Created; number of members; compensation. 
There is hereby created a beautification commission to be known as the Lake Jackson Beautification Commission for the restoration, preservation and enhancement of scenic beauty, consisting of eight (8) members who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 73-495, § 1, 5-14-73; Code 1958, § 2-19)  
Sec. 2-207. - Appointment; terms; ex officio members; duties of director of parks and recreation. 
The members of the beautification commission shall be appointed by the city council, three (3) such members to be appointed in each even-numbered year and four (4) such members to be appointed in each odd-numbered year, the appointments to be made each year within thirty (30) days following the regular election. The term of office of each such member shall be two (2) years. In addition, the director of parks and recreation, as a representative of the city manager, shall be an ex officio member of the commission, and shall serve the commission in an advisory capacity, but shall have no voting rights and shall attend the meetings of the beautification commission. The director of parks and recreation as representative of the city manager shall also coordinate the activities of the beautification commission and those of the parks and recreation board and serve as a liaison between these boards and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 73-495, § 2, 5-14-73; Code 1958, § 2-20)  
Sec. 2-208. - Organization; rules of procedure. 
The beautification commission shall annually elect one of its members as chairman, and shall establish its own rules and procedures which shall include the following: 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members of the commission and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon questions. 
(2)  Meetings shall be held not less than once each month, shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 73-495, § 4, 5-14-73; Code 1958, § 2-22)  
Sec. 2-209. - Powers and duties. 
The beautification commission shall be and is hereby vested with the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the landscaping, the placement of trees, grass, shrubs, flowers and decorations within the corporate limits of the city, including public parks and private property used for public purposes. 
(2)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the aesthetic placement of all signs in the city, including signs used in the advertisement of businesses, products for sale, services for sale or for charity and political signs and posters. 
(3)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the control and elimination of junk yards and automobile graveyards within areas under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(4)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies concerning the aesthetic qualities that are involved in preserving and enhancing scenic beauty in planning and zoning the future development and redevelopment of the city. 
(5)  Initiate studies concerning the aesthetic placement of trees, grass, shrubs, flowers and decorations within the city and hold public hearings as necessary with regard to these studies. 
(6)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time authorize. 
(Ord. No. 73-495, § 5, 5-14-73; Code 1958, § 2-23) 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 78; solid waste, condition and use of premises, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 110.  
Secs. 2-210—2-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - KEEP LAKE JACKSON BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission, § 4.09. 
 
Sec. 2-226. - Created, number of members, compensation. 
There is hereby created a Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission for the purpose of performing and carrying out the duties of the beautification commission as set out in the City Charter and assisting the city council in establishing a city-wide policy for landscaping and aesthetic improvements and for decreasing the amount of loose refuse in the city. The commission shall consist of five (5) or more members who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 00-1633, § 1, 9-5-2000; Code 1958, § 2-27; Ord. No. 05-1789, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 2-227. - Appointment; terms, duties of representatives and liaisons. 
The members of the Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission shall be appointed by the city council; half of the members shall be appointed each year within thirty (30) days following the regular city election. In the event of an odd number of members, the extra member will be appointed in even-numbered years. The term of office of each such member shall be two (2) years. In addition, a representative of the city manager, or any person appointed by the city council shall serve as liaison between the commission and city council, but shall have no voting rights. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 00-1633, § 1, 9-5-2000; Code 1958, § 2-28; Ord. No. 05-1789, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 2-228. - Organization; rules of procedure. 
The Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission shall annually elect one (1) of its members as chair, and shall establish its own rules and procedures which shall include the following: 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members of the commission and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon questions. 
(2)  Meetings shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 00-1633, § 1, 9-5-2000; Code 1958, § 2-30; Ord. No. 05-1789, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 2-229. - Powers and duties. 
The Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission shall be and is hereby vested with the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the landscaping, the placement of trees, grass, shrubs, flowers and decorations within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, including public parks and private property used for public purpose. 
(2)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies concerning the aesthetic qualities that are involved in preserving and enhancing scenic beauty in planning and zoning the future development and redevelopment of the municipality to include control and elimination of junk yards and automobile graveyards. 
(3)  Recommend to the city, for adoption, legislative changes with regard to the handling of solid waste or the control and elimination of litter, trash and waste materials. 
(4)  Conduct a continuous education program designed to change the attitude of all the citizens of the city toward the disposal of waste and to motivate citizens to keep their city clean. 
(5)  Encourage citizen involvement and participation. 
(6)  Encourage strict code enforcement. 
(7)  Introduce new forms of technology. 
(8)  Develop programs within the city government and community which will aid in the sustained reduction of litter. 
(9)  Periodically measure litter accumulation in the city. 
(10)  Make an annual report to the city council showing the activities of the commission and the Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful subcommittees for the current year. 
(11)  Initiate studies and undertake review of the waste problem in the city. 
(12)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time authorize. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 00-1633, § 1, 9-5-2000; Code 1958, § 2-31; Ord. No. 05-1789, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 2-230. - Subcommittees. 
To exercise the powers and accomplish the duties of the Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission, the commission may establish subcommittees including, but not limited to, the areas of business and industry, communications, community organizations, municipal operations and schools. Each subcommittee shall be chaired by a Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful member with an unspecified number of community volunteers chosen by the commission as working subcommittee staff. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 00-1633, § 1, 9-5-2000; Code 1958, § 2-32; Ord. No. 05-1789, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 2-231. - Funding. 
Office space, supplies, telephone, postage and secretarial support for the Keep Lake Jackson Beautiful Commission shall be furnished by the city within the budgetary appropriation process. Additional funds involving travel or training shall also be supplied by the city within council-imposed budgetary restraints. However, supplemental funds for commission activities may be gained from donations. Such donations may be received by the city from the general public, business, industry, foundations and other sources for the purposes set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 00-1633, § 1, 9-5-2000; Code 1958, § 2-33; Ord. No. 05-1789, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Secs. 2-232—2-234. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5.5. - YOUTH ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-235. - Established. 
There shall be established and maintained a commission to be known and maintained as the Lake Jackson Youth Advisory Commission in the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to serve as a liaison between the city council and the youth of the community. 
(Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, 7-18-97)  
Sec. 2-236. - Membership. 
The commission shall consist of at least eight (8) members who are between the ages of twelve (12) and eighteen (18) and are residents of the city. The members shall be chosen by the city council to serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, 7-18-97; Ord. No. 15-2078, § 1, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 2-237. - Selection and appointment of members. 
All members of the commission shall be selected through an application process and shall be appointed by the city council and take office upon being sworn on their oath to uphold the duties of the office and the Constitution of Texas and of the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, 7-18-97)  
Sec. 2-238. - Term of office. 
The term of office for each member shall run from August 1 to May 31 of each year. However, when a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of a term, an appointment shall be made by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, 7-18-97; Ord. No. 15-2078, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 2-239. - Officers. 
The commission shall have a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary. 
(Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, 7-18-97; Ord. No. 15-2078, § 3, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 2-240. - Function of commission. 
The function of the commission shall be to serve as a liaison between city council and the youth of the community on issues affecting youth by involving them in social, cultural, recreational, and other drug-free and alcohol-free activities. When requested by city council or the city manager, the commission shall give advice and assistance on matters concerning the needs of youth. 
(Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, 7-18-97)  
Sec. 2-241. - Meetings. 
The commission shall hold meetings at least monthly. The presence of a majority of the commissioners shall be necessary and sufficient to constitute a quorum, and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions. On tie votes, the vote of the chairman shall be determinative, the chairman in addition being entitled to vote on all questions. Minutes of meetings shall be kept and the record filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, 7-18-97; Ord. No. 15-2078, § 4, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 2-242. - Authority to make recommendations. 
In the performance of its function, the commission is an advisory body authorized to make recommendations to the city council and the city manager on: 
(1)  Policy matters affecting the youth of the community; 
(2)  Planning, organizing, coordinating, and carrying out drug-free and alcohol-free social, cultural, recreational, achieving, educational, and other activities for the youth of the community; and 
(3)  Establishing guidelines, rules, and procedures for participation in such activities. 
(Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, 7-18-97; Ord. No. 15-2078, § 5, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 2-243. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2078, § 6, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, repealed § 2-243, which pertained to written report; annual plan and derived from Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 1996; and Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, adopted July 18, 1997.  
Sec. 2-244. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2078, § 6, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, repealed § 2-244, which pertained to attendance policy and procedure; notification of vacancy and derived from Ord. No. 96-1361, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 1996; and Ord. No. 97-1425, § 1, adopted July 18, 1997.  
Secs. 2-245—2-247. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5.7 - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 97-1425, adopted July 18, 1997, repealed §§ 2-248—2-250 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 2-248—2-250 pertained to the youth advisory commission corporation and derived from § 2 of Ord. No. 96-1361, adopted Feb. 6, 1996. 
 
Secs. 2-248—2-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 110. 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Created. 
Subject to like provision being made by the commissioners' court of the county and the City of Angleton, by proper order, duly promulgated and entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.014, there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Brazoria County-Angleton-Lake Jackson Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 241.001—241.903. 
(Ord. No. 78-664, § 1, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 79-710, § 1, 8-20-79; Code 1958, § 2-26(a))  
Sec. 2-252. - Composition. 
The Brazoria County-Angleton-Lake Jackson Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of seven (7) members, two (2) to be appointed by the city council of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas; two (2) to be appointed by the city council of the City of Angleton, Texas, and two (2) members to be appointed by the commissioners' court of Brazoria County, Texas. The seventh member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and such seventh member shall serve as chairman of the Brazoria County-Angleton-Lake Jackson Joint Airport Zoning Board. The two (2) members appointed by the city council of this city shall serve two-year terms, or until their successors are appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 78-664, § 2, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 79-710, § 2, 8-20-79; Code 1958, § 2-26(b))  
Sec. 2-253. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SENIOR CITIZENS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-254. - Created; number of members; compensation. 
The commission shall consist of five (5) or more members who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 99-1606, § 1, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 2-255. - Appointment; terms, duties of representatives and liaisons. 
The members of the senior citizens commission shall be appointed by the city council, half of the members shall be appointed each year within thirty (30) days following the regular city election. In the event of an odd number of members, the extra member will be appointed in even numbered years. The term of office of each such member shall be two (2) years. In addition, a representative of the city manager, or any person appointed by the city council shall serve as liaison between the commission and the city council, but shall have no voting rights. 
(Ord. No. 99-1606, § 1, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 2-256. - Organization; rules of procedure. 
The senior citizens commission shall annually elect one (1) of its members as chairman, and shall establish its own rules and procedures, which shall include the following: 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members of the commission and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon questions. 
(2)  Meetings shall be held not less than once each month, shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 99-1606, § 1, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 2-257. - Powers and duties. 
The senior citizens commission shall be and is hereby vested with the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To recommend to the city, for adoption, legislative or administrative changes with regard to issues affecting or improving the quality of life for all citizens of Lake Jackson. 
(2)  To recommend to the city changes that will improve the quality of life and services to the senior citizens of Lake Jackson. 
(3)  To encourage citizen involvement and participation. 
(4)  To initiate studies and study new forms of technology. 
(5)  To develop programs within the city government and the community which will aid in improving the quality of life. 
(6)  To make an annual report to the city council showing the activities of the commission for the current year. 
(7)  To perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time authorize. 
(Ord. No. 99-1606, § 1, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 2-258. - Subcommittees. 
To exercise the powers and accomplish the duties of the senior citizens commission, the commission may establish subcommittees. Each subcommittee shall be chaired by a senior citizen commission member with an unspecified number of community volunteers chosen by the commission as working subcommittee staff. 
(Ord. No. 99-1606, § 1, 8-2-99)  
Secs. 2-259, 2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Created; number of members; compensation. 
(a)  There is hereby created a hotel occupancy tax committee for the purpose of recommending to city council how to expend level 2 hotel tax funds. The committee shall consist of seven (7) members who shall not be compensated and who shall represent the following organizations: 
(1)  Brazosport Convention and Visitors Council; 
(2)  Brazosport Fine Arts Council; 
(3)  Museum of Natural Science at the Center for Arts and Services; 
(4)  Lake Jackson Historical Association; 
(5)  Hotels in the city; 
(6)  City of Lake Jackson staff (to be assigned by the city manager); and 
(7)  City council. 
(b)  It is preferred that the committee members be Lake Jackson residents, but it is not a requirement. 
(Ord. No. 17-2127, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 2-262. - Appointment; terms. 
The members of the hotel occupancy tax committee shall be appointed by city council within thirty (30) days following the regular city election and shall serve two-year terms. Each organization or group listed in section 2-261(a)(1)—(5) may make a recommendation to city council as to who their representative on the committee shall be. 
(Ord. No. 17-2127, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 2-263. - Organization; meetings. 
(a)  The hotel occupancy tax committee shall annually elect one (1) of its members as a chairperson. The committee shall hold meetings each month unless cancelled by the chair following meeting posting requirements. The presence of a majority of the committee shall be necessary and sufficient to constitute a quorum, and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairperson being entitled to vote on all questions. Minutes of meetings shall be kept and the record filed with the city secretary. 
(b)  All meetings shall follow the Texas Open Meetings Act and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which record shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 17-2127, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 2-264. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The hotel occupancy tax committee shall have the power to and shall be required to: 
(1)  Hear requests for level 2 hotel occupancy funds and submit a recommendation to city council; 
(2)  Recommend allocation of level 2 hotel occupancy funds to city council; 
(3)  Recommend to city council a budget of expected revenue from and proposed expenditures of level 2 hotel occupancy funds for the next ensuing fiscal year; and 
(4)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time prescribe. 
(b)  All recommendations for the allocating of level 2 hotel occupancy funds shall be for a lawful method of advertising the city or encouraging tourism, including preservation of historical sites, promoting visitation through attraction of conventions, and encouraging visitations to museums. 
(Ord. No. 17-2127, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Secs. 2-265—2-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to issue and sell bonds or notes, § 2.01; audit and examination of city books and accounts, § 3.14; municipal finance, art. 9. 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Selection of depositories. 
City depositories shall be selected by requests for proposals and the requirements of law. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 1, 12-14-47; Ord. No. 65-322, § 1, 12-6-65; Code 1958, § 20-7) 
State Law reference— Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 105; state and private banks as city depositories, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 342-901.  
Sec. 2-272. - Investment policy. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall have the authority to invest city money and shall be responsible for and be obligated to invest the money in investments that yield the highest rate of return while providing the necessary protection of principal consistent with state law. The city treasurer shall determine the highest or best rate of interest available by consulting the available financial services. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall invest local funds in any sources that are permitted under state law which provide the best combination of short term and long term interest rates. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall make projections of the city's cash on a continuing basis by forecasting both revenues and expenditures. 
(d)  Ninety-five (95) percent of the total funds available will be the goal for the amount of funds invested. 
(e)  At least four (4) times each year, the city treasurer shall prepare a signed written report to the city council concerning the city's investment transactions for the preceding quarter, describing in detail the investment position of the city as of the date of the report. The report shall be signed by the treasurer and delivered through the city manager to the council. 
(Ord. No. 80-729, § 1, 2-11-80; Code 1958, § 20-8) 
State Law reference— Public Funds Investment Act of 1987, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 842a-2.  
Secs. 2-273—2-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Preservation and management of local government records, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 441.151 et seq.; Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.; municipal records management, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.021 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-291. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Director and librarian means the executive and administrative officer of the state library and archives commission. 
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the city or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-295. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-296. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-61) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions pertaining to local government records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.003, and V.T.C.A., Government Code § 441.151.  
Sec. 2-292. - Records affected; procedures generally. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it unless otherwise directed by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-60)  
Sec. 2-293. - City records declared public property. 
All city records are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-62) 
State Law reference— Declaration of local government records as public property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.005.  
Sec. 2-294. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 201 et seq.), the Texas Government Code, and accepted records management practice under Texas law. 
(1)  Definitions: 
a.  Confidential documents or information means information considered confidential by law, either constitutional, statutory or by judicial decision as set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.101. 
b.  Exempt documents or information means information considered to be excepted from disclosure under V.T.C.A., Government Code, §§ 552.101 through 552.123. 
(2)  Guidelines. To further implement this policy the following guidelines are adopted: 
a.  The city manager shall be the official in the city to whom shall be made all open records requests or requests for city documents. 
b.  The city manager shall maintain a file of, or access to, all public, exempt and confidential city documents. All other public officials should keep the city manager informed of materials in their possession that they believe are exempt or confidential under the Open Records Act. 
c.  The city attorney should be consulted, both by the city manager and other city officials, whenever that official comes into possession of materials that might be considered exempt or confidential under the Open Records Act. 
1.  Any information that relates to pending or prospective litigation should be clearly marked as such. The attorney, rather than the city manager, must then decide whether that litigation material should be exempt from public disclosure. 
2.  All documents that contain information that is confidential under the law should be clearly marked as confidential. Although some information contained in these records may not, in fact, be confidential (that is, the document may contain some purely factual information that is not privileged and thus must be distributed to the public upon a proper request under the Act), all documents containing privileged information should be carefully perused by the city attorney before being publicly distributed. The city attorney may request an attorney general opinion within ten (10) days after receiving an open records request if he is uncertain as to whether specific information should or should not be publicly distributed. 
3.  All documents that contain attorney-client confidential information should be clearly marked as such to avoid any misunderstandings, attorney advice, recommendations or opinions should be contained in documents drafted directly by the city attorney, not the city manager or any other public official. Confidential client communications from city council members or the city manager should also be labeled "Attorney-Client Confidential Communication." 
4.  All confidential documents that are distributed to city council members in executive session and whose release would cause the City of Lake Jackson harm should be collected by the city attorney or the city manager after each executive session and kept safe by the appropriate official. 
d.  All open records requests for city council information shall be made to the city manager. 
e.  If any person requests official city materials from any other public official, the public official should direct that person to the city manager. No city council member shall distribute city council documents or any city records to the public on his own initiative. Such requests for documents shall be referred to the city manager. Council members who violate this provision are in violation of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.201 and with regard to confidential material are subject to the penalties established in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.352. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-63; Ord. No. 98-1551, § 1, 3-17-98) 
State Law reference— Purpose of Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.002.  
Sec. 2-295. - Designation of officer. 
The city manager shall designate an individual, employed by the city, to serve as records management officer for the city. Upon the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the city manager of the individual so designated, the city manager shall promptly designate another individual to serve as records management officer. The individual designated as records management officer shall file his name with the director and librarian within thirty (30) days of the date of designation, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-64) 
State Law reference— Designation of records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025.  
Sec. 2-296. - Plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-65) 
State Law reference— Custodians of records required to participate in records management program, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.022(b); records management program to be established, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.026.  
Sec. 2-297. - Duties of records management officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article or by law, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operation quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the city is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(11)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(12)  Report annually to the city the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) of this section; and 
(13)  Bring to the attention of the city noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-66) 
State Law reference— Duties of records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.023.  
Sec. 2-298. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible. 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article and state law. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-67)  
Sec. 2-299. - Electronic information records management. 
(a)  Storage schedules and compliance. Records retention schedules apply regardless of the recording or storage media. Electronically stored records require special diligence because their creation, storage and destruction are often automated and may be performed by another function. 
The retention schedules mandated by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission are adopted as the schedules for the City of Lake Jackson. 
(b)  Internet services. Internet services provided by the City of Lake Jackson are to be provided in accordance with the City of Lake Jackson's Acceptable Use Guidelines for Internet Services, prepared under the authority of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 98-1551, § 2, 3-17-98)  
Sec. 2-300. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officers in cooperation with department heads shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of the city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-68; Ord. No. 98-1551, § 3, 3-17-98) 
State Law reference— Records control schedules, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.041 et seq.; records retention schedules, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 441.158.  
Sec. 2-301. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-296 shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to the pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the city manager that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-69; Ord. No. 98-1551, § 3, 3-17-98) 
State Law reference— Retention periods, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.042.  
Sec. 2-302. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-296, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-296. 
(Ord. No. 90-1142, § 1, 11-19-90; Code 1958, § 2-70; Ord. No. 98-1551, § 3, 3-17-98)  
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 2009, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; keeping certain animals as nuisance, § 38-28; barking dogs, § 38-57; health and sanitation, ch. 50; removal of dead animals by city, § 82-74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Local Public Health Reorganization Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq.; animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq.; Rabies Control Act of 1981, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; livestock, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 141.001 et seq.; permitting a head of cattle or a domestic turkey to run at large in certain counties, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 143.082; cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.11; dog fighting, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.111; certain tax exemptions for charitable organizations, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Court means the Lake Jackson Municipal Court. 
Destructive animal means an animal, while not on its owner's property, that injures or kills a domestic animal. 
Domestic animal means any animal which is not livestock, not prohibited, and commonly kept as pets at the owner's residence, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, fish, reptiles, and small caged rodents. 
Feral cat means a domestic cat that exists in an untamed state, either from birth or due to reversion to a wild state from domestication. 
Fowl means domesticated birds commonly kept for eggs or meat, including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, and turkeys. 
Handler means a person having control or custody of the animal. 
Injure means a wound characterized by bite wounds or ripping and tearing of skin or muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent animal owner to take the animal to a veterinarian. 
Livestock means any farm animal commonly kept for pleasure or profit, including, but not limited to, swine, cattle, horses, sheep, goats, chickens, ducks, geese, and rabbits. 
Nuisance animal means an animal that: 
(1)  Molests people; 
(2)  Attacks other animals; 
(3)  Is repeatedly at large; 
(4)  Damages private or public property other than that of the animal's owner; 
(5)  Repeatedly barks, yelps, whines, howls or makes any other sound loud and long enough to unreasonably disturb the peace of other people in the neighborhood; 
(6)  Creates an offensive odor; 
(7)  Creates a health hazard; or 
(8)  Deposits body waste upon public property or private property other than that of the animal's owner. 
Owner means any person who owns, keeps, maintains, possesses, harbors, feeds, shelters, or allows to remain on a premises under his control one (1) or more animals. 
Shelter means the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter. 
Tying and staking means the securing of an animal by a leash or lead. 
Unrestrained animal means any animal, excluding cats, that is not inside a fenced yard; at the end of a leash controlled by a responsible person; in a house, apartment or a completely enclosed cage; or tied or staked upon open or unfenced land. 
Wild animal means and includes any wild mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. Such animals shall include, but not be limited to, tigers, lions, bobcats, ocelots, cougars, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles, apes, foxes, elephants, rhinoceri, hippopotami, monkeys, skunks, all forms of poisonous reptiles and other like animals, or any other animal usually confined to cages. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, §§ 3-7(d), 3-22(a); Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 17-2126, § 1, 2-6-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-2. - Protection of birds. 
(a)  The entire area within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird refuge. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to intentionally destroy the eggs or nests of any wild bird or fowl in the city. 
(c)  It is an exception to the application of this section if the destruction of the eggs or nest occurs as an unintended consequence of an otherwise lawful activity, such as trimming or clearing of trees or shrubbery. 
(d)  Provided, however, if European starlings, English house sparrows, grackles, red-winged blackbirds, cowbirds, feral rock pigeons (Columba livia) or crows are found to be congregating in such number in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property, in the opinion of the city health officer, then such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by said health officer under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-26; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009) 
State Law reference— Protection of nongame birds, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 64.002.  
Sec. 10-3. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-28; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Secs. 10-4—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Humane officer; appointment, function. 
The city manager shall appoint for a period to be terminated at his pleasure a qualified person to act in the capacity of city humane officer, whose duty it shall be to see that the provisions of this chapter and any other city ordinance relating to the control of animals are enforced. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-1; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-32. - Enforcement; interference with officers. 
(a)  The city humane officer or any police officer of this city having probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred, shall have the right to enter upon all yards or other outside areas within the city in the course of enforcement for the purpose of impounding an animal or issuing a citation, or both. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as to authorize the humane officer to enter dwellings or buildings attached thereto without the consent of the owner or person in control of such dwelling. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or oppose or resist the chief of police or any of his officers, the humane officer or his deputies, or the city health officer or his deputies while such officers are engaged in the performance of the duties pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter. All police, humane, and health officers, deputies and employees are empowered to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-2; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Secs. 10-33—10-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - KEEPING ANIMALS GENERALLY  
DIVISION 1. - CARE AND CONFINEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-2126, § 2, adopted Feb. 6, 2017, added Div. 1 title for existing §§ 10-81—10-86 to facilitate inclusion of new Div. 2, §§ 10-91—10-94, as set out herein. 
 
Sec. 10-81. - Animal care; cruelty. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper protection from the weather, veterinary care, when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. 
(b)  No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, including a wild animal, or cause, instigate or permit any combat between animals and humans or another animal. 
(c)  No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal. 
(d)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; if the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the police department. 
(e)  If an animal is found in an enclosed vehicle without adequate ventilation and is in distress, an animal control officer, police officer, or personnel of the fire department may use reasonable force to remove the animal from the vehicle and the owner of the animal shall be subject to fine. Neither the city nor any of its employees will be held responsible for any damage done to the vehicle during the attempt to remove the animal from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-17; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09.  
Sec. 10-81.1. - Tying and staking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to tie or stake any animal unless: 
(1)  The tying or staking is accomplished by providing an overhead cable onto which is attached a lead or leash that allows the animal to be free to travel unrestricted between the extreme terminations of the overhead cable and the lead or leash is of sufficient length to allow the animal to move about laterally from the overhead cable without the possibility of strangulation but not so long to allow it to wrap around or become entangled on any obstacles that may restrict the movement of the animal; or 
(2)  The at-grade tying and staking systems include posts or rod stakes with three hundred sixty-degree swivels to which the lead is attached and cable hoop and lead wherein the lead is free to slide three hundred sixty (360) degrees around the cable hoop which is placed around a tree or fixed post and without the possibility of strangulation but not so long to allow it to wrap around or become entangled on any obstacles that may restrict the movement of the animal. 
(b)  Within the range of travel of the lead or leash, the animal shall be provided ready access to water, food, shade and shelter. 
(Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-82. - Use of poisons. 
No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal. It shall not be unlawful for any person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-18; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-82.1. - Feeding of unlicensed animals prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to cause or permit the maintenance of an attractive environment for any dog, cat or other animal, by the placement of food or other means, when the animal is not confined inside a fenced or otherwise restrictive area, and the animal is not licensed as provided herein. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person placed the food or other attractive environment solely for the purpose of apprehending an animal for surrender to a humane organization or to the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 05-1786; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-83. - Sanitation of quarters. 
(a)  The premises or place in which any animal is kept or harbored shall be at all times maintained in a sanitary manner. It shall be the duty of the health officer of the city and of the humane officer and the assistant humane officers of the city to, from time to time, visit the premises where any animal is kept or harbored in the city and report any such violation of this section respecting the sanitary conditions of such premises to the health officer of the city. 
(b)  When the health officer or humane officer, upon inspection of any premises or place where any animal is kept or harbored shall find that unsanitary conditions exist, he shall notify the owner, lessor or lessee of the premises or place and give notice to such person to remedy and make sanitary the condition within three (3) days. Any owner, lessor or lessee of a premises or place determined to be unsanitary by the health officer and who does not remedy the condition within three (3) days after official notification, shall be subject to section 1-5 of this Code for harboring a nuisance. 
(c)  The health officer or humane officer shall notify the owner, lessor, or lessee of the unsanitary conditions in writing and deliver such writing either in person or through certified mail. If the certified mail is returned "refused" or "unclaimed", the notice shall be valid and deemed delivered. 
(d)  In the municipal court, the owner, lessor or lessee shall be considered a prima facie violator of this section if the health officer determines that unsanitary conditions exist and the condition is not made sanitary to the satisfaction of the health officer within three (3) days of notification. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-19; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-84. - Wild animals; caging; prohibition against running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to lead or permit any animal of a species that is generally vicious and wild in nature to walk, run, parade, tour, sit or be tied in a public place outside a secure cage without permission of city council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep or harbor any wild animal within the city unless prior permission is gained from city council and unless the same is kept in a cage in a safe manner and in secure quarters. 
(c)  Secure quarters shall mean a completely enclosed cage or a cage with a stake for tying any member of the cat family or shall mean a chain link fence or wall of sufficient height and strength to keep other animals within a confined private area. 
(d)  Any wild animal found loose outside the confined private area is prima facie evidence that the owner or handler did not keep the wild animal in a safe manner or in secure quarters. 
(e)  Secure quarters shall not mean the passenger section of an automobile, truck or other motorized vehicle operated, parked or used on a public street or in a public area, nor shall it mean the hauling area of a truck or trailer unless the area is caged with chain link fence. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for anyone who owns, raises, keeps or is caring for any wild animal to allow the same to be at large outside of its secure quarters or cage. The fact that such animal is discovered outside of the secure quarters or cage, is prima facie evidence that the person who owns, raises, keeps or cares for the same allowed it to roam at large outside the secure quarters or cage. 
(g)  When any animal coming under this section shall be found running at large in the city or not in a cage or secure quarters, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all police officers and humane officers are authorized to capture, restrain and impound any such animal to preserve the public peace and safety. When recapturing or attempting to handle a wild animal, police officers, humane officers and other lawfully constituted authorities may take any reasonable action, including the use of deadly force, against such animal for the safety and welfare of themselves or of other persons and property. The city shall select and establish a place within the city for impounding animals found running at large in violation of this section. Any such animal may be released to the person entitled to its possession, if all applicable fees as authorized in section 10-172 are paid to the city. If not reclaimed within one hundred twenty (120) hours, the city may dispose of the animal in any manner it deems appropriate. Should the person entitled to possession ask to have the animal released to him within the one hundred twenty-hour time limit, he shall satisfy the chief of police or authorized representative that equipment adequate to meet the provisions of this section in restraining any such animal is available and will be used for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-22(b)—(f); Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-85. - Abandonment and confinement of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, release, or abandon any animal on any property, whether public or private, within the corporate limits of the city. An animal shall be considered abandoned if the owner has not provided water, food and shelter, for three (3) or more consecutive days. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall bear the full costs and expenses incurred by the city in the care of the abandoned animal and the person shall reimburse to the city all costs therefore as determined by the animal control officer. 
(c)  Any person having knowledge of any animal which has been or is believed to have been dumped, released, or abandoned shall notify the humane officer and shall give all pertinent information, including description and location of the animal and the name, address, car license, or any other information or description of the person who dumped, released, or abandoned the animal, if known. 
(Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-86. - Selling of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade, barter, lease, rent, or give away, any animal on any roadside, public right-of-way, commercial parking lot, or at any, flea market or festival. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display for a commercial purpose any animal on any roadside, public right-of-way, commercial parking lot, or at any garage sale, flea market or festival. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any non-profit organization founded for the purpose of providing humane sanctuary or shelter for abandoned or unwanted animals. 
(Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Secs. 10-87—10-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DESTRUCTIVE ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Destructive animals—Impoundment. 
(a)  If a humane officer has probable cause to believe that an animal, while not on its owner's property, has injured or killed a domestic animal, the humane officer shall impound the animal at the shelter, a boarding kennel or a veterinarian's office. The animal shall remain impounded until the court holds a hearing to determine whether the animal is a destructive animal and to determine the disposition of that animal. 
(b)  If the owner of the animal does not allow the humane officer to impound the animal, a humane officer or police officer shall obtain a seizure warrant for the animal. 
(c)  If a humane officer or police officer finds an animal running at-large and the humane officer or police officer has probable cause to believe that, while not on its owner's property, the at-large animal has injured or killed a domestic animal, the humane officer or police officer shall take possession of the animal and impound it at the shelter. A humane officer shall send notice of the impoundment to the owner within two (2) business days of impoundment. 
(d)  If the owner wants to surrender the animal, the owner shall surrender the animal to the humane department. The animal shall remain on a police hold at the shelter or other appropriate facility until the court holds a hearing to determine the animal's disposition. 
(Ord. No. 17-2126, § 2, 2-6-2017)  
Sec. 10-92. - Same—Hearing. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days of impoundment, the court shall hold a bench hearing to determine whether the animal is a destructive animal. The court shall follow the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.0423. 
(b)  If the court finds that the animal, while off its owner's property, injured or killed a domestic animal, the court shall deem the animal a destructive animal. The court shall also issue at least one (1) of the following orders: 
(1)  Order the animal to be destroyed; 
(2)  Prohibit the owner from owning the same type of domestic animal as the destructive animal while the owner lives in the city limits; 
(3)  Order that the animal be placed in the custody of the shelter so that the animal will be placed for adoption, with specific restrictions; 
(4)  Order the shelter to release the animal to its owner with a written notification to the owner that the owner must do one (1) or more of the following within a designated time: 
a.  Microchip the animal; 
b.  Sterilize the animal; 
c.  Place and keep a red collar on the animal with the wording "caution"; 
d.  Register the animal yearly with the Lake Jackson Humane Department; 
e.  Restrain the animal at all times on a leash or within a secure enclosure; 
f.  Provide the humane department annual proof of liability insurance for the duration of the destructive animal's life, in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per incident, to cover expenses for injured or killed domestic animals that the destructive animal may cause in the future; 
g.  Retrieve the destructive animal from the shelter only when the owner has paid all costs for the impoundment of the animal; 
h.  Retrieve the destructive animal from the shelter only when the owner has provided the humane department with proof that the animal will be kept in a secure enclosure. 
(c)  Placing the destructive animal for adoption or transferring ownership does not affect the destructive animal designation or the requirements ordered by the court. 
(d)  Restitution. The court may order the owner of the destructive animal to pay restitution to the owner of the animal that was injured or killed. If the owner cannot pay restitution, the court may order the owner to perform community service. 
(e)  No finding. The court shall not deem the animal destructive if: 
(1)  The damage or attack happened in an enclosure in which the animal was being kept; 
(2)  The animal was protecting its offspring, itself, or another animal; or 
(3)  The animal was protecting a person. 
(f)  Appeal. An owner may appeal the decision of the court in the same manner as provided for in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.0424. 
(Ord. No. 17-2126, § 2, 2-6-2017)  
Sec. 10-93. - Same—Adoption. 
(a)  If ordered to be placed for adoption, the court will order the shelter to give the new owner written notification of the restrictions in section 10-92(b)(4) that the court has put in place. 
(b)  If the court orders the animal to be placed for adoption, the court may set limitations on who may adopt the animal and the type of environment in which the animal can live, such as no other animals or small children living in the house. 
(c)  If a specific person wants to adopt the animal, that person must appear at the hearing and prove that person can control the animal. 
(Ord. No. 17-2126, § 2, 2-6-2017)  
Sec. 10-94. - Same—Violations. 
(a)  An owner violates this division if: 
(1)  After being deemed a destructive animal, while not on its owner's property, the animal injures or kills another domestic animal; or 
(2)  An animal that has not been deemed destructive, while not on its owner's property, injures or kills another domestic animal and the owner of the animal had knowledge that the animal had injured or killed, or attempted to injure or kill another domestic animal before. 
(3)  The owner does not follow the court's orders. 
(b)  If the destructive animal is found running at large or if the animal owner does not follow the court's orders, the animal shall be impounded at the shelter. 
(1)  Within ten (10) days of impoundment, the court shall hold a hearing to determine if the animal should be returned to the owner or if one (1) or more of the options listed in section 10-92(b) should be ordered; 
(2)  The court shall follow the same notice provisions as in section 10-92. 
(Ord. No. 17-2126, § 2, 2-6-2017)  
Secs. 10-95—10-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LIVESTOCK AND OTHER SUCH DOMESTIC ANIMALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Livestock, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 141.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-107. - Livestock and fowl prohibited in city limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or lead any livestock on any sidewalk within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, raise, or care for any livestock or fowl within the city. 
(c)  The keeping of any livestock or fowl within the city is a public nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with chapter 38 of this Code. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The owner of land upon which the animals are kept if the owner has obtained an agricultural designation of such land for tax purposes; 
(2)  A licensed animal shelter, veterinarian clinic, or similar facility for the treatment and temporary shelter of animals; 
(3)  An officer or employee of the federal, state, or local government engaged in the performance of official duties; or 
(4)  A person who has received permission from the city manager to temporarily keep livestock or fowl within the city limits for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days. All livestock and fowl kept under this section shall be provided a pen, shed, or other structure of adequate size for the shelter and safekeeping of such animals. Such structures shall be maintained in a manner that prevents the escape of noxious odors or substances to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-25; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Secs. 10-108—10-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DOGS AND CATS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Barking dogs, § 38-57. 
State Law reference— Regulation of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-131. - Sentry dog—Registration and training. 
Any person owning or having custody of one (1) or more dogs used, kept, maintained or trained or purported to be trained to work without supervision in a fenced area to deter or detain unauthorized persons found within such area shall register the dog with the humane officer. Before any sentry dog may be registered by the humane officer, evidence of training of such dog must be given so as to ensure that the person having possession of the dog is able to exercise control over it. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-20; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-132. - Same—Notice. 
No person shall keep any sentry dog in any business establishment, residence or other enclosed lot unless there is posted at every entrance thereto a sign of sufficient size and design to warn persons that such a dog is used at such place. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-21; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-133. - Vicious dogs—Disposition. 
(a)  If it is determined by the humane officer that any dog is a vicious dog, the humane officer may order the person who owns or has custody of the dog to keep the dog at all times securely confined within the private property of such owner or person having the custody of the dog. The dog must be kept in such manner as the humane officer may direct to prevent it from biting or having the opportunity of biting any person, including persons lawfully on the premises where the dog is confined, and a sign of sufficient size and design to warn persons shall be clearly posted at every entrance, until after further order of the humane officer. If, after proper notice, the dog is found running at large, the humane office shall capture and may destroy the dog. 
(b)  If the humane officer determines any dog to be both vicious and a perilous threat to human safety after it has first bitten someone, the dog shall be destroyed after giving proper notice to the owner and after the ten-day rabies observation period. 
(c)  For cases arising under this subsection, the humane officer shall notify the dog's owner that the dog has been determined to be a vicious dog or the dog is to be destroyed. The owner shall have five (5) days after receipt of the notice to appeal the decision of the humane officer to the judge of the municipal court. 
(d)  The humane officer shall notify the owner of the dog in writing and deliver such writing either in person or through certified mail. If the certified mail is returned "refused" or "unclaimed", the notice shall be valid and deemed delivered. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Ord. No. 83-893, § 1, 5-16-83; Code 1958, § 3-15; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-134. - Same—determination of viciousness. 
(a)  In determining whether or not a dog is vicious, the humane officer shall be guided by the following: 
(1)  Whether or not the dog has bitten any person at any time other than the occasion which gave rise to the operation of section 10-133; 
(2)  The circumstances surrounding the occasion indicating the temper or ferocity of the dog; 
(3)  The reputation of the dog in the community with regard to its temper or ferocity; and 
(4)  Its general menace to the public. 
(b)  This section shall be operative even though the dog in question has been vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a dog guarding property against trespassers. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-16; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-135. - Animal waste removal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not to immediately remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, feces left by a dog being handled by that person on property, public or private, other than the premises of the owner or handler of such dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to walk a dog on public property or the private property of someone other than the owner or handler of such dog without having in their possession a container or other instrument suitable for the removal and disposal of the dog's feces in a sanitary manner. 
(c)  This section shall not, however apply to handicapped persons using guide dogs or to peace officers while using animals in the discharge of emergency law enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 05-1794; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Secs. 10-136—10-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RABIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities may adopt rabies control ordinances or rules, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.015. 
 
Sec. 10-146. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to own, keep, possess, harbor or to allow to remain upon the premises under his control any dog or cat four (4) months of age or older that is not vaccinated against rabies. 
(b)  Once the dog or cat has received an initial rabies vaccine, the animal must receive a booster within the twelve-month period following the initial vaccination. Thereafter, the animal must be revaccinated against rabies at an interval of at least once every three (3) years, unless more frequent vacations are required by the animal's veterinarian. 
(c)  Nothing in this section prohibits an owner from having the animal vaccinated more frequently. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-3; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009) 
State Law reference— Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021 et seq.  
Sec. 10-147. - Vaccination certificates. 
(a)  Any licensed veterinarian may vaccinate any dog or cat and shall, upon administering the vaccination, issue a vaccination certificate to the owner of the animal in a form approved by the state department of health. 
(b)  The owner of the animal shall keep the rabies vaccination tag securely fastened around the neck of the animal at all times by means of a collar or harness. 
(c)  The fact that a dog or cat is not wearing the vaccination tag is prima facie evidence of the owner's failure to vaccinate the animal for rabies. This prima facie evidence may be rebutted with a copy of the vaccination certificate that shows the animal was vaccinated in accordance with section 10-146. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-4; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009) 
State Law reference— Vaccination certificate, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021(b).  
Sec. 10-148. - Licensing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson to own, keep, possess, harbor, or allow to remain on the premises, under such person's control, an unlicensed dog or cat that is six (6) months of age or older. The licensing tag must be attached to the collar or harness of the animal at all times. 
(b)  A license may be obtained from a participating veterinarian or the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter. Proof of rabies vaccination shall be required before issuance of the licensing tag. A reasonable fee shall be charged for the tag and the fee shall be used toward the operational costs of the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter. 
(c)  The fact that a dog or cat is not wearing the license tag is prima facie evidence of the owner's failure to have the animal licensed. This prima facie evidence may be rebutted with a copy of the licensing paperwork from the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter or the veterinarian that issued the licensing tag. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-6; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-149. - Removal of tag or collar prohibited without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner, to remove any tag issued under this article from a dog or cat's collar or harness without the written consent of the owner of such dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-150. - Animal bite or scratch; report; confinement, observation and destruction of animal. 
(a)  A person who knows of an animal bite or scratch to an individual, or who knows of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, shall report the incident or animal to the humane officer if the City of Lake Jackson is the location in which the person lives, in which the animal is located, or in which the bite or scratch occurred. 
(b)  The report must include: 
(1)  The name and address of the victim and of the animal's owner, if known; and 
(2)  Any other information that may help in locating the victim or animal. 
(c)  The humane officer shall investigate a report filed under this section. 
(d)  Should any person be bitten or scratched by any animal and a report is made under this section, the humane officer shall have the authority to immediately retrieve the animal and place it with a licensed veterinarian or the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter for confinement and observation for at least ten (10) days. Any and all fees, including transport fees and expenses shall be billable to and be paid by the owner of, or person responsible for, the animal. 
(1)  Should the humane officer decide that it is not necessary to retrieve the animal and place it under confinement and observation with a licensed veterinarian, the person responsible for such animal shall be notified to keep such animal confined and under observation by a licensed veterinarian for not less than ten (10) days after the person was bitten or scratched. The veterinarian shall not release the animal until the local rabies control authority approves the release. 
(2)  Upon the failure of the person responsible for such animal to comply with such notice, the humane officer shall cause such animal to be confined and placed under observation with a veterinarian duly licensed to practice in the state or the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter. The owner or owners of such animal shall be responsible for any actual expenses incurred for treatment, veterinary fee and lodging fees. 
(e)  If any animal dies while under observation, the head will be sent to the Texas Department of Health Rabies Lab. 
(f)  If, after the ten-day observation period, the animal does not show signs of rabies, the veterinarian or the humane officer shall release the animal if the owner has an unexpired rabies vaccination certificate for the animal or if the animal is vaccinated against rabies at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-13; Ord. No. 97-1427, § 1, 8-18-97; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009) 
State Law reference— Reports of rabid animal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.041.  
Sec. 10-151. - Killing of rabid animal. 
The chief of police or any police officer of this city shall have the right to destroy any animal suspected of being rabid within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-14; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Secs. 10-152—10-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION 
 
Sec. 10-171. - Unrestrained and nuisance animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal (excluding cats) that he owns, keeps, possesses, harbors or allows to remain upon the premises under his control to be unrestrained. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, harbor or allow to remain upon the premises under his control a nuisance animal. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-7(a)—(c); Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-1767, § 1, 11-1-2004; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009) 
State Law reference— Restraining dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033(a)(1); quarantine and impoundment facilities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.051 et seq.  
Sec. 10-171.1. - Trapping. 
(a)  Humane officers shall only use humane cage style traps as a means of apprehending nuisance and feral cats. 
(1)  Humane officers may trap on private property if the property owner or agent of the property owner requests the removal of a nuisance or feral cat. 
(2)  Humane officers shall not trap during weekends, city holidays or during times of inclement weather. 
(b)  Any person who is a property owner or agent of that property owner may trap on their property. 
(1)  People may borrow traps from the police department. However, traps will not be loaned out during times of inclement weather. 
(2)  Whether the person is using a private trap or one loaned from the police department, the humane officer shall provide said person guidelines concerning how long an animal may remain in a trap. If a humane officer is not available to retrieve the animal within the hours established in the guidelines, the person must release the animal or take it to the animal shelter. Violation of said guidelines shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(3)  Any person who traps an animal will be subject to criminal prosecution if it is determined animal cruelty laws are violated. 
(4)  Any person who unintentionally traps a domestic animal shall immediately release the animal at the site where it was trapped. 
(5)  The relocation and abandonment of any trapped animal is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-171.2. - Impoundment. 
(a)  All humane officers and police officers have the authority to pick up any unrestrained animal (excluding cats), any nuisance animal, any animal that is treated in a manner determined by an animal control officer to be cruel or inhumane, or any animal being kept in a condition which is a violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Unrestrained animals may be returned to their owner if known and if the owner has a secure area for the animal. 
(c)  Unrestrained animals not returned to their owners and all other animals picked up according to this section, shall be confined in the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter. 
(Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-171.3. - Redemption, disposition. 
(a)  Unrestrained animals impounded in the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter shall be kept for up to seventy-two (72) hours in the case of an animal without a collar or up to one hundred twenty (120) hours in the case of an animal wearing a current vaccination and/or license tag. After such time period, the animal shall become the property of the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter, and the animal may be destroyed or placed for adoption. 
(b)  Nuisance animals impounded in the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter shall be kept until the nuisance situation has been abated. If the situation is not abated within fourteen (14) days, the city shall ask the court to hold a hearing on whether the animal should be returned to the owner, temporarily retained at the shelter to give the owner more time, or placed for adoption. 
(c)  Animals that are impounded at the shelter because they are dangerous, destructive, cruelly treated, or nuisances shall remain on a police hold and shall not become the property of the shelter without a court order. 
(Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 17-2126, § 3, 2-6-2017)  
Sec. 10-172. - Redemption fees; fees for services rendered; revenue to general fund. 
Reasonable fees will be charged for redemption of animals and for all costs and services rendered by the humane department and the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter. Such fees are to be paid by the owner or person entitled to redeem the animal before the animal is redeemed. The humane officer and the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter shall keep a current schedule of fees to be charged, such fees approved by the city council and the board of directors of the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter. All fees and monies for pickup and daily fees will be collected by the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter and are to be used to defray operational costs of the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter facility. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-7.1; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009) 
State Law reference— Impoundment fee, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033(c).  
Sec. 10-173. - Notice. 
As soon as possible after any animal has been impounded at the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter, it shall be the duty of the humane officer to post the required notice at the door of the shelter describing each such animal, whether bearing a vaccination tag, or not and giving the number of the tag, and the name of the person registering the animal in the case where the animal bears a vaccination tag. If the animal bears a vaccination tag, in addition to posting such notice, it shall be the duty of the humane officer to contact the veterinarian who issued the vaccination tag, to determine the identity of the owner of the animal. The humane officer will notify such person by letter, postal card or telephone. The mailing of such letter or postal card shall be deemed sufficient notice whether the person addressed shall receive the same or not. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-8; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-174. - Release of redeemed animals; prerequisite. 
The person entitled to the possession of an animal impounded under this article, upon proper application within the specified time limits after the impounding of such animal, shall be entitled to have the animal released to him/her provided such animal is not affected or thought to be affected with rabies, displays proof of a current rabies vaccination and proof of a current license and all current pickup and shelter fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-9; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009) 
State Law reference— Impoundment for a period set by ordinance or rule, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033(a)(4).  
Sec. 10-176. - Adoption of unredeemed animals, sterilization, rabies vaccination required. 
(a)  The Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter shall not release for adoption by a new owner any animal more than six (6) months of age that has not been sterilized. In addition, there shall be satisfactory evidence that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies, and that the vaccination is current, before any animal may be released. The cost of sterilization and vaccination must be deposited with the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter for payment to a veterinarian selected by the person adopting the animal. The deposit shall be returned upon receipt by the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter of a notice from the veterinarian that the animal has been sterilized and vaccinated as set forth in this article. 
(b)  When a person picks up an animal that he already owns, the animal does not have to be sterilized. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-11; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-177. - Records, reports. 
The humane officer shall submit a monthly report to the chief of police as to the number of dogs and cats picked up, the number of wild animals relocated, and the number of citations and warnings given for violations of this chapter. The humane officer shall make such other reports as are requested. 
(Ord. No. 79-709, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 3-12; Ord. No. 03-1709, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1729, § 1, 10-5-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Secs. 10-178—10-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 10-201. - Created, composition. 
There is hereby created an animal shelter advisory committee, to advise the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter in complying with Chapter 823 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, consisting of four (4) or more members composed of at least one (1) licensed veterinarian, one (1) county or municipal official, one (1) person whose duties include daily operation of an animal shelter, and one (1) representative from an animal welfare organization, and all shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 06-1811, § 1, 5-22-2006; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-202. - Appointment of members. 
The members of the animal shelter advisory committee shall be appointed by the city council, four (4) such members to be appointed in each even-numbered year, and the remainder number of members appointed in each odd-numbered year, the appointments to be made each year within thirty (30) days following the regular election. 
(Ord. No. 06-1811, § 1, 5-22-2006; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-203. - Chairman, rules of procedure. 
The animal shelter advisory committee shall annually elect one (1) of its number as chairman and shall establish its own rules and procedures, which shall include the following: 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members, the chairman being entitled to vote upon questions. 
(2)  Meetings shall be held at least three (3) times each calendar year, shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the record keeper for the animal shelter board and shall be public record. 
(Ord. No. 06-1811, § 1, 5-22-2006; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Sec. 10-204. - Powers, duties. 
The animal shelter advisory committee shall be and is hereby vested with the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To assist in complying with the requirements of Chapter 823 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(2)  To act as an advisory body, with power to advise and recommend to the Southern Brazoria County Animal Shelter and its board of directors policies, rules and regulations for the care and control of animals within the jurisdiction of the shelter. 
(Ord. No. 06-1811, § 1, 5-22-2006; Ord. No. 09-1895, § 1, 1-5-2009)  
Chapter 12 - ANNEXATIONS AND DISANNEXATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 12-1—12-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANNEXATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— For complete description of city boundaries at adoption of charter, see § 1.02. The annexations contained herein are set out in chronological order. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PRECODE ANNEXATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The City of Lake Jackson's first codification was in 1954. There were three annexations prior to the codification in 1954 that were not listed in this chapter: Ord. No. 124, passed 3-10-1952; Ord. No. 131, passed 8-25-1952; and Ord. No. 134, passed 1-31-1953. Said ordinances have since been codified herein as §§ 12-18—12-20. 
 
Sec. 12-18. - Precode annexation one. 
This section amends Ordinance No. 75, same being the zoning ordinance of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, reflecting the inclusion of areas "L", "E Extension" and "M" into the city limits of said City of Lake Jackson, and setting forth zoning and other pertinent regulations to govern said areas. 
I.  A new paragraph, designated as paragraph (40), to follow under paragraph (39) of Section 1 entitled "Definitions" in said Ordinance No. 75, is hereby adopted, which shall read as follows: 
"(40) In measuring distances from permitted structures to front, side and rear property lines, the measurements shall be made from the foundation or vertical wall of said permitted structure." 
II.  A new paragraph, designated as paragraph (41), to follow under paragraph (40) of Section 1 entitled "Definitions" in said Ordinance No. 75, is hereby adopted, which shall read as follows: 
"(41) Block lines - Lines bounding a block." 
III.  Paragraph (2) of Section 2 entitled "District Regulations" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"(a) For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Lake Jackson is hereby divided into five districts, namely: 
"A" Residence Districts; 
"B" Residence Districts; 
"B-1" Residence Districts; 
"C" Local Business Districts; 
"D" Commercial Districts." 
IV.  A new section, designated as Section 4-a to follow Section 4 in said Ordinance No. 75 is hereby adopted, which shall read as follows: 
"SECTION 4-a - "B-1" RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
(a)  Use Regulations: Unless hereafter provided, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered within a "B-1" Residence District except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Any use permitted in "A" Residence Districts; 
(2)  Any use permitted in "B" Residence Districts; 
(3)  Two-family residences may be constructed and a campus-style arrangement of said two-family residences is hereby permitted, subject to approval of the governing body of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
(b)  Area Regulations: 
(1)  Set Back Sides and Rear of Permitted Structures. No residence or other permitted structure, whose end or side wall lines have an angle of 15° or less with any block line, shall be constructed nearer than fifteen (15) feet from the front block line; nor nearer than fifteen (15) feet from any side street block line; nor nearer than five (5) feet from the rear block line; nor nearer than three (3) feet to any side block line other than a side street block line. 
No residence or other permitted structure, whose end or side wall lines have an angle of 16° or more with any block line, shall be constructed on said block nearer than five (5) feet from the front block line; nor nearer than five (5) feet from any side street block line; nor nearer than five (5) feet from the rear block line; nor nearer than three (3) feet to any side block line other than a side street block line. 
No structure shall be constructed nearer than ten (10) feet from any other structure. 
The restrictions contained herein shall not extend to steps, fences, terraces or trellises, but do apply to the building proper and to any and all garages, porches and galleries attached thereto. If more than one lot is used as one building site, the restrictions set out herein shall not apply to the common side property line of such lots. 
(2)  Garages, Laundries and Other Accessory Buildings. In addition to the structures permitted in subparagraphs (1), (2) and (3), of subparagraph (a) of Section 4-a, there may be erected or constructed multiple garages, laundries or other buildings essential for residential purposes for the use of the occupants of said residences. No garage or outbuilding on said lots or building sites shall be used as a residence or living quarters, except for servants engaged on the premises. 
(3)  Places of Public Assembly. Any such use as churches, schools and community buildings or any place of public assembly seating 100 persons or more, located in a "B-1" Residence District, shall observe the regular set-back requirements of that district and there shall be a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet and there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet." 
V.  Paragraph 1, Section 11, entitled "Description of Districts" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"1.  A map of the City of Lake Jackson, showing the various districts created by this Ordinance, is attached to this Ordinance, marked "Zoning Map, City of Lake Jackson, Texas". A map of said City of Lake Jackson marked "Exhibit A" is attached to this amendment which reflects the inclusion of Areas "L", "E Extension" and "M" in the City Limits of said City of Lake Jackson." 
VI.  Paragraph (a) under 2, Section 11, entitled "Description of Districts" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"(a)  "A" Residence Districts. 
"A" Residence Districts shall include the entire City of Lake Jackson and all of the land within the corporate limits, except those parts of the City of Lake Jackson included within "B" Residence Districts, "B-1" Residence Districts, "C" Local Business Districts, and "D" Commercial Districts, said "A" Residence District being outlined in blue on the attached map." 
VII.  A new paragraph, designated as (b-1), to follow under Paragraph 2 of Section 11 in said Ordinance No. 75, is hereby adopted, which shall read as follows: 
"(b-1) "B-1" Residence Districts. No part of the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson shall be "B-1" Residence District unless and until so provided by proper amendment hereof." 
(Ord. No. 124, §§ I—VII, 3-10-1952) 
Note— See editor's note at Div. 1.  
Sec. 12-19. - Precode annexation two. 
Said land being Tracts 1 and 2 out of the subdivision of Tract 3 of the Wharton Plantation, out of the J.E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pipe on the southwest corner of said Tract 1, site and the city limit line of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas; thence north 0°04'58" west a distance of 2,984.03 feet to an old fence; thence south 53°47'18" east along said old fence 1,751.76 feet for a corner; thence south 0°04'58" east a distance of 1,947.10 feet to the southeast corner of said Tract 2; thence north 89°55'02" west along the south line of said Tracts 1 and 2 a distance of 1,411.9 feet to the place of beginning, containing 80 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 8-25-1952) 
Note— See editor's note at Div. 1.  
Sec. 12-20. - Precode annexation three. 
Forty acres of land, being all of Lot 10 in Tract 3 of the subdivision of the Wharton Plantation in the J.E. Groce Five-League Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, according to the recorded map or plat of said subdivision appearing in Volume 25 at page 168, Deed Records, Brazoria County, Texas; 
The west 12.12 acres of Lot 8 and all of Lot 9, containing 26.12 acres, out of said Tract 3 of the subdivision of the Wharton Plantation in the J.E. Groce Five-League Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, according to the recorded map or plat of said subdivision appearing in Volume 25, at page 168, Deed Records, Brazoria County, Texas, said land being more particularly described as follows by metes and bounds: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, and where the south line of Oyster Creek Drive intersects the east line of said City of Lake Jackson; thence south 1589.49 feet to a point for the southwest corner of the tract herein described; thence east 2652.79 feet to a point for corner, being the southeast corner of the tract herein described; thence north 627.91 feet to a point for corner; thence west 840.79 feet to a point for corner in the easterly side of the tract herein described; thence north 961.58 feet to the south line of Oyster Creek Drive for the northeast corner of the tract herein described; thence west along the south line of Oyster Creek Drive 1812 feet to the place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 1, 1-31-1953) 
Note— See editor's note at Div. 1.  
DIVISION 2. - ANNEXATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-21. - Annexation number one. 
There is hereby received and annexed as part of the city the following territory: 
Being out of the subdivision of tract No. 3 of the Wharton Plantation, J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Area B of the city, said beginning point also being on the south line of Oyster Creek Drive of the city; thence east along the south line of Oyster Creek Drive a distance of 1762 feet for a corner; thence north 0 degrees 00 minutes 35 seconds east across Oyster Creek Drive and continuing at a total distance of 3857.59 feet in all for a corner; thence north 89 degrees 54 minutes 00 seconds west 1707.07 feet past the high bank of Oyster Creek at a distance of 1796.07 feet in all to the water's edge of Oyster Creek; thence in a southerly direction along the water's edge of said Oyster Creek with the meanders of said Oyster Creek to an intersection with the west line of said subdivision of tract No. 3 of the Wharton Plantation; thence south at 1109.42 feet more or less past an iron pipe filled with concrete at a distance of 1309.42 feet more or less in all to the place of beginning, containing 158.68 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 5, 11-25-53; Code 1958, § 1-7)  
Sec. 12-22. - Annexation number two. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
Being out of the subdivision of tract No. 3 of the Wharton Plantation, J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas described as follows: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Area B of the city, said beginning point also being on the south line of Oyster Creek Drive of the city; thence east along the south line of Oyster Creek Drive a distance of 1762 feet for a corner; thence north 0 degrees 00 minutes 35 seconds east across Oyster Creek Drive and continuing at a total distance of 3857.59 feet in all for a corner; thence north 89 degrees 54 minutes 00 seconds west 1707.07 feet past the high bank of Oyster Creek at a distance of 1796.07 feet in all to the water's edge of Oyster Creek; thence in a southerly direction along the water's edge of said Oyster Creek with the meanders of said Oyster Creek to an intersection with the west line of said subdivision of tract No. 3 of the Wharton Plantation; thence south at 1109.42 feet more or less past an iron pipe filled with concrete at a distance of 1309.42 feet more or less in all to the place of beginning, containing 158.68 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 157, § 5, 3-2-54; Code 1958, § 1-8)  
Sec. 12-23. - Annexation number three. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
A parcel of land situated south of the common league line between the S. F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, and the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, all in Brazoria County, Texas, and being on the north side of State Highway F. M. Road No. 1605 between the Lake Jackson Loop Road and Plantation Drive and on the south side of F. M. Road No. 1605 between the Flag Lake Road and the Bryan 373 acre tract owned by The Dow Chemical Company, described by metes and bounds as follows: 
Beginning at a 2 inch iron pipe on the southwest corner of Brazos Oaks Subdivision, section No. 1, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, said iron pipe also being on the common line between the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, and the S. F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19; thence in an easterly direction along the common league line between the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, and the S. F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, to an intersection with the centerline of the Lake Jackson Loop Road right-of-way, for a corner; thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of said Lake Jackson Loop Road right-of-way, a distance of 850 feet, more or less, for a corner; thence south 53 degrees 06 minutes 25 seconds west to the intersection with the centerline of the F. M. Road No. 1605 right-of-way for a corner; thence in a northwesterly direction along the said centerline of F. M. Road No. 1605 right-of-way, to the intersection with the centerline of the Flag Lake County Road right-of-way, for a corner; thence south along said centerline of the Flag Lake County Road right-of-way a distance of 350 feet for a corner; thence west to the intersection with the east property line of tract No. 244 in the said Brazos Coast Investment Company subdivision No. 15, Brazoria County, Texas, at a distance of 659.3 feet for a corner; thence north along the east property line of said tract No. 244 to the northeast corner of said tract No. 244, said corner also being the southeast corner of tract No. 243, Brazos Coast Investment Company subdivision No. 15, Brazoria County, Texas, for a corner; thence west along the common property line between said tracts No. 243 and No. 244 past a 30-foot right-of-way and continuing along the north property line of tract No. 307, Brazos Coast Investment Company subdivision No. 15, Brazoria County, Texas, to the intersection with the eastern property line of a 373 acre tract of land owned by The Dow Chemical Company, for a corner; thence in a northeasterly direction along said eastern property line of said 373 acre tract of land to an intersection with the south right-of-way line of the F. M. Road No. 1605, for a corner; thence in a northwesterly direction along the said south right-of-way line of said F. M. Road No. 1605 to an intersection with the common league line between the said J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, and S. F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, for a corner; thence east along said common league line between said J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, and S. F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, to the place of beginning, containing 69.2 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 1, 12-7-54; Code 1958, § 1-9)  
Sec. 12-24. - Annexation number four. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot No. 1 of Block No. 1, Lake Forest subdivision, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas; thence in an easterly direction parallel to the Oyster Creek Drive Road and 100 feet from the north right-of-way line of the Oyster Creek Drive Road to the east line of the 40 acre tract No. 12 out of the Masterson subdivision of tract No. 3, Wharton Estate, J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas; thence south along the east line of said 40 acre tract No. 12 to the north right-of-way line of the said Oyster Creek Drive Road; thence in a westerly direction along the said north right-of-way of said Oyster Creek Drive Road to an intersection with a northerly extension of the west right-of-way line of the Lake Jackson Loop County Road; thence in a southerly direction across said Oyster Creek Drive Road to the intersection between the south right-of-way line of said Oyster Creek Road and the west right-of-way line of the Lake Jackson Loop Road and continuing along the west right-of-way line of said Lake Jackson Loop Road with the curves of said right-of-way line to the south line of the 14 acre tract No. 8 out of the said Masterson subdivision of tract No. 3 of the Wharton Estate, J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas; thence west along the south line of said tract No. 8 to an intersection with the east line of tract No. 9 of said Masterson subdivision No. 3; thence north along the common line between said tract No. 8 and No. 9 to the south line of the 40 acre tract No. 11 of the said Masterson subdivision No. 3; thence west along the common line between said tracts No. 9 and No. 11 to the east line of tract No. 10 of said Masterson subdivision of tract No. 3; thence north along the east line of said tract No. 10 across Oyster Creek Drive Road to the north right-of-way line of said Oyster Creek Drive to the southeast corner of the Lake Forest subdivision; thence north along the east line of the Lake Forest subdivision to the place of beginning, containing 56.51 acres of land more or less. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 1, 12-21-54; Code 1958, § 1-10)  
Sec. 12-25. - Annexation number five. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
Tract One. Said tract being all of Lot No. 3 of the Masterson subdivision of a 119.5 acre tract No. 3 in the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows, to wit: 
Beginning at the southwest corner of said Lot No. 3, same lying on the common boundary line of the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66 and S. F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19; thence north 89 degrees 57 minutes 17 seconds east 1730.07 feet along said common boundary line to a point for corner; thence north 52 degrees 02 minutes 11 seconds west 493.50 feet to a point for corner; thence north 51 degrees 50 minutes 27 seconds west 843.60 feet to a point for corner; thence north 36 degrees 05 minutes 50 seconds east 511.70 feet to a point for corner, same being the most southerly corner of the J. B. Willenberg 46.9 acre tract; thence north 53 degrees 56 minutes 29 seconds west 1214.70 feet along the common boundary line between the tract herein described and the said Willenberg tract to a point for corner, said point also being the northeast corner of Brazos Oaks subdivision of the city; thence south 0 degrees 04 minutes 58 seconds east 1953.40 feet along the common boundary line between the tract herein described and said Brazos Oaks subdivision to the place of beginning; containing approximately 38.70 acres of land, more or less. 
Tract Two. Said tract being a part of Lots Nos. 29, 30, 31, and 32 of the Stanford subdivision of a 15.35 acre tract out of the Wharton Plantation subdivision, J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows, to wit: 
Beginning at the intersection of the northwest boundary line of said Lot No. 29 with the northeast boundary line of Lot No. 3 of the Masterson subdivision of a 119.5 acre tract No. 3 in the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas; thence south 52 degrees 02 minutes 11 seconds east 302.04 feet to a point for corner on the south boundary line of said J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66; thence north 87 degrees 53 minutes 14 seconds east 76.86 feet to a point for corner; thence north 50 degrees 19 minutes 53 seconds west 62.10 feet to a point for corner; thence north 51 degrees 59 minutes 59 seconds west 300.30 feet to a point for corner on the said northwest boundary line of Lot No. 29; thence with said northwest boundary line of Lot No. 29 south 36 degrees 19 minutes 59 seconds east 51.49 feet to the place of beginning; containing 0.39 acre of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 5, 3-29-55; Code 1958, § 1-11)  
Sec. 12-26. - Annexation number six. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
Beginning at a concrete monument on the most northeasterly corner of Oak Woods addition to the city, as shown on the plat of said Oak Woods addition recorded in Volume 6, page 74, of the Plat Records of the County Clerk of Brazoria County, Texas; thence south 65 degrees 56 minutes 00 seconds east 635.22 feet to the true point of beginning of the tract herein described, said point being on the south right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive, said right-of-way line being on the north line of Area "B" of the city; thence south 65 degrees 56 minutes 00 seconds east 537.13 feet along the said north line of said Area "B" to the P. C. of a curve having a central angle of 24 degrees 05 minutes 40 seconds and a radius of 3,735.00 feet; thence around said curve to the left along the north line of said Area "B" a distance of 1,570.65 feet to a point for a corner; thence south 89 degrees 56 minutes 00 seconds west 189.09 feet along the north line of said Area "B" to a point for a corner; thence north 00 degrees 04 minutes 00 seconds west along a common line between Lake Forest subdivision and Area "K" of the city past a concrete monument at 200.00 feet which is the southwest corner of said Lake Forest subdivision, and continuing on said line a total distance of 1,136.54 feet in all to the water's edge of Oyster Creek for a corner; thence up Oyster Creek with its meanders along the water's edge as follows: 
South 18 degrees 45 minutes 00 seconds west 137.37 feet; thence south 29 degrees 48 minutes 00 seconds west 199.88 feet; thence south 42 degrees 46 minutes 52 seconds west 148.62 feet; thence south 48 degrees 18 minutes 00 seconds west 193.74 feet; thence south 59 degrees 10 minutes 00 seconds west 191.82 feet; thence south 67 degrees 46 minutes 56 seconds west 85.08 feet; thence south 72 degrees 38 minutes 03 seconds west 190.21 feet; thence south 89 degrees 07 minutes 25 seconds east 244.55 feet; thence south 80 degrees 25 minutes 32 seconds east 136.64 feet; thence south 70 degrees 45 minutes 37 seconds east 116.20 feet; thence south 58 degrees 34 minutes 56 seconds east 410.57 feet; thence south 39 degrees 13 minutes 15 seconds east 421.73 feet; thence leaving the water's edge of Oyster Creek south 31 degrees 04 minutes 00 seconds west, along the common line between Area "E" and Area "K" of the city a total distance of 548.50 feet to the true point of beginning containing 23.025 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 5, 4-5-55; Code 1958, § 1-12)  
Sec. 12-27. - Annexation number seven. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
40 acre tracts Nos. 4, 5, 6 and 7 out of the Masterson subdivision of tract No. 3, Wharton Estate, J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, a part of the 10.12 acre tract No. 12 of the Blunck subdivision of the 22.05 acre tract out of the said J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66 and the 46.9 acre J. B. Willenberg tract of land all out of the said J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an intersection between the south line acre tract No. 8, out of the Masterson subdivision of tract No. 3, Wharton Estate, J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, and the west right-of-way line of the Lake Jackson Loop Road; thence west along the south line of said 40 acre tract No. 4 to the southwest corner of said 40 acre tract No. 4; thence south with a southerly extension of the west line of said 40 acre tract No. 4 to an intersection with the northeast line of the 46.9 acre J. B. Willenberg tract of land; thence in a southeasterly direction along the northeast boundary of said 46.9 acre J. B. Willenberg tract of land to the most northerly corner of Lot No. 1 out of the Willenberg subdivision of a 14.84 acre tract out of the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas; thence in a southwesterly direction along the northwest line of said Willenberg subdivision to the most westerly corner of Lot No. 15 of said Willenberg subdivision at the most southerly corner of the said 46.9 acre J. B. Willenberg tract; thence in a northwesterly direction along the southwest line of the said 46.9 acre J. B. Willenberg tract, said southwest line also being the northeast line of tracts Nos. 1, 2, and 3 of the said Masterson subdivision of tract No. 3, Wharton Estate and continuing to the most northerly corner of said tract No. 1 of said Masterson subdivision, said point also being the most northerly corner of Brazos Oaks subdivision of the city; thence north 0 degrees 04 minutes 58 seconds west along the old Lake Jackson Plantation east line to the southwest corner of Parkwood Terrace subdivision of the city, said point also being the southwest corner of the 26.12 acre tract No. 9 out of said Masterson subdivision of tract No. 3; thence east along the south line of said tract No. 9 of said Masterson subdivision past the common corner between said tract No. 9 of said Masterson subdivision and tract No. 8 of said Masterson subdivision and continuing along the south tract No. 8 of said Masterson subdivision to the place of beginning; containing 210.1 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 185, § 1, 10-5-55; Code 1958, § 1-13)  
Sec. 12-28. - Annexation number eight. 
There is hereby received and annexed as part of the city the following territory: 
Parts of tracts Nos. 12, 15, 16, and 19 of the Masterson subdivision of tract No. 3, Wharton Estate, J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described by metes and bounds as follows, to wit: 
Parcel A. Said tract of land being parts of tracts Nos. 12, 15 and 16, of the Wharton Estate subdivision in the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas and being described by metes and bounds as follows, to wit: 
Beginning at a point on the easterly boundary of said tract No. 12, said point lying 100 feet north of the intersection of the easterly boundary of tract No. 12 with the northerly boundary of Oyster Creek Drive; thence north with the easterly [boundary] of said tracts, to the water's edge of Oyster Creek; thence with the meander of Oyster Creek in a northwesterly direction to a point lying 30 feet at right angles easterly from the original westerly boundary of said tract No. 16, thence south, parallel to and 30 feet at right angles easterly from the original westerly boundary of said tracts Nos. 16, 15 and 12, to a point lying 100 feet north of the northerly boundary of Oyster Creek Drive; thence in an easterly direction, parallel to and 100 feet north of the northerly boundary of Oyster Creek Drive, to the place of beginning; excluding the part of County Road No. 537 crossing said tract No. 16; containing approximately 114.2 acres of land, more or less. 
Parcel B. Said tract of land being part of tract No. 19 of the Wharton Estate subdivision in the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas and being described by metes and bounds as follows, to wit: 
Beginning at a point on the southerly boundary of said tract No. 19, said point lying 30 feet west of the original southeast corner of tract No. 19; thence north to the water's edge of Oyster Creek; thence with the meanders of Oyster Creek in a westerly direction to the southwest corner of said tract No. 19; thence east with the southerly boundary of said tract No. 19 to the place of beginning; containing approximately 36.1 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 10-5-55; Code 1958, § 1-14)  
Sec. 12-29. - Annexation number nine. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
An area containing approximately 105.9 acres of land, southeast of and being adjacent and contiguous to the existing city limits, out of the Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15, F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of tract No. 245 Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15, F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas; thence with an easterly extension of the north boundary line of said tract No. 245, east to an intersection with the westerly boundary line of Flag Lake Road; thence with said westerly boundary line of Flag Lake Road, south to the northeast corner of tract No. 237, Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15; thence west with the northerly boundary line of tracts Nos. 237, 250, 301 and 31 of the Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15, and continuing west across a 30 foot road to an intersection with the east boundary line of tract No. 359 Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15; thence south with the east boundary line of tract No. 315 to the southeast corner of said tract No. 359; thence west with the south boundary line of said tract No. 359 to the southwest corner of said tract No. 359; thence in a northeasterly direction with the westerly boundary line of tract No. 359, said line being also the westerly boundary line of the Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15, to the northwest corner of tract No. 359; thence east along the north boundary line of tract No. 359 and continuing east across a 30 foot road to an intersection with the west boundary line of tract No. 315, Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15; thence east along the north boundary line of tract No. 359 and continuing east across a 30 foot road to an intersection with the west boundary line of tract No. 315, Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15; thence north with the west boundary line of said tract No. 315 and tract No. 314, said tract No. 314 being also Shady Oaks Terrace No. 2, to the north corner of said Shady Oaks Terrace No. 2; thence east along the north boundary line of said Shady Oaks Terrace No. 2 to the northwest corner of tract No. 304, Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15; thence north with the west boundary line of tracts Nos. 304, 306 and 307 to the northwest corner of said tract No. 307, Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15; thence east along the north boundary line of tract No. 307 and No. 244 to the northeast corner of said tract No. 244, Brazos Coast Investment Company's subdivision No. 15; thence south along the east boundary line of said tract No. 244 to the northeast corner of tract No. 245, same being the place of beginning; containing 105.9 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 187, § 1, 10-5-55; Code 1958, § 1-15)  
Sec. 12-30. - Annexation number ten. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
An area containing 200 acres of land, more or less, being a part of the McBeth, Barnes, Weyren Tract, out of the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at the most southwesterly corner of Area "L" of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, said beginning point also being of the city limit line, said beginning point also being on the east line of said 200 acre tract, said beginning point also being north 65 degrees 56 minutes west 148.08 feet from the most southerly corner of said Area "L" of the city; thence north 1 degree 39 minutes west along the city limit line and the common line between said Area "L" and the said 200 acre tract, at a distance of 1565.33 feet past a common corner between said Area "L" and Area "M" of the city, and continuing on the common line between said 200 acre tract and said Area "M" north 1 degree 39 minutes west a distance of 5207.98 feet in all to the water's edge of Oyster Creek; thence up said Oyster Creek with its meanders and along the water's edge to the west line of said 200 acre tract; thence south 0 degrees 47 seconds east 2474.00 feet to a point on the common line between said J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and the S. F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas; thence north 89 degrees 13 minutes east 47.4 feet along said common League Line to a common corner of said J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66 and said S. F. Austin Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19; thence south 1 degree 15 minutes east continuing along common league line a distance of 886.33 feet to an intersection with the existing city limits line; thence south 65 degrees 56 minutes east 2010.69 feet along the existing city limits line to the place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 205, § 1, 7-2-57; Code 1958, § 1-16)  
Sec. 12-31. - Annexation number eleven. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
An area containing 71.7 acres of land, more or less, being a part of a 100 acre tract No. 57 and a 3.74 acre tract No. 43, out of the J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the easterly boundary of tract No. 12 of the Wharton Estate subdivision out of said J. E. Groce Five Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, said point lying 100 feet north of the intersection of the easterly boundary of said tract No. 12 with the northerly boundary of Oyster Creek Drive in the city; thence south 100 feet to the said intersection of the easterly boundary of said tract No. 12 with the northerly boundary of said Oyster Creek Drive, said point also being on the northerly boundary of County Road No. 286; thence in an easterly direction along the said northerly boundary of said County Road No. 286 with the various meanders of said County Road No. 286 to the westerly boundary of County Road No. 288; thence in a northwesterly direction along the westerly right-of-way or boundary of said County Road No. 288 to the water's edge of Oyster Creek; thence upstream in a northwesterly direction along the water's edge of said Oyster Creek with the meanders of said Oyster Creek to a point on the present city limits at a point where the northerly extension of the east line of tract No. 15 of said Wharton Estate subdivision intersects with the water's edge of said Oyster Creek; thence south along the said city limits line, the same also being along the east line of said tracts Nos. 12 and 15 out of said Wharton Estate subdivision to the place of beginning, containing 71.7 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 209, 1957; Code 1958, § 1-17)  
Sec. 12-32. - Annexation number twelve. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
Said land being a part of a 373 acre tract No. 25, part of the two north 10 acre tracts of the 40 acre tract No. 23, and a part of the 1 acre tract out of the northeast corner of the 40 acre tract No. 23 all out of the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues Grant, Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at an intersection between the south right-of-way line of Plantation Drive in the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the west boundary line of Shady Oaks Subdivision of said City of Lake Jackson, Texas; thence, in a southwesterly direction along the said west boundary of said Shady Oaks Subdivision a distance of 102.88 feet; thence, north 79°23'55? west along a line 100 feet from and parallel to the said south right-of-way line of said Plantation Drive a distance of 1583.21 feet to the P. T. of a curve having a central angle of 54°41'00? and a radius of 1434.42 feet; thence, around said curve to the right to an intersection with the north line of a 10 acre tract out of the said 40 acre tract, said point also being on the common league line between said S. F. Austin 5 Leagues Grant, Abstract 19, and the Jared E. Groce League, Abstract 66, Brazoria County, Texas; thence in an easterly direction along said common league line on the north line of said 10 acre tract to an intersection with the south right-of-way line of said Plantation Drive; thence, in an easterly direction along said south right-of-way line of said Plantation Drive with a curve to the left having a central angle of 54°41'00? and a radius of 1334.42 feet to the P. T. of said curve; thence, south 79°23'55? east 1607.40 feet to the place of beginning and containing 4.84 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 1, 3-18-58; Code 1958, § 1-18)  
Sec. 12-33. - Annexation number thirteen. 
There is hereby received and annexed as a part of the city the following territory: 
Parcel I. Said land being a part of the Jared E. Groce League, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at an intersection of the north right-of-way line of County Road No. 537 (Willow Drive) and the west right-of-way line of County Road No. 288; thence in a northwesterly and northerly direction along the said west right-of-way line of said County Road No. 288 to an intersection with the south right-of-way Proposed Brazosport Loop Road as follows: N 35°37'47? W 857.07 ft. to the P. C. of a curve to the right having a central angle of 33°28'47? and a radius of 2974.79 ft.; around said curve a distance of 1738.26 ft. to the P. T. of said curve continuing N 2°09'00? W 19922.60 ft.; thence S 86°38'30? W. 5853.93 ft. along the south right-of-way line of said Proposed Brazosport Loop Road to the P. T. of a curve having a central angle of 35°47' and a radius of 1809.85 ft.; thence around said curve in a southwesterly direction a distance of 1130.33 ft. to the P. C. of said curve; thence S.50°51'30? W. 1109.08 ft. to an intersection with the east line of the City of Lake Jackson 123.19 Acre Tract; thence S.0°39' W. along said east line of the said City of Lake Jackson 123.19 acre tract, and continuing on a south extension of this line across Oyster Creek to the water's edge of Oyster Creek on the north boundary of Area Q of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas; thence down Oyster Creek along the said water's edge and with the meanders of said Oyster Creek to an intersection with the north right-of-way line of said County Road No. 537 (Willow Drive); thence in a northeasterly direction along said north right-of-way line of said County Road No. 537 to the place of beginning, containing 920.2 acres of land, more or less. 
Parcel II. Said land being a part of the Jared E. Groce League, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at an intersection of the south right-of-way line of County Road No. 537 (Willow Drive) and the west right-of-way line of County Road No. 288; thence in a southeasterly direction along said west right-of-way line of said County Road No. 288 to the water's edge of Oyster Creek on the south side of said Oyster Creek; thence up Oyster Creek along the said water's edge and with the meanders of said Oyster Creek to an intersection with the south right-of-way line of said County Road No. 537 (Willow Drive); thence in a northeasterly direction along the said south right-of-way line of said County Road No. 537 (Willow Drive) to the place of beginning, containing 121.6 acres of land, more or less. 
Parcel III. Said land being a part of the Jared E. Groce League, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at the southeast corner of Knollwood Addition, City of Lake Jackson, Texas, on the west right-of-way line of the Lake Jackson Loop Road, County Road No. 285; thence west following the present City Limit line of said City of Lake Jackson, Texas, along, the south line of said Knollwood Addition to the southwest corner of said Knollwood Addition, said point also being the southwest corner of said 40 acre Tract No. 4 out of the Masterson Subdivision of Tract No. 3, Wharton Estate, Jared E. Groce League, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas; thence south with a southerly extension of the west line of said 40 acre Tract No. 4 to an intersection with the northeast line of the 46.9 acre J. B. Willenberg Tract of Land; thence in a southerly extension of the west line of said 40 acre Tract No. 4 to an intersection with the northeast line of the 46.9 acre J. B. Willenberg Tract of Land; thence in a southeasterly direction along the northeast boundary of said 46.9 acre J. B. Willenberg Tract of land to the most northerly corner of Lot No. 1 out of the Willenberg Subdivision of a 14.84 acre Tract out of the Jared E. Groce League, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas; thence in a southwesterly direction along the northwesterly direction line of said Willenberg Subdivision to the most westerly corner of Lot No. 17 of the Stanford Subdivision of a 15.35 acre tract; thence in a southeasterly direction along the southwest line of said Stanford Subdivision to the common league line between said Jared E. Groce League, Abstract No. 66, and the S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas; thence east along said common league line to the west right-of-way line of the said Lake Jackson Loop Road, County Road No. 285; thence in a northerly direction along the said west right-of-way line of said Lake Jackson Loop Road to the place of beginning containing 98.9 acres of land, more or less. 
Parcel IV. 
Beginning at the northwest corner of Tract No. 359, Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15, S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas; thence in a southwesterly direction along the west line of said Tract No. 359 at a distance of 33.88 ft. to the north right-of-way line of the proposed State Highway No. 332; thence around a curve to the right along said north right-of-way line of said State Highway No. 332 said curve having a central angle of 41.43 and a radius of 2714.93 ft. and for a distance of 706.87 ft. in all to the P. C. of said curve at centerline station 468 50.02; thence N 25°45' W 1598.29 ft.; thence N 64°15' E 305.19 ft. to the south line of 100 ft. Parkway along the south side of Plantation Drive of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas; thence in a southeasterly direction along the said south line of said 100 ft. Parkway to an intersection with the common boundary line between the said Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15 and the 373 acre Bryan Tract; thence in a southwesterly direction along said common boundary line between said Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15 and the 373 acre Bryan Tract to an intersection with the westerly extension of the north line of Tract No. 307 of said Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15; thence in an easterly direction along said westerly extension of said north line of said Tract No. 307 to the northwest corner of said Tract No. 307; thence south along the west line of Tract No. 307, 306, and 305 of said Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15 to the southwest corner of said Tract No. 305; thence west along the north line of Tract No. 314 of said Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15 to the northwest corner of said Tract No. 314; thence south along the west line of Tract No. 314 and No. 315 to an intersection with an easterly extension of the north line of said Tract No. 359; thence west along the easterly extension of along [sic] the said north line of said Tract No. 359 to the place of beginning, containing 64.6 acres of land, more or less. 
[Parcel V.] Said land being a part of the S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at an intersection between the west line of Tract No. 359, Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15 and the south right-of-way line of the proposed State Highway No. 332, said beginning point being S 22°31' W 365.87 feet, from the northwest corner of said Tract No. 359; thence along the said south right-of-way line of said State Highway No. 332 along a curve to the right having a central angle of 41°43' and a radius of 3014.93 ft. at a distance of 934.85 ft. to the P. C. of said curve; thence N. 25°45' W 2102.15 ft. to the common League line between said S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, and the Jared E. Groce League, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas; thence west along said common League line a distance of 3205.28 ft.; thence in a southeasterly direction to the southwest corner of Tract No. 359; thence N 22°31' E along the west line of Tract No. 359 to the place of beginning, containing 131.2 acres of land, more or less. 
Parcel VI. Said land being a part of the Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15, S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at an intersection between the west right-of-way line of Flag Lake Road (County Road No. 444) and the north right-of-way line of the Proposed State Highway No. 332, said beginning point being N. 01°00' W., 176.76 ft. from the south line of Tract No. 234 of said Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15; thence along the said north right-of-way line of said State Highway No. 332, N. 67°28' W., 2178.74 ft. to the P. T. of a curve having a central angle of 41°43' and a radius of 2649.60 ft.; thence around said curve to the right a distance of 595.46 ft. to the north line of Tract No. 317 of said Brazos Coast Investment Co. Subdivision No. 15; thence in an easterly direction along the north line of said Tract No. 317 and continuing along the north line of Tracts No. 301, 250, and 237 to the said west right-of-way line of said Flag Lake Road (County Road No. 444); thence S. 01°00' E. along said west right-of-way line of said Flag Lake Road (County Road No. 444) to the place of beginning, containing 32.3 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-60; Code 1958, § 1-19)  
Sec. 12-34. - Annexation number fourteen; exceptions. 
(a)  Property annexed. The boundary limits of the city are hereby extended to embrace and include all of the following described territory situated in Brazoria County, Texas and lying adjacent to the city, save and except only such of the land and territory lying within such boundaries and limits as are described in the exceptions set forth in subsection (b) of this section and expressly excluded from the area annexed, and said additional territory, except for the areas described in subsection (b) hereof, is hereby annexed to the city: 
Beginning at a point, said point being the westernmost intersection of the corporate limits of the city and the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332, said point also being situated in the S. F. Austin 5 League land grant, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, approximately S. 35° W. 1500 feet more or less from an interior northeast corner of the said land grant; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332, to a point, said point being the intersection of the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 and the east bank of Buffalo Camp Bayou; 
Thence, west from the east bank of Buffalo Camp Bayou to a point, said point being the intersection of a westerly extension of the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 and the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou; 
Thence along the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou with its meanders in a southerly direction to its mouth at the Brazos River, and continuing along an extension of the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou south to a point, said point being the intersection of this extension and the centerline of the Brazos River; 
Thence along the centerline of the Brazos River with its meanders in a southeasterly direction past a point, said point being the most westerly north corner of the corporate limits of the City of Freeport, Texas, and continuing along the centerline of the Brazos River with its meanders and along the corporate limits line of the City of Freeport, Texas, to a point for a corner, said point being the intersection of the southeast line of the Dow Waste Water Canal extended with the centerline of the Brazos River, said southeast line of the Dow Waste Water Canal being 125 feet, more or less, from the centerline of the canal, said point also being a corner in the corporate limits of the City of Freeport, Texas; 
Thence continuing along the corporate limits of the City of Freeport, Texas, and the southeasterly line of the Dow Waste Water Canal, N. 63°55' E. to an intersection with the southwest or west right-of-way line of State Highway No. 288 for a corner; 
Thence in a northwesterly direction along the said southwest or west right-of-way line of said State Highway No. 288 to a point for a corner, south 10 ft. from the north line of Tract No. 547 of the Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision, No. 14, A. Calvit League, Abstract No. 49; said corner also being south 10 ft. from the south line of Tract No. 549 of said Brazos Coast Subdivision No. 14, said corner also being south 10 ft. from the south line of the corporate limits of the Village of Lake Barbara; 
Thence continuing west along a line 10 ft. from and parallel to the said north line of said Tract No. 547, said north line of Tract No. 547, also being the corporate limits of the Village of Lake Barbara, to an intersection with a line parallel to State Highway No. 288, 10 ft. southwesterly from and at right angles to the southwest right-of-way of State Highway No. 288; 
Thence continuing in a northwesterly direction along a line 10 ft. from and parallel to the corporate limits of the Village of Lake Barbara, said corporate limits being on the west right-of-way line of said State Highway No. 288, to a point for a corner, said point being 10 ft. from and at right angles to State Highway No. 288 and being southwesterly from the northeast corner of Tract No. 551 of the Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 14, A. Calvit League, Abstract No. 49, said northeast corner of said Tract No. 551 also being a corner in the corporate limits of the Village of Lake Barbara; 
Thence continuing in a northwesterly direction on a line 10 ft. from and parallel to the corporate limits of the Village of Lake Barbara, said corporate limits being along the north and northeast lines of Tracts No. 551, 553 and 555 all of said Subdivision No. 14, A. Calvit League, Abstract No. 49, to a point for a corner, said corner being on the intersection between the said northeast line of said Tract No. 555 and the proposed southerly right-of-way line of the new location of State Highway No. 332; 
Thence continuing along the proposed southerly right-of-way line of the new location for said State Highway No. 332, along the arc of a circular curve to the right having a P.C. tangent bearing of N. 89° 05' E. more or less, a radius of 3014.93 feet, more or less, and a central angle of 25° 24', more or less, passing through the east line of Tract No. 227 of said Subdivision at a point S. 1° 05' E. 35.16 feet from the northeast corner of said Tract No. 227, and continuing a distance of 1321.24 feet in all, more or less, to a point for a P.T. of said curve in Tract No. 230 of said Subdivision No. 14, A. Calvit League, Abstract No. 49, said point bearing S. 1° 05' E. 203.30 feet and S. 64° 27' E. 624.09' from the northwest corner of Tract No. 229 in said Subdivision No. 14; 
Thence continuing along the proposed southerly right-of-way line of the new location of said State Highway No. 332, N. 64° 27' W. 2871.70 feet, more or less, to a point for the P.C. of a curve, said point bearing S. 1° 07' E. 170.77 feet and N. 64° 27' W., 134.89 feet from the northeast corner of Tract No. 389 of said Subdivision No. 14; 
Thence continuing along the proposed southerly right-of-way line of the said new location of said State Highway No. 332, along the arc of a circular curve to the left having a radius of 2714.93 feet more or less, and a central angle of 26° 40' passing through the west line of Tract No. 388 of said Subdivision No. 14 at a point S. 1° 07' E., 236.28 feet from the northwest corner of said Tract No. 388 for a total distance of 1265 feet in all, more or less, to the P.T. of said curve, said P.T. point bearing S. 1° 07' E., 150.0 feet and N. 88° 53' E., 10.38 feet from the northwest corner of Tract No. 439 of said Subdivision No. 14; 
Thence continuing along the proposed southerly right-of-way line of the said new location of State Highway No. 332, S. 88° 53' W., 3396.30 feet, more or less, to the P.C. of a curve to the right, said P.C. bearing S. 1° 07' E., 150' and N. 88° 53' E., 5.02 feet from the northeast corner of Tract No. 165 of the Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 15, A. Calvit League, Abstract No. 49, Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence continuing along the proposed southerly right-of-way line of the new location of State Highway No. 332, along the arc of a circular curve to the right having a radius of 3014.93 feet, more or less, and a central angle of 23° 39' passing through the west line of Tract No. 165 of said Subdivision No. 15 at a point S. 1° 05' E., 77.68 feet from the northwest corner of said Tract No. 165, for a distance of 1247 feet in all, more or less, to the P.T. of said curve, said P.T. point bearing S. 1° 05' E., 191.65 feet and S. 67° 28' E., 93.34 feet from the northwest corner of Tract No. 178 of said Subdivision No. 15; 
Thence continuing along the said proposed southerly right-of-way line of the said new location of said State Highway No. 332 N. 67° 28' W., 2509.82 feet, more or less, to the P.C. of a curve to the right, said P.C. bearing S. 1° 04' E., 272.69 feet and N. 67° 28' W., 157.39' from the northeast corner of Tract No. 318 of said Subdivision No. 15; 
Thence continuing along the proposed southerly right-of-way line of the said new location of said State Highway No. 332, along the arc of a circular curve to the right having a radius of 3014.93 feet, more or less, and a central angle of 16° 33', more or less, passing through the east line of Tract No. 358 of said Subdivision No. 15 at a point S. 1° 04' E., 150.0' from the northeast corner of said Tract No. 358, for a distance of 873.07 feet in all, more or less, to a point in the south line of Tract No. 359 of said Subdivision, said point bearing S. 88° 56' W., 192.89 feet from the southeast corner of Tract No. 359 and said point being in the line of the present corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas; 
Thence continuing along the corporate limits of the city in a northwesterly direction to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Excepted from annexation. All of the area which is not now within the limits of the city, but which is included within the boundaries and limits hereinabove set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby annexed to and made a part of the city, save and except: 
(1)  Any part thereof which, on June 22, 1961, is within the limits of any incorporated city, town or village other than the City of Lake Jackson whether such other city, town or village is a home-rule city or operates pursuant to any general or special law of the State of Texas; and 
(2)  The following described tracts of land within the area described in subsection (a) hereof, to wit: 
Exception A: Beginning at a point in the most easterly north-south line of the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, said point also being 80 ft. north from the southeast corner of Tract No. 23, of the Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 15, said beginning point also being south 100 ft. from the south right-of-way line of the proposed State Highway No. 332, said beginning point also being 80 ft. north from the northeast corner of Tract No. 22 of said Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 15; 
Thence S. 88° 53' W., 100 ft. from and parallel to the said south right-of-way line of said proposed State Highway No. 332 a distance of 2695.92 ft. to a point for the P.C. of a curve to the right having a central angle of 23° 39' and a radius of 3114.93 ft.; 
Thence around said curve to the right with a radius of 3114.93 ft. for a distance of 1285.69 ft., more or less, to the P.T. of said curve to the right; 
Thence N. 67° 28' W. continuing along a line 100 ft. from and parallel to the said south right-of-way of said proposed State Highway No. 332 to a point for a corner on the intersection with the common line between Tracts Nos. 318 and 319 both of the Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 15, S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19; 
Thence west along the said common line between said Tracts Nos. 318 and 319 to the southeast corner of Tract No. 357 of said Brazos Coast Investment Company subdivision No. 15; 
Thence north along the east line of said Tract No. 357 to the southeast corner of Tract No. 358 of said Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 15; 
Thence along the south line of Tract No. 358 of said Subdivision No. 15, west to the southwest corner of said Tract No. 358; 
Thence along the northwest line of Tract No. 358 of said Subdivision No. 15, in a northeasterly direction to a point for corner, said point being the intersection of this line and a line parallel to and 100 feet southwesterly from the corporate limits of the city; 
Thence along a line parallel to and 100 feet southwesterly from the southwesterly corporate limits of the city, in a northwesterly direction to the intersection of this line and the southeast right-of-way line of an access road from the city to the city's sewage treatment plant; 
Thence along the southeasterly right-of-way line of said access road, in a southwesterly direction to the intersection of the northeast line of the city's five acre sewage treatment plant-site; 
Thence along the northeast line of said five acre tract, southeast to the east corner of said five acre tract; 
Thence along the southeast line of said five acre tract, southwest to the south corner of said five acre tract; 
Thence along the southwest line of said five acre tract, northwest to the intersection of the southeast right-of-way line of an easement of the city for a sewage outfall pipe; 
Thence along the southeast line of said easement, southwest to the intersection of the centerline of the Brazos River Flood Protection Levee; 
Thence along the centerline of the present Brazos River Flood Protection Levee with its meanders, in a southeasterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of the levee on the northwest side of the Dow Plant "A" Waste Water Canal; 
Thence along the centerline of the levee on the northwest side of the Dow Plant "A" Waste Water Canal, in a northeasterly direction to a point for corner, said point being the intersection of the levee centerline and a line parallel to and 100 ft. southwesterly from the southwest or west right-of-way line of State Highway No. 288; 
Thence in a northwesterly direction along a line parallel to and 100 ft. from the said southwest or west line of said State Highway No. 288 to an intersection with the south line of Tract No. 547 in Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 14; 
Thence along a straight line in a northwesterly direction to the northwest corner of Tract No. 227 of said Subdivision No. 14; 
Thence along a straight line in a northwesterly direction to the northwest corner of Tract No. 320 of said Subdivision No. 14; 
Thence along a straight line in a northwesterly direction to a point on the east line of said Tract No. 23 which stands north 80 ft. from the southeast corner of said Tract No. 23, said point being the place of beginning; 
and the areas described in the foregoing exceptions are expressly not annexed to the city but are excluded from the area hereby annexed. 
(Ord. No. 248, §§ 1, 2, 8-7-61; Code 1958, § 1-20)  
Sec. 12-35. - Annexation number fifteen. 
The boundaries and limits of the city are hereby extended so as to embrace and include the following described areas of land, and the following described areas of land are hereby annexed and made a part of the city, to wit: 
Parcel I. Said land being a part of the S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the intersection between the most Southerly right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 and the most Westerly right-of-way line of the Flag Lake Road, known as County Road No. 444; 
Thence North 67° 28' West along said Southerly right-of-way line of said State Highway No. 332 for a distance of 2244.06 feet more or less, to the P. T. of a 2° 00' curve having a central angle of 41° 43' and a radius of 3014.93; 
Thence around said curve to the right along the said Southerly right-of-way line of said State Highway No. 332 for a distance of 913.61 feet, more or less, to a point on the South line of Tract No. 359 of the Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 15, S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, said point also being on the existing City Limit line of the said City of Lake Jackson, Texas; 
Thence East along the existing City Limits line of the said City of Lake Jackson to the West line of Tract No. 317 of said subdivision No. 15; 
Thence continuing North and East along the said existing City Limits line along the West and North line of said Tract No. 317 to an intersection with the most Northerly right-of-way line of said State Highway No. 332; 
Thence continuing around a curve to the left along said existing City Limits line along the said Northerly right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 around a curve to the left having a central angle of 41° 43' and a radius of 2649.60 feet, more or less, for a distance of 595.46 feet, more or less, to the P.T. of said curve; 
Thence continuing along said existing City Limits line along the said Northerly right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 South 67° 28' East 2178.74 feet, more or less, to an intersection between the said Northerly right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 and the West right-of-way line of Flag Lake Road (County Road No. 444), said intersection point being North 01° 00' West 176.76 feet from the South line of Tract No. 234 of said Subdivision No. 15; 
Thence South 01° 00' East across said State Highway No. 332 for a distance of 327.22 feet to the Place of Beginning. Containing 17.0 Acres more or less. 
Parcel II. Said land being a part of the S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the West line of Tract No. 359 out of the Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 15, S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, said beginning point also being Southwesterly along the said West line of Tract No. 359 at a distance of 33.88 feet from the Northwest corner of said Tract No. 359; 
Thence Northwesterly around a curve to the right having a central angle of 41° 43' and a radius of 2714.93 feet for a distance of 706.87 feet to the P.T. of said curve; 
Thence North 25° 45' West 1598.29 feet; 
Thence North 64° 15' East 305.19 feet to the South line of a 100 foot Parkway along the South side of Plantation Drive of said City of Lake Jackson, Texas; 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the said South line of said 100 foot Parkway along the South side of Plantation Drive to the common league line between the said S. F. Austin 5 Leagues and the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence West along said common league line to the Northeast right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 as built; 
Thence in a Southeasterly direction along the said Northeasterly right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 to the Place of Beginning. Containing 4.90 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 1, 5-20-63; Code 1958, § 1-21)  
Sec. 12-36. - Annexation number sixteen. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Said land being the existing 100 foot right-of-way of County Road No. 537 (Willow Drive) which was conveyed from the following tracts of land: Tract No. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 of the Wharton Plantation Subdivision, the 5 acre Houston Lighting and Power Company tract, and the E. J. Mantooth 902 acre tract, all being out of the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection between the north line of the 100 ft. Parkway along Oyster Creek Drive in the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas and the West right-of-way line of County Road No. 537 also known as Willow Drive, said beginning point being located on a corner of the present City Limit line of said City of Lake Jackson, said beginning point also being located east 1762.00 feet from a concrete monument on the corner of the Lake Forest Subdivision; 
Thence N 0° 00' 35? E along the said Lake Jackson City Limit line which is also the west right-of-way line of said County Road No. 537 or Willow Drive for a distance of 2827.94 feet to the point of a curve to the right having a radius of 686.63 feet and a central angle of 54° 28'; 
Thence continuing along the present Lake Jackson City Limit line also being on the said west or northwest right-of-way line of County Road No. 537 or Willow Drive around said curve to the right for a distance of 652.72 feet to the point of tangency; 
Thence continuing along the present Lake Jackson City Limit line, also being on the said west or northwest right-of-way line of County Road No. 537 or Willow Drive, N. 54° 28' 35? E a distance of 1583.25 feet to an intersection with the west right-of-way line of County Road No. 288 (Old Clute to Angleton Road); 
Thence S 35° 31' 25? E for a distance of 100 feet across the right-of-way of County Road No. 537 (Willow Drive) to the intersection between the west right-of-way line of County Road No. 288 and the southeast right-of-way line of County Road No. 537, said point also being on the present City Limit line of the City of Lake Jackson; 
Thence S 54° 28' 35? W along the southeast right-of-way line of the County Road No. 537 or Willow Drive, said southeast right-of-way line being on the present City Limit line of the City of Lake Jackson, for a total distance of 1583.25 feet to the point of a curve to the left having a radius of 586.63 feet and a central angle of 54° 28'; 
Thence continuing along the said Lake Jackson City Limit line, said line also being the southeasterly right-of-way line of County Road No. 537, around said curve to the left for a distance of 557.66 feet to the point of tangency; 
Thence continuing along the present Lake Jackson City Limit line on the east right-of-way line of County Road No. 537 for a distance of 2827.94 feet to an intersection with the north line of the 100 feet Parkway along the north side of said Oyster Creek Drive; 
Thence continuing along the present Lake Jackson City Limit line west 100 feet across County Road No. 537 or Willow Drive to the place of beginning, containing 11.52 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 64-302, § 1, 4-20-64; Code 1958, § 1-22)  
Sec. 12-37. - Annexation number seventeen. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Said land being a parcel of land out of the E. W. Bertner Tract West of the Barnes and Weyren Tract out of the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the west line of the Weyren Tract No. 71, at an intersection with the southwest line of Lot No. 18, Block No. 2, Area "Q," City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, said beginning point also being located N 69° 15' 39? W 158.15 ft. from the south corner of said Lot No. 18 of said Area "Q"; 
Thence N 69° 15' 39? W along said southwest line of said Lot No. 18 of said Area "Q," for a distance of 116.36 ft. to a point on the water's edge of Oyster Creek; 
Thence upstream along the water's edge of Oyster Creek with the meanders of Oyster Creek as follows: 
S 18° 19' 57? W 86.77 ft., S 43° 38' 05? W 89.64 ft., S 32° 46' 58? W 65.17 ft., S 47° 59' 15? W 89.42 ft., S 43° 54' 15? W 60.27 ft., S 58° 41' 55? W 60.83 ft., S 53° 50' 13? W 128.90 ft., and S 64° 47' 23? W 89.11 ft. to a point for a corner; 
Thence S 56° 05' 00? E 765.00 ft. to a point on the west line of said Weyren Tract, said point also being on the west line of the existing City Limits of said City of Lake Jackson; 
Thence N 3° 52' 34? W 837.50 ft. to the place of beginning, containing 6.42 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 66-330, § 1, 6-6-66; Code 1958, § 1-23)  
Sec. 12-38. - Annexation number eighteen. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
A tract out of the J. E. Groce 5 Leagues Grant, Abstract 66, Brazoria County, Texas: 
Beginning at an intersection of the West right-of-way line of County Road 288 and the South right-of-way line of Proposed Brazosport Loop Road as located in Section 1-19, Parcel 1, of the Lake Jackson City Code, the same being the most northerly Northeast corner of the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson; 
Thence South 86° 38' 30? West 5853.93 feet to the P. T. of a curve having a central angle of 35° 47' and a radius of 1809.85 feet; 
Thence around said curve in a Southwesterly direction a distance of 1130.33 feet to the P.C. of said curve; 
Thence South 50° 51' 30? West 1109.08 feet to an intersection with the East line of the City of Lake Jackson 123.19 acre tract; 
Thence North 0° 39' East along said East line of the said City of Lake Jackson 123.19 acre tract a distance of 638.79 feet to a point for corner; 
Thence Northeasterly parallel to and 500 feet from the South right-of-way line of Proposed Brazosport Loop Road described in Section 1-19, Parcel 1, of the Lake Jackson City Code to a point for corner in the West right-of-way line of County Road 288; 
Thence South 2° 9' 00? East 502.32 feet to the place of beginning, and containing 90.4 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 68-364, § 1, 2-19-68; Code 1958, § 1-24)  
Sec. 12-39. - Annexation number nineteen. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Said land being out of the J. E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66 and the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the west line of the Weyren Tract No. 71, said west line also being on the City Limit line of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, said beginning point being located S 3° 52' 34? E 837.50 ft., and N 69° 15' 39? W 158.15 ft. from the south corner of Lot No. 18, Block No. 2, Area "Q," City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence in a southerly direction along the west line of said McBeth, Barnes, and Weyren 200 acre tract to an intersection with the common league line between the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19 and the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66; 
Thence continuing along said McBeth, Barnes and Weyren 200 acre tract boundary on the said common league line in an easterly direction to a common interior league corner for both the said S. F. Austin 5 Leagues and the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues; 
Thence in a southerly direction along the said west line of the McBeth, Barnes, and Weyren 200 acre tract, said west line also being on the common league line between said S. F. Austin 5 Leagues and the said Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues to an intersection with the northwesterly extension of the north line of the 100 foot Parkway along the north side of Oyster Creek Drive of said City of Lake Jackson; 
Thence in a northwesterly direction along the said northwesterly extension of the north line of the 100 foot parkway along the north side of Oyster Creek Drive to the easterly line of the proposed right-of-way of State Highway No. 332 Freeway to Houston; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the easterly right-of-way line of said proposed Freeway to Houston to the Point of Curvature of a curve to the right at State Highway Station No. 27+36.09 said Point of Curvature point also being located at the position of X = 3,132, 474.38, Y = 459,953.40 of the Texas Coordinate System South Central Zone, Lambert Grid; 
Thence in a northeasterly direction along said easterly right-of-way of said proposed Freeway to Houston on said curve to the right having a radius of 5519.58 for a distance of 894.01 ft. to the present City Limit line; 
Thence S 56° 05' 00? E along said present City Limit line for a distance of 323.75 ft. to the place of beginning, containing 11.40 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 68-375, § 1, 7-15-68; Code 1958, § 1-25)  
Sec. 12-40. - Annexation number twenty. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Annexation of Sleepy Hollow, Oyster Bend, and the Brazosport Junior College Site. Said land being out of the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at the north corner of Lot No. 10, Block No. 3, Pecan Grove Subdivision of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, said beginning point also being on the City Limit line of said City of Lake Jackson, Texas, said beginning point also being on the westerly right-of-way of County Road No. 288 (Old Clute-Angleton Road), said beginning point also being on the south right-of-way line of Marigold Street in said City of Lake Jackson; 
Thence in a southeasterly direction along said westerly right-of-way line of the said County Road No. 288 to an intersection with the centerline of said Oyster Creek; 
Thence downstream along the centerline of said Oyster Creek and with the meanders of said Oyster Creek to an intersection with the westerly extension of the south line of the L. W. Livesay 214 acre tract out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League, Abstract No. 66; 
Thence in an easterly direction along the said south line of said L. W. Livesay 214 acre tract and the easterly extension of said Livesay south line to an intersection with the centerline of said Oyster Creek; 
Thence upstream along the centerline of said Oyster Creek and with the meanders of said Oyster Creek to an easterly extension of the south line of a 10 acre tract of land owned by Roy E. Carr as is described in Vol. 646, page 7 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the easterly extension of the said south line and continuing along the said south line of said Carr Tract to an intersection with the said westerly right-of-way line of said County Road No. 288; 
Thence in a southeasterly direction along said common City Limit line and westerly right-of-way line of County Road No. 288 and across Marigold Street of said City of Lake Jackson to the place of beginning, containing 316.1 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 70-409, § 1, 3-2-70; Code 1958, § 1-26)  
Sec. 12-41. - Annexation number twenty-one. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Beginning at the position x = 3,132,876.69 and y = 458,414.81, Texas Coordinate System, South Central Zone, which is the northwest corner of Area S, an addition to the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, situated in a common line between the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19 and the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas: 
Thence, using survey terminology referring to the Texas Coordinate System, South Central Zone, except the distances which are the horizontal ground level lengths, with said common line and the west line of said Area S, Azimuth 355 deg. 41' 38.7? in all a distance of 55.445 feet to the position x = 132,880.85 and y = 458,359.53, which is the point of intersection with the north right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive, which right-of-way line is also the north boundary of Area J of said City of Lake Jackson, Texas, for the extreme southeast corner; 
Thence, with said right-of-way line, Azimuth 111 deg. 18' 00.8? in all a distance of 241.971 feet to the position x = 3,132,655.44 and y = 458,447.41 for a corner; 
Thence, continue with said right-of-way line, Azimuth 104 deg. 41' 46.15? in all a distance of 210.399 feet to the position x = 3,132,451.95 and y = 458,500.78 for a corner; 
Thence, continue with said right-of-way line, Azimuth 98 deg. 50' 06.2? in all a distance of 429.625 feet to the position x = 3,132,027.47 and y = 458,566.76, which is the point of intersection of said north right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive with the north right-of-way line of Texas State Highway No. 332, located opposite the junction of said drive and highway, marked with a concrete monument in which is embedded a Texas State Highway Department brass disk; 
Thence, with the north right-of-way line of said Highway No. 332, Azimuth 98 deg. 23' 48.2? in all a distance of 678.168 feet to the position x = 3,131,356.66 and y = 458,665.78, which is a slight angle point in said north right-of-way line for a corner; 
Thence, continue with said north right-of-way line, Azimuth 100 deg. 43' 10.25?, at 745.419 feet, pass the point of intersection with the extension of the centerline of the runway of Brazoria County Airport, and in all a distance of 1206.498 feet to the position x = 3,130,171.36 and y = 458,890.16 which is the point of a curve to the left and southwest which has its radius point fixed at the position x = 3,129,629.26 and y = 456,026.51 and a radius of 2914.873 feet; 
Thence, continue along said north right-of-way line of Texas State Highway No. 332, along said curve to the left and southwest, at 28.893 feet, arc length, pass the centerline of a 4? underground pipeline, and in all a distance of 104.098 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,130,068.77 and y = 458,907.69, which is the point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of County Road No. 856, which point of intersection is marked with a concrete monument, for a corner; 
Thence, with the easterly right-of-way line of County Road No. 856, in a northwesterly and northerly direction, along a curve to the right, which curve has its radius point fixed at the position x = 3,130,293.97 and y = 459,537.85 and a radius of 669.278 feet, at a distance of 444.483 feet, arc length, pass the point of intersection with the common line between the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19 and the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, and in all a distance of 642.012 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,129,648.72 and y = 459,360.45 which is the point of tangency of said curve and marked with a concrete monument; 
Thence, continue with said easterly right-of-way line of County Road No. 856, Azimuth 164 deg. 37' 38.0? in all a distance of 799.474 feet to the position x = 3,129,436.81 and y = 460,131.23, which is the point of intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of County Road No. 856, which has a right-of-way 80.00 feet in width, with the southerly right-of-way line of State Highway F. M. No. 2004, which has a right-of-way 300.00 feet in width, for the northwest corner; 
Thence, with the southerly right-of-way line of State Highway F. M. No. 2004, Azimuth 237 deg. 39' 52.5?, at 166.278 feet pass the centerline of a powerline, Houston Lighting and Power Company, at 174.750 feet pass the centerline of a 4? underground pipeline, pass the extension of the centerline of the runway of Brazoria County Airport, at a distance of 971.347 feet to the position x = 3,130,257.43 and y = 460,650.71, which is the point of intersection with the right descending waters' edge of Oyster Creek, pass said waters' edge and continue Azimuth 237 deg. 39' 52.5? in all to the center of Oyster Creek channel for a corner; 
Thence, with the centerline of Oyster Creek downstream, following all of the meanders of same, in all, an approximate distance of 2375 feet, to the point of intersection with the northerly extension of the east boundary of that certain tract of land containing 41.87368 acres, said northerly extension being a curve having a radius of 5519.580 feet and its radius point fixed at the position x = 3,137,920.10 and y = 460,849.09, for the extreme northeast corner; 
Thence, with said northerly extension of said east boundary, in a southerly direction, along said curve, to the left, which curve has a radius of 5519.580 feet and its radius point fixed at the position x = 3,137,920.10 and y = 460,849.09, in all to the position x = 3,132,431.94 and y = 461,430.64, which is the most northern corner of said 41.87368 acres, the point of intersection with the right descending waters' edge of Oyster Creek and a point situated in said curve; 
Thence, continue along said curve, which is the east boundary of said 41.87368 acres, in a southerly direction, at a distance of 588.486 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,132,401.22 and y = 460,843.32, which is a point-on-curve in said curve and the common west corner of a tract of 3.90601 acres out of 6.41813 acres and a tract of 2.51212 acres, pass said position and continue with and along said curve, at a distance of 1097.544 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,132,425.21 and y = 460,335.08, which is the common west corner of above mentioned 2.51212 acres and a tract of 9.08449 acres, which position is marked with an iron pipe, pass said position and continue with and along said curve in all a distance of 1482.500 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,132,474.382 and y = 459,953.403 and the end of said curve which is marked with a wooded hub stake, which identical stake was found existing by survey on the 13th day of June, 1966; 
Thence, continue with the east line of said 41.87368 acres and the west line of said 9.08449 acres, Azimuth 350 deg. 39' 35.6?, at a distance of 627.726 feet to the position x = 3,132,576.25 and y = 459,334.08, which is the point of intersection with the common line between the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66 and the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, from which a concrete monument, marking the interior southwest corner of said Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues and the central northeast corner of said S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, located at the position x = 3,132,806.53 and y = 459,346.50, bears Azimuth 266 deg. 54' 43.3? a distance of 230.648 feet, pass said point of intersection and continue Azimuth 350 deg. 39' 35.6?, crossing hereinabove mentioned powerline, in all a distance of 1496.444 feet to the position x = 3,132,717.22 and y = 458,476.98, which is the southwest corner of said 9.08449 acres, for an interior corner of this tract; 
Thence, with the south line of said 9.08449 acres, Azimuth 291 deg. 18' 00.8? in all at distance of 171.185 feet to the position x = 3,132,876.69 and y = 458,414.81 and the point of beginning, lineating and enclosing 136.97941 acres of land, plus one-half of the channel of Oyster Creek, an area of land inundated by water which is approximately 2375 feet long by 30 wide, along the boundary of said 136.97941 acres which is congruent with the right descending waters' edge of said creek. 
(Ord. No. 71-425, § 1, 1-4-71; Code 1958, § 1-27)  
Sec. 12-42. - Annexation number twenty-two. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
405.9137 acres of land in the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, and the J. E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, all in Brazoria County, Texas, described in metes and bounds, using survey terminology relative to the Texas Coordinate System, South Central Zone, except the distances which are the horizontal ground level lengths, as follows: 
Beginning at the position x = 3,135,215.01 and y = 450,208.89, which is a point in the southeast top bank of a drainage ditch located at a distance of 20 feet northeasterly from the point of intersection of said bank with the northeasterly top bank of the main drainage ditch or canal known as Flag Lake Drainage Ditch, for the West corner; 
Thence, with and along the southeasterly top bank of the hereinabove first mentioned drainage ditch, the following meanders: 
Azimuth 244 deg. 21' 23.8? a distance of 27.702 feet; Azimuth 235 deg. 04' 33.4? a distance of 230.41 feet; Azimuth 238 deg. 42' 09.4? a distance of 55.081 feet; Azimuth 251 deg. 33' 54.2? a distance of 95.133 feet; Azimuth 212 deg. 34' 27.8? a distance of 120.521 feet; Azimuth 222 deg. 23' 53.4? a distance of 25.082 feet; Azimuth 248 deg. 47' 53.5? a distance of 202.843 feet; Azimuth 256 deg. 39' 31.6? a distance of 119.581 feet; Azimuth 188 deg. 04' 41.1? a distance of 109.035 feet; Azimuth 199 deg. 30' 57.1? a distance of 6.706 feet; Azimuth 252 deg. 33' 52.0? a distance of 6.709 feet; Azimuth 261 deg. 59' 48.5? a distance of 91.947 feet; Azimuth 230 deg. 16' 44.7? a distance of 122.212 feet; Azimuth 235 deg. 55' 45.5? a distance of 73.070 feet; Azimuth 238 deg. 25' 32.3? a distance of 55.526 feet; Azimuth 245 deg. 19' 19.8? a distance of 145.593 feet; Azimuth 233 deg. 46' 36.7? a distance of 127.408 feet; Azimuth 240 deg. 36' 11.9? a distance of 197.191 feet; Azimuth 226 deg. 07' 39.4? a distance of 140.151 feet; Azimuth 250 deg. 34' 44.1? a distance of 152.526 feet; Azimuth 229 deg. 50' 04.1? a distance of 102.121 feet; Azimuth 250 deg. 02' 41.5? a distance of 73.555 feet; Azimuth 224 deg. 27' 26.5? a distance of 146.353 feet; Azimuth 216 deg. 26' 03.2? a distance of 104.694 feet; Azimuth 235 deg. 45' 43.5? a distance of 14.505 feet; Azimuth 257 deg. 16' 06.3? a distance of 17.472 feet; Azimuth 267 deg. 16' 31.7? a distance of 76.165 feet; Azimuth 221 deg. 19' 17.1? a distance of 67.237 feet; Azimuth 247 deg. 06' 45.2? a distance of 113.173 feet; and Azimuth 240 deg. 11' 48.5? a distance of 241.735 feet in all to the position x = 3,137,696.88 and y = 451,799.98, which is a point-on-curve in the southwesterly right-of-way line of Texas State Highway No. 332 situated at 150.00 feet, measured radial, from the centerline of right-of-way of said highway and also the point of intersection of said southeasterly top bank of said ditch with said southwesterly right-of-way line, for the North corner; 
Thence, with the southwesterly right-of-way line of Texas State Highway No. 332, at 150.00 feet from and parallel to the centerline of right-of-way of said highway, along a curve to the right and southeast which has a radius of 3287.87 feet in all a distance of 308.191 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,137,839.75 and y = 451,527.08 which is the point of tangency of said curve; 
Thence, continue with said southwesterly right-of-way line, Azimuth 335 deg. 03' 04.1?, at 0.167 foot to the position x = 3,137,839.82 and y = 451,526.93, at which position is situated a Texas State Highway Department concrete monument, pass said monument and continue Azimuth 335 deg. 03' 04.1? in all a distance of 1933.135 feet to the position x = 3,138,655.06 and y = 449,774.55 as which position is situated a Texas State Highway Department concrete monument marking the beginning of a curve to the left and southeast; 
Thence, continue with said right-of-way line, along a curve to the left and southeast which has a radius of 11,609.19 feet, at a distance of 402.009 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,138,830.97 and y = 449,413.15 which is a point on said curve and the point of intersection of same with the common line between the J. E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, and the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, pass said point of intersection and continue in all a distance of 1074.972 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,139,153.10 and y = 448,822.49 at which position is situated a Texas State Highway Department concrete monument marking the end of said curve; 
Thence, continue with said right-of-way line, Azimuth 329 deg. 44' 13.4? in all a distance of 1600.197 feet to the position x = 3,139,959.45 and y = 447,440.54 at which position is situated a Texas State Highway Department concrete monument marking the beginning of a curve to the left and easterly; 
Thence, continue with said right-of-way line, along a curve to the left and easterly which has a radius of 3014.93 feet in all a distance of 594.237 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,140,307.36 and y = 446,960.07, which is a point-on-curve in said southwesterly right-of-way line of Texas State Highway No. 332 and the most northern corner of a drainage easement 252 feet in width, for the east corner; 
Thence, with the westerly line of above mentioned drainage easement, at 126 feet from and parallel to the centerline of said easement, Azimuth 22 deg. 09' 01? in all a distance of 3160.653 feet to the position x = 3,139,115.83 and y = 444,033.04, which is a point situated offset 20 feet northeasterly from the northeast low bank of Flag Lake, for the South corner; 
Thence, at 20 feet northeasterly from and parallel to the northeasterly low bank of Flag Lake, in a northwesterly direction, the following meanders: 
Azimuth 156 deg. 46' 38.4? a distance of 85.897 feet; Azimuth 162 deg. 35' 51.0? a distance of 76.176 feet; Azimuth 168 deg. 32' 29.1? a distance of 210.185 feet; Azimuth 169 deg. 50' 30.7? a distance of 71.621 feet; Azimuth 168 deg. 35' 55.3? a distance of 124.206 feet; Azimuth 162 deg. 10' 29.2? a distance of 92.134 feet; Azimuth 152 deg. 20' 39.7? a distance of 250.270 feet; Azimuth 141 deg. 34' 14.5? a distance of 199.558 feet; to the position x = 3,138,711.88 and y = 445,548.51; 
Continue said line: 
Azimuth 137 deg. 39' 44.1? a distance of 457.220 feet; to the position x = 3,138,403.98 and y = 445,386.44; 
Continue said line: 
Azimuth 130 deg. 35' 54.6? a distance of 199.224 feet; Azimuth 123 deg. 04' 58.1? a distance of 174.488 feet; Azimuth 137 deg. 55' 32.9? a distance of 196.878 feet; Azimuth 142 deg. 31' 34.5? a distance of 200.276 feet; Azimuth 136 deg. 06' 42.8? a distance of 200.442 feet; Azimuth 147 deg. 23' 53.8? a distance of 212.778 feet; Azimuth 144 deg. 13' 35.6? a distance of 153.137 feet; Azimuth 147 deg. 51' 34.5? a distance of 210.986 feet; 
Continue with said line, but, transitionally from 20 feet from and parallel to the northeasterly low bank of Flag Lake to a similar condition traversing a line at 20 feet northeasterly from and parallel to the northeasterly actual top bank of the channel of Flag Lake drainage ditch, continue the meanders of same: 
Azimuth 143 deg. 23' 32.6? a distance of 199.679 feet; Azimuth 143 deg. 52' 51.8? a distance of 195.049 feet; Azimuth 133 deg. 34' 22.2? a distance of 156.169 feet; to the position x = 3,137,050.78 and y = 446,968.63; 
Continue said line: 
Azimuth 123 deg. 49' 16.9? a distance of 388.564 feet; to the position x = 3,136,728.01 and y = 447,184.88; 
Continue said line: 
Azimuth 149 deg. 06' 44.6? a distance of 218.141 feet; Azimuth 142 deg. 58' 18.8? a distance of 42.017 feet; Azimuth 135 deg. 15' 17.2? a distance of 340.333 feet; Azimuth 163 deg. 52' 15.2? a distance of 42.841 feet; Azimuth 169 deg. 38' 05.0? a distance of 357.142 feet; Azimuth 159 deg. 52' 09.7? a distance of 75.991 feet; Azimuth 150 deg. 46' 23.0? a distance of 231.232 feet; Azimuth 170 deg. 20' 36.6? a distance of 184.831 feet; Azimuth 163 deg. 22' 47.4? a distance of 192.244 feet; Azimuth 155 deg. 50' 35.3? a distance of 74.832 feet; to the position x = 3,136,019.40 and y = 448,747.47; 
Continue said line: 
Azimuth 148 deg. 16' 33.7? a distance of 445.086 feet; to the position x = 3,135,785.39 and y = 449,126.01; 
Continue said line: 
Azimuth 145 deg. 27' 33.7? a distance of 56.057 feet; Azimuth 151 deg. 23' 30.3?, at a distance of 79,424 feet which is the point of intersection with the common line between the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, and the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, from which the most southern southwest corner of said Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues and the most eastern northeast interior corner in said S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, which corner is situated at the position x = 3,133,576.23 and y = 449,123.95 and marked with a concrete monument which has appropriate identification stampings, bears Azimuth 86 deg. 50' 39.7? a distance of 2142.868 feet; 
Pass said point of intersection and continue: 
Azimuth 151 deg. 23' 30.3? a distance of 103.246 feet; Azimuth 147 deg. 08' 47.7? a distance of 321.040 feet; Azimuth 146 deg. 56' 34.6? a distance of 99.925 feet; Azimuth 143 deg. 13' 59.8? a distance of 111.064 feet; Azimuth 139 deg. 55' 45.4? a distance of 90.204 feet; Azimuth 149 deg. 10' 37.7? a distance of 84.400 feet; Azimuth 161 deg. 22' 00.2? a distance of 57.564 feet; and Azimuth 166 deg. 24' 43.4? a distance of 316.592 feet; in all to the position x = 3,135,215.01 and y = 450,208.89 and the point of beginning, lineating and enclosing 405.9137 acres of which 279.83232 acres is in said S. F. Austin 5 Leagues and 126,081.38 acres is in said Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, 
Less and except that portion of the above described tract which is partially within the incorporated limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, all as more fully shown by the plat attached hereto [to Ordinance No. 71-432] as Exhibit "A." 
(Ord. No. 71-432, § 1, 4-19-71; Code 1958, § 1-28)  
Sec. 12-43. - Annexation number twenty-three. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Beginning at the Southeast corner of said 2405.27 acre tract at the water's edge of Oyster Creek, said beginning point also being on the southwest corner of the 50 acre Daisy Bryan Lewis Tract No. 19, out of said Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant; 
Thence North along the common line between said 2405.27 acre tract and the said 50 acre Daisy Bryan Lewis tract passing an existing concrete monument at 97.8 ft. more or less and continuing north along the east line of said 2405.27 acre tract at a total distance of 2097.8 ft. to a stake for a corner; 
Thence West to an intersection with the waters' edge of Oyster Creek on the left descending bank of Oyster Creek; 
Thence down said Oyster Creek with the waters' edge following the left descending bank of said Oyster Creek with the meanders of said Oyster Creek to the place of beginning, 
Less and except a 4.95 acre tract of land conveyed to The Dow Chemical Company by the United States of America by deed dated May 17, 1949, and recorded in Volume 453, Page 607 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, 
Containing 123.19 acres of land not including the 4.95 acre tract specifically excluded. 
(Ord. No. 71-433, § 1, 4-19-71; Code 1958, § 1-29)  
Sec. 12-44. - Annexation number twenty-four. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
393.350331 acres (17,134,340.4397 square feet) out of the Belle Wisdom 450 acre tract lying in the Jared E. Groce 5½ League Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
Commencing at a 4? × 4? concrete monument lying in the northerly line of Farm to Market Road No. 2004 (300.00 foot right-of-way) being the southeasterly corner of the herein described 393.350331 acre tract and being also the place of beginning. 
Thence South 87° 28' 45? West along the northerly right-of-way line of Farm to Market Road No. 2004 a distance of 1712.81 feet to a 5/8 inch iron rod being the southwesterly corner of the herein described 393.350331 acre tract. 
Thence North 00° 30' 11? West a distance of 9940.57 feet to a 1 inch iron pipe being the northwesterly corner of the herein described 393.350331 acre tract. 
Thence East a distance of 1748.93 feet to a 2 inch iron pipe for the northeasterly corner of the herein described 393.350331 acre tract. 
Thence South 00° 17' 15? East a distance of 9864.98 feet to a 4? × 4? concrete monument in the northerly right-of-way line of Farm to Market Road No. 2004 being the southeasterly corner of the herein described 393.350331 acre tract and being also the place of beginning. 
Containing 393.350331 acres (17,134,340.4397 square feet) of land, less and except that portion of the above described tract which is partially within the incorporated limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 72-485, § 1, 12-4-72; Code 1958, § 1-30)  
Sec. 12-45. - Annexation number twenty-five. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
234.63 acres (called 244 acres), out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas: 
Beginning at the southeast corner of the 234.63 acres (originally part of the 300-acre tract allotted to the heirs of Nellie W. Cave, out of the Wisdom 1700-acre tract in said Groce Grant, in the partition of the lands formerly owned by the B. H. Wisdom Estate); 
Thence, north along the east line of said original 300-acre tract to the southeast corner of the 56-acre tract allotted to A. B. Mayes in a partition of said 300 acres; 
Thence, west along the south line of said 56-acre tract to its southwest corner in the west line of said 300-acre tract; 
Thence, south along said west line to the southwest corner of said 300-acre tract; 
Thence, east along the south line of said 300-acre tract to the place of beginning, containing 234.63 acres of land, more or less, and being the same 234.63-acre tract (called 244 acres), out of the Wisdom 1700 acres in said Groce Grant. 
(Ord. No. 73-502, § 1, 7-16-73; Code 1958, § 1-31)  
Sec. 12-46. - Annexation number twenty-six. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Parcel No. 1. 
Beginning at a point on the northerly waters' edge of Oyster Creek said beginning point also being the southwest corner of the Daisy B. Lewis 35.92-acre tract and the southeast corner of T. J. Dunbar Park; 
Thence, upstream following the meanders of the waters' edge to an intersection with the northerly right-of-way line of State Highway F.M. No. 2004 for a corner; 
Thence, in a southwesterly direction along the northerly right-of-way line of State Highway F.M. No. 2004, crossing Oyster Creek to a point on the west side of the Creek; 
Thence, continuing southwesterly along the same northerly right-of-way line of State Highway F.M. No. 2004 to a point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Lake Road for a corner; 
Thence, in a southeasterly direction following the extension of the easterly right-of-way line of Lake Road across State Highway F.M. No. 2004 to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of State Highway F.M. No. 2004, said point also being on the easterly right-of-way line of County Road No. 856 for a corner; 
Thence, northeasterly along the southerly right-of-way line of State Highway F.M. No. 2004 to a point on the waters' edge of Oyster Creek for a corner; 
Thence, downstream following the meanders of the waters' edge of said Oyster Creek to a point of intersection with the extension of the west line of the Daisy B. Lewis 35.92-acre tract for a corner; 
Thence, in a northerly direction across Oyster Creek along the extension of the west line of said 35.92-acre tract to the place of beginning. 
Parcel No. 2. 
Starting at a point of intersection between the north right-of-way line of State Highway F.M. No. 2004 and the east right-of-way line of County Road No. 856; 
Thence, northwesterly along the east right-of-way line of County Road No. 856 a distance of 367.982 feet to the point of beginning; 
Thence, northeasterly following a line at 57° 39' 52.5? a distance of 345.097 feet to an intersection with the west waters' edge of Oyster Creek and continuing along said line to the easterly waters' edge of Oyster Creek; 
Thence, upstream following the meanders of the waters' edge of said Oyster Creek to a point of intersection with the extension of the north line of a 23.58-acre tract, said north line also being the south line of the Texas Department of Corrections Retrieve Prison Farm for a corner; 
Thence, West South 86° 31' 25? West along the common line between said 23.58-acre tract and the Retrieve Prison Farm, as extended, across Oyster Creek to a 1¼-inch iron pipe on the west bank of Oyster Creek, said iron pipe being a witness corner 41.00 feet from the west water's edge of Oyster Creek as measured in July, 1970; 
Thence, continuing in the westerly direction South 86° 31' 25? West on the same line, 2347.61 feet to the northeast corner of Buffalo Camp Bayou Subdivision, said corner also being the northwest corner of a 24.93-acre tract for a corner; 
Thence, South 03° 24' 11? East 578.20 feet to a point on the northeasterly right-of-way line of Bayou Road in the Lake Jackson Farms Subdivision for a corner; 
Thence, in a southeasterly direction following the northerly right-of-way line of Bayou Road and Lake Road to the place of beginning; 
Taken together, Parcel No. 1 and Parcel No. 2 contain 437 acres, more or less, specifically excluding any property owned by the Dow Chemical Company. 
(Ord. No. 73-504, § 1, 8-20-73; Code 1958, § 1-32)  
Sec. 12-47. - Annexation number twenty-seven. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
1,000 acres of land, more or less, which is located north of the city and comprises an area that includes the proposed new county airport, said land being out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, and out of the Asa Mitchell Grant, Abstract No. 96, Brazoria County, Texas: 
Beginning at the southeast corner of the 300-acre tract owned by Phillip G. and Theodore H. Harrison, and known as Tract 75 out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, 
Thence, west along the south line of said 300-acre tract to the southwest corner of said tract which point is a point of intersection with the east line of Tracts 74 and 74A owned by the Texas State Prison System; 
Thence, continuing west extending the south line of the aforesaid 300-acre tract in a westerly direction, across the tract of the Texas Department of Corrections Retrieve Prison Farm for a distance of 3332 feet for a corner; 
Thence, north at a 90 degree angle 7125 feet to a point of intersection with the north boundary line of the Tract 74 and 74A owned by the Texas Department of Corrections; such point also being the south boundary line of the Asa Mitchell Grant, Abstract 96 and Tract 12A-1A owned by Theodore H. Harrison, Phillip G. Harrison and Elizabeth C. Harrison and such point being 1835.5 feet east of a 1-inch iron pipe which marks the southwest corner of the 600-acre tract 12A-1A described in Volume 917 page 397 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County; 
Thence, north northeast following an arc which is at all times 5280 feet from a point on the northwest corner of the 234-acre Ted Merchant Tract #76 out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract 66, across the Jared E. Groce Abstract 66 League line and into the Asa Mitchell League Grant, Abstract 96 and Tract 12A-1A owned by Theodore H. Harrison, Phillip G. Harrison and Elizabeth C. Harrison to a point on the eastern boundary line of Tract 12A-1A which is also the league line between the Asa Mitchell Grant and the Edwin Waller League Grant; 
Thence, south along the eastern boundary line of Tract 12A-1A, parallel to the Angleton protection levee and along the western edge of the proposed new Freeway 288, to a point which marks the perpendicular juncture of the eastern boundary of Tract 12A-1A owned by Phillip G. and Theodore H. Harrison with the northern boundary line of the 300-acre tract no. 75 out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant; 
Thence, east along the northern boundary line of Tract 75 to a point of intersection with the eastern boundary line of Tract 75 for a corner; 
Thence, south 7500 feet along the eastern boundary line of the 300-acre Tract 75 to a point of intersection with the southern boundary and to the place of beginning, in all containing 1,000 acres, more or less, but only 500 acres of which are to be counted as allotted acres for annexation purposes under Article 970a, Section (7). 
(Ord. No. 74-522, § 1, 2-18-74; Code 1958, § 1-33)  
Sec. 12-48. - Annexation number twenty-eight. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the petitioned request of the majority of the owners of said property, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
A tract of 63.063 acres of land out of the J. T. Suggs 334.34 acre tract in the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues Grant, Abstract 66, Brazoria County, Texas, said 63.063 acres being the northwest corner of the intersection of County Road 288 and F.M. 2004, being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a concrete monument on the northwest corner of the J. T. Suggs 334.34-acre tract in the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, said concrete monument is also the southwest corner of the Dr. Galloway 200.66-acre tract and the northwest corner of the 63.063 acres herein described; 
Thence, north 89° 59' 38? east a distance of 881.32 feet to a concrete monument on the tap bank of Bastrop Bayou; 
Thence, north 83° 34' 16? east a distance of 105.00 feet to the centerline of Bastrop Bayou; 
Thence, down the centerline of Bastrop Bayou with the following meanders: south 54° 34' east a distance of 107.34 feet, south 76° 02' east a distance of 86.00 feet, north 72° 57' east a distance of 59.00 feet, north 61° 22' east a distance of 124.00 feet, south 81° 03' east a distance of 73.00 feet, south 57° 09' east a distance of 35.00 feet, south 31° 22' east a distance of 224.50 feet, south 56° 39' east a distance of 81.00 feet, south 83° 59' east a distance of 206.50 feet, and south 89° 53' east a distance of 115.94 feet; 
Thence, along the west line of a 3.66-acre tract with the following meanders: south 08° 25' east a distance of 156.09 feet, south 18° 41' east a distance of 87.40 feet, south 38° 51' east a distance of 102.70 feet, south 18° 57' east a distance of 79.30 feet, south 28° 08' east a distance of 95.00 feet, and south 52° 35' east a distance of 164.92 feet to the west right-of-way line of County Road No. 288; 
Thence south 02° 09' 30? east along the said west right-of-way line of County Road No. 288 for a distance of 472.52 feet to a point on the north right-of-way of F.M. Road No. 2004 for a corner; 
Thence south 87° 50' 30? west along the said north right-of-way line of F.M. Road No. 2004 for a distance of 2,265.37 feet to the west line of the J. T. Suggs 334.34-acre tract for a corner; 
Thence north along the said west line of the J. T. Suggs 334.34-acre tract for a distance of 1,416.58 feet to the place of beginning, containing 63.063 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 74-534, § 1, 5-20-74; Code 1958, § 1-34)  
Sec. 12-49. - Annexation number twenty-nine. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the petitioned request of the majority of the owners of said property, and the territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Five hundred acres comprised of 18 acres of the Buffalo Camp Bayou and the Brazos River and 482 acres out of the A. E. Friedrich 1682.4-acre tract described in Volume 1190, pages 851—859 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County and lying in the Stephen F. Austin Survey Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of a westerly extension of the South right-of-way line of State Highway 332 and the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou, said point being the westernmost intersection of the corporate limits of the city and the south right-of-way line of State Highway 332; 
Thence along the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou, which is the existing western boundary of the city, with its meanders in a southerly direction to its intersection with the Brazos River; at all times traveling in adjacency and contiguity the existing western boundary of the city; and continuing along an extension of the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou south to a point, said point being the intersection of this extension and centerline of the Brazos River; 
Thence along the centerline of the Brazos River with its meanders upstream in a northwesterly direction, for a distance of 5280 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence at a right angle from the centerline of the Brazos River in a northerly direction to the waters' edge, which is also the southerly boundary of said A. E. Friedrich 1682.4-acre tract, to a point for a corner; 
Thence in a northwesterly direction along the waters' edge and the southerly boundary of said 1682.4-acre tract to the southwesterly corner of said A. E. Friedrich 1682.4-acre tract, to a point for a corner; 
Thence with the westerly boundary of said A. E. Friedrich 1682.4-acre tract north 01° 03' 07.1? west a distance of 693.53 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence north 88° 56' 52.9? east a distance of 1744.67 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence south 77° 40' 21.2? east a distance of 10,249.42 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence north 01° 03' 23.8? west a distance of 5573.62 feet to an intersection with the southerly boundary of said State Highway 332 and a point for a corner; 
Thence with said southerly boundary of State Highway 332 north 89° 34' 00.0? east a distance of 100 feet to a concrete monument lying on the southerly right-of-way line of State Highway 332 and the westerly bank of Buffalo Camp Bayou; 
Thence with said southerly boundary of State Highway 332 to the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou which is the existing boundary of the City to the place of beginning; containing 500 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 78-661, § 1, 7-10-78; Code 1958, § 1-35)  
Sec. 12-50. - Annexation number thirty. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, and the territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
One hundred eighty-one and eighty-two one-hundredths acres more or less, comprised of the territory 525 feet south of the north edge of the Brazos River and southern boundary of the new city park and lying in the Stephen F. Austin Survey Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows: 
From a point of intersection of the extension of the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou with the centerline of the Brazos River, then along the centerline of the Brazos River with its meanders upstream in a northwesterly direction, for a distance of 5280 feet to a point which is a corner on the southerly boundary of the city and thence at a right angle from said centerline of the Brazos River in a northerly direction to the waters' edge, which is also the southerly boundary of the city and the new city park and of the former A. E. Friedrich 1682.4-acre tract described in volume 1190, pages 851—859 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, to a point for a corner and the place of beginning; 
Thence in a northwesterly direction along the waters' edge and the existing southerly boundary of the city, at all times traveling in adjacency and contiguity with the existing southerly boundary of the city and the southerly boundary of said new city park and said former A. E. Friedrich 1682.4-acre tract to the southwesterly corner of said city, which is also the southwesterly corner of said new city park and former A. E. Friedrich 1682.4-acre tract to a point for a corner; 
Thence south 01° 03' 07.1? east a distance of 525 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence following a generally southeasterly direction at all times 525 feet from the existing southerly boundary of the City of Lake Jackson and the southerly boundary of the new city park to an intersection of a line extended in a southerly direction at a right angle from the centerline of the Brazos River with its intersection of a meandering line 5280 feet from the intersection of the centerline of the Brazos River with the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou extended, to a point for a corner; 
Thence along the line extended at a right angle to the centerline of the Brazos River which is a point 5280 meandering feet from the intersection of the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou extended for a corner; 
Thence along a line extended at a right angle to the centerline of the Brazos River in a northerly direction to the waters' edge, which is also the southerly boundary of said city, new city park, and former A. E. Friedrich 1682.4-acre tract and the place of beginning; containing 181.82 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 78-668, § 1, 8-21-78; Code 1958, § 1-36)  
Sec. 12-51. - Annexation number thirty-one. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such City, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
28.04 acres of land, more or less, which is located east and northeast of the present city limits, comprising mostly street and road rights-of-way, said land being out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, and the Stephen F. Austin Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas: 
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the west right-of-way line of Flag Lake Drive (County Road No. 444) and the south right-of-way line of Plantation Drive (F.M. 1605) for a corner; 
Thence in a southeasterly direction along the south right-of-way line of said Plantation Drive to an intersection with the eastern right-of-way line of Dixie Drive; 
Thence in a northerly direction along a northerly extension of the eastern right-of-way line of said Dixie Drive to its intersection with the eastern right-of-way line of Lake Jackson Loop Road; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the eastern right-of-way line of said Lake Jackson Loop Road to a point that is 40 feet south of the existing south right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive; 
Thence in an easterly direction approximately 400 feet to a point for the beginning of a curve to the right having a delta angle of 13° 21' 05? and a radius of 2784.83 feet; 
Thence along the arc of the curve 648.94 feet to a point for the end of the curve; 
Thence south 74° 37' 37? east 798.13 feet to a point of beginning of a curve to the left having a delta angle of 61° 27' 14? and a radius of 1034.94 feet; 
Thence along the arc of the curve 1110 feet to a point for the end of the curve; 
Thence north 43° 55' 09? approximately 450 feet to a point of intersection of the east right-of-way line of the H. & B. V. Railroad and the south right-of-way line of College Blvd.; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the said east right-of-way line of said H. & B. V. Railroad to an intersection with the centerline of Oyster Creek; 
Thence west and upstream along the centerline of said Oyster Creek and with the meanders of said Oyster Creek crossing the H. & B. V. Railroad and County Road No. 288 to an intersection with the westerly right-of-way line of County Road No. 288; 
Thence south along the west right-of-way line of County Road No. 288 to the north right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive, for a corner; 
Thence west along the north right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive as noted in the 1957 annexation (Ordinance #209), around a curve to the right to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way line of Loop Road extended in a northerly direction, for a corner; 
Thence south across Oyster Creek Drive along the west right-of-way line of Loop Road extended to a point of intersection in the west right-of-way line of Loop Road with the south right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive, for a corner; 
Thence south, along the west right-of-way line of Loop Road to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way line of Plantation Drive (F.M. 1605) for a corner; 
Thence west along the north right-of-way line of Plantation Drive to a point that represents the intersection of the north right-of-way line of Plantation Drive with the northerly extension of the west right-of-way line of Flag Lake Drive for a corner; 
Thence south along the northerly extension of the west right-of-way line of Flag Lake Drive to a point that is the intersection of the west right-of-way line of Flag Lake Drive (County Road No. 444) and the south right-of-way line of Plantation Drive (F.M. 1605), and the place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 80-750, § 1, 8-4-80; Code 1958, § 1-37)  
Sec. 12-52. - Annexation number thirty-two. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to, being contiguous with, and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous and adjacent to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Tract One. Eighty-five acres more or less, comprised of the territory mainly south of the Brazos River lying in the Stephen F. Austin Survey, Abstracts 19, and 20, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows: 
From a point of intersection of the extension of the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou with the centerline of the Brazos River along and adjacent and contiguous with the existing southerly boundary of the city; 
Thence, along the centerline of the Brazos River and the existing southerly boundary of the city with its meanders in a southeasterly direction to a point on the eastern right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004, for the place of beginning; 
Thence, in a southerly direction along the eastern right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004 for a distance of 3,900 feet, for a corner; 
Thence, in a westerly direction at all times 90° from, and perpendicular to, the east right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004 for a distance of 750 feet and to a point in the Clemons Prison Farm, for a corner; 
Thence, in a northerly direction at all times 750 feet from and parallel with the east right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004 for a distance of approximately 5,200 feet to a point on the centerline of the Brazos River; 
Thence, along the centerline of the Brazos River with its meanders in a southeasterly direction to a point which is the place of beginning containing eighty-five acres more or less. 
Tract Two. Sixty-five acres more or less lying adjacent to, being contiguous with, and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, said land being composed mostly of the Beutel Tract out of the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues Grant Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and out of the Stephen F. Austin Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 and the easterly outer edge of the Brazos River Flood Protection Levee, for a corner; 
Thence, in an easterly direction along the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332, to a point, said point being the intersection of the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332, with the line extended of the east right-of-way line of County Road 856, for a corner; 
Thence, in a northerly direction along the extension of the east right-of-way line of County Road 856 to a point on the north right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332, for a corner; 
Thence, in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of County Road 856, and along, contiguous with, and adjoining the present boundary limits of the city, to the intersection of the east right-of-way line of County Road 856 with the south right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing in the same northerly direction to a point on the north right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004, said point being the intersection of the north right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004 and the east right-of-way line of the Lake Farms Entrance Road, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing in the same northerly direction along the eastern right-of-way line of the Lake Farms Road to an intersection with the south outer edge of the Brazos River Flood Protection Levee, for a corner; 
Thence, in a westerly direction along the south outer edge of the Brazos River Flood Protection Levee 3,058.43 feet, to its intersection with the easterly outer edge of the Levee for a corner; 
Thence, in a southerly direction along the easterly outer edge of the Brazos River Flood Protection Levee to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332, and the place of beginning. 
Tract Three. One hundred twenty-three acres more or less, lying adjacent to, being contiguous with, and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, said land being composed of city-owned property including the new city service tract, out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and out of the Stephen F. Austin, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described by metes and bounds using survey terminology referring to the Texas Coordinate System, South Central Zone, except the distances which are the horizontal ground level lengths as follows: 
Beginning at the position x = 3,133,754.178 and y = 449,133.760 which is a point on the common line between the J. E. Groce 5 League, Abstract No. 66 and the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, said position also being located Azimuth 266° 50' 39.7? 178.239 feet from a concrete monument at the position of x = 3,133,576.230 and y = 449,123.950 which is the most eastern northeast interior corner of the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence Azimuth 247° 25' 04? along the north right-of-way of a 95.00 foot drainage easement for a distance of 1515.288 feet to the position x = 3,135,153.117 and y = 449,715.573 which is a point on the west right-of-way of a 200.00 foot drainage easement for a corner; 
Thence with the following meanders of the westerly right-of-way line of said 200.00 foot drainage easement as follows: Azimuth 149° 10' 37.7? 54.689 feet, Azimuth 161° 22' 00.2? 87.731 feet, Azimuth 166° 24' 43.4? 320.813 feet, Azimuth 163° 46' 54.4? 90.325 feet, Azimuth 170° 56' 47.6? 170.423 feet, Azimuth 155° 53' 52? 161.887 feet, Azimuth 144° 33' 05.9? 256.822 feet, Azimuth 132° 12' 04? 152.998 feet, Azimuth 140° 58' 03? 390.350 feet, and Azimuth 149° 51' 41? for a distance of 276.840 feet to the position x = 3,134,256.534 and y = 451,414.725 for a corner; 
Thence Azimuth 63° 26' 36.1? for a distance of 2929.030 feet to the position x = 3,131,636.858 and y = 450,105.368 for a corner; 
Thence Azimuth 322° 26' 05.5? for a distance of 54.036 feet to the position of x = 3,131,669.548 and y = 450.062.350 for a corner; 
Thence Azimuth 328° 26' 33.4? for a distance of 1685.506 feet to the position of x = 3,132,551.554 and y = 448,626.278 for a corner; 
Thence Azimuth 314° 46' 04.1? for a distance of 50.00 feet to the position x = 3,132,587.048 and y = 448,591.071 for a corner; 
Thence Azimuth 224° 46' 04.1? for a distance of 137.366 feet to the position x = 3,132,683.774 and y = 448.688.584 for a corner; 
Thence Azimuth 247° 25' 04? for a distance of 1159.429 feet to the position x = 3,133,754.178 and y = 449,133.760 which is the place of beginning, containing 123.4213 acres of land, more or less. 
Less and except that certain 62.50001 acres which was conveyed by The Dow Chemical Company to Herbert R. Stevens, Jr., by instrument dated December 19, 1975, and of record in Volume 1272 at Page 717 et seq., of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, and conveyed by Herbert R. Stevens, Jr., to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, by instrument of even date and of record in Volume 1272 at Page 723 et seq., of the Deed Records of said county and state, leaving a net area containing 60.92129 acres conveyed hereby, of which 4.07977 acres is in the S.F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, and 56.84152 acres is in the J.E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66. 
Tract Four. Seven acres more or less lying adjacent to, being contiguous with and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, said land being composed of Highway 332 in front of the Brazos Mall out of the Stephen F. Austin, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the present city boundary limits, said point also being the intersection of the north right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive with the north right-of-way line of Texas State Highway No. 332, located opposite the junction of said drive and highway, marked with a concrete monument in which is embedded a Texas State Highway Department brass disk; 
Thence, with the north right-of-way line of said Highway No. 332, in a westerly direction along curves described in Ordinance No. 71-425 (dated 1-4-71) to the point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of County Road No. 856, which point of intersection is marked with a concrete monument, for a corner; 
Thence, in a southerly direction along the line extended of the east right-of-way line of County Road 856, to a point on the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332, for a corner; 
Thence, in an easterly direction along the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 to a point on the city's present boundary limits which point is the intersection of the city's present boundary limits with the south right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332, in the vicinity of the Highway No. 332 and Oyster Creek Drive confluence, for a corner; 
Thence, in a northerly direction along, contiguous, adjacent and adjoining the present city boundary limits past the north right-of-way line of Highway No. 332 and past the south right-of-way line of Oyster Creek Drive, and to a point on the northwesterly extension of the north line of the 100-foot parkway along the north side of Oyster Creek Drive, for a corner; 
Thence, in a northwesterly direction along said northwesterly extension of the north line of the 100-foot parkway along the north side of Oyster Creek Drive to the intersection with the north right-of-way line of State Highway No. 332 and to the place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 81-787, § 1, 4-6-81; Code 1958, § 1-38)  
Sec. 12-53. - Annexation number thirty-three. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to, being contiguous with, and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous and adjacent to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Ninety-five acres more or less, comprised of the territory mainly south of the Brazos River lying in the Stephen F. Austin Survey, Abstract No. 20, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows: 
From a point of intersection of the extension of the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou with the centerline of the Brazos River along and adjacent and contiguous with the existing southerly boundary of the city; 
Thence, along the centerline of the Brazos River and the existing southerly boundary of the city with its meanders in a southeasterly direction past a point on the eastern right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004, and continuing along the centerline of the Brazos River and the existing southerly boundary of the City with its meanders in a southeasterly direction to a point on the western boundary line extended of Tract 3P out of the Stephen F. Austin Abstract No. 20 for the place of beginning; 
Thence, in a southerly direction along the western boundary line extended of Tract 3P to an intersection with the northerly right-of-way line of County Road 400, for a corner; 
Thence, in a southerly direction along the western boundary line of Tract 3P, across County Road 400, to an intersection with the southern right-of-way line of County Road 400, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the western right-of-way line of Tract 3P to a point on the north bank of the creek known as Jones Creek, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the western right-of-way line of Tract 3P to a point on the south bank of Jones Creek, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the western boundary line of Tract 3P to a point of intersection on the north boundary line of Tract 22A which is also the southwest corner of Tract 3P, for a corner; 
Thence, in a southeasterly direction along the southern boundary line of Tract 3P and the northern boundary line of Tract 22A for approximately 1,000 feet to a point of intersection with the eastern boundary line of Tract 3P, which is also the southeastern corner of Tract 3P, for a corner; 
Thence, in a northerly direction along the eastern boundary of Tract 3P to a point on the south bank of the creek known as Jones Creek, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing in a northerly direction along the eastern boundary of Tract 3P to a point on the north bank of the creek known as Jones Creek, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the eastern boundary line of Tract 3P past County Road 400, to a point of intersection with the south bank of the Brazos River, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the eastern boundary line extended of Tract 3P to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Brazos River, for a corner; 
Thence, upstream along the centerline of the Brazos River in a northwesterly direction to a point which is the place of beginning, containing ninety-five acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 81-794, § 1, 5-11-81; Code 1958, § 1-39)  
Sec. 12-54. - Annexation number thirty-four. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a], and Section 43.052 of the Local Government Code [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.052], and in Section 1.03 of the City of Lake Jackson City Charter, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Parcel No. 1. Beginning at a point of intersection of the city limit boundaries, same point being the point of beginning of description for a 393.35 acre Annexation No. 24 of the City Ordinance No. 72-485 and recorded in the Code of Ordinance records of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, same being at a point of intersection of the north right-of-way of State Highway FM 2004 and the eastern boundary of the so called 450-acre Belle Wisdom Tract No. 77 in the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant Abstract 66 for a corner; 
Thence, east along the northern right-of-way of said highway also the city limit boundary and crossing the common boundaries of Tract(s) 88B, 88, and 88A respectively to an intersection with the eastern boundary of Tract 88A and also a point of intersection of the city limit boundary, for a corner; 
Thence, north along the eastern boundary of Tract No. 88A, also the city limit boundary to its inflection point and continuing north which course follows the eastern boundary of a 100-acre Tract No. 89, a 57.4 acre Tract No. 89A; a 128.55-acre Tract No. 90; a 100-acre Tract No. 91; a 70-acre tract No. 92, as shown on the plats, maps and in the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, and passes through the eastern corners of said tracts to the southeast corner of the 26 acre tract No. 93, owned by John Suggs, and Ralph Gilbert as described in Vol. 1127, Page 626 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas for a corner; 
Thence, west along the southern boundary of Tract No. 93 to its southwest corner and intersection with the east boundary line of a 15.47 acre Tract No. 93A owned by Suggs and Gilbert as described in Vol. 1127, Page 626 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas and continuing west along its southern boundary line to a point of intersection with the southern boundary of the so called 244-acre Merchant Tract No. 76 out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant as described in Vol. 567, Page 635 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas also being the city limit boundary described by a 234.63 acre Annexation No. 25 of the City Ordinance No. 73-502, for a corner; 
Thence, south along the eastern boundary of Tract 76 and Tract 77 also the aforesaid city limit boundary which course follows the western boundary of said Tracts 92, 91, 90, 89A, 89 and 88B and passes through the western corners of said tracts to the point of beginning and containing 689 acres of land more or less. 
Parcel No. 2. Beginning at a point of intersection of the city limit boundaries as described by a 1,000-acre Annexation No. 27 in the City Ordinance No. 74-522 and recorded in the Code of Ordinance Records of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, same being the northeast corner of a 300-acre Tract No. 75 owned by Phillip G. and Theodore H. Harrison described in Vol. 877, Page 40 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, same point lies in the northern boundary of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant Abstract No. 66, for a corner; 
Thence, south along the eastern boundary of Tract No. 75 also said city limit boundary to an intersection with the northern boundary line and northeast corner of so called 244-acre Merchant Tract No. 76 as described in Vol. 567, page 635 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, for a corner; 
Thence, east along the northern boundary line of said Tract No. 76 also the said city limit to a point which marks the northeastern corner of Tract No. 76 and also the intersection of the eastern boundary of Tract 76 with the southern boundary of Tract No. 76A and which also marks the southeastern corner of Tract No. 76A, a 28-acre tract owned by A. R. Cline, described in Vol. 901, Page 351 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, for a corner; 
Thence, north along the eastern boundary of Tract No. 76A to an intersection with the southeastern corner of Tract No. 76C, a 10-acre tract owned by E. Breeding et al, as described in Vol. 179, Page 136 of the Deed Records and continuing north along the eastern boundary of Tract No. 76C to a point which marks the northeastern corner of Tract No. 76C and also the northern boundary of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract 66, for a corner; 
Thence, west along the northern boundary of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant Abstract No. 66 which also marks the northern boundary lines of aforesaid Tract No. 76C and 76B owned by J. D. Flewellen as described in Vol. 122, Page 399 of the Deed Records, to the point of beginning and containing 56 acres more or less. 
Parcel No. 3. Beginning at a point of intersection of the city limit boundaries, same point being the point of beginning of description for a 603-acre Disannexation No. 3 of the City Ordinance No. 76-586 and recorded in Code of Ordinance Records of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, said point also lies south 87° 18' 24? west 680 feet from the southwest corner of the 300-acre tract owned by Phillip G. and Theodore H. Harrison, and known as Tract 75 out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract 66; 
Thence, along the city limit boundary description of said disannexation, grid bearing north 01° 48' 06? West approximately 7,500 feet to an intersection with the common league line of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Abstract 66 and the Asa Mitchell Abstract 96 also the common boundary line of the Texas Prison Retrieve State Farm and Tract 12A-1A for a corner; 
Thence, southwesterly along the common line between the Asa Mitchell Grant and J. E. Groce Grant also the Texas Prison Retrieve State Farm and Tract 12A-1A to the northeast corner of Airport Tract 74E, a 22.726 acre Tract described in Vol. 1645, Page 878 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along said common abstracts and property tract lines, the following courses; S 87°16'54? W, 200.03 feet and S 87°16'13? W, 1,700 feet to the northwest corner of the Airport Tract 74C-1A, a 9.20 acre tract described in Vol. 1961, Page 407 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, for a corner; 
Thence, S 01° 48' 06? E along the west line of the County Airport Tracts, 4,924.42 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence, S 01°36'39? E, 1,500.01 feet to the southwest corner of Airport Tract 74D, a 124.07 acre tract described in Vol. 1592, Page 582 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, for a corner; 
Thence, extended the west line of the Airport Tracts S 01°48'06? E, 6,500 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence, west approximately 300 feet to an intersection with the northeasterly waters' edge of Oyster Creek for a corner, and a corner on the south line of said Retrieve Farm; 
Thence, downstream following the meanders of the northerly waters' edge of said Oyster Creek and south line of the prison farm to a point of connection with the city limit boundary described by Annexation No. 26 Ordinance No. 73-504 and its protraction by Disannexation No. 4 of Ordinance No. 78-676; 
Thence, continuing downstream the northerly waters' edge concurrently along the south line of the prison farm and said city limit boundary to a point for the northwesternmost corner of Dunbar Park for a corner; 
Thence, continuing east and concurrently along the south line of said prison farm and city limit boundary to the southeast corner of said Prison Farm at its intersection with the west boundary line of a 450 acre tract No. 78 in the J. E. Groce Abstract No. 66 as recorded in the Plat and Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas, for a corner; 
Thence, south along the west boundary of said Tract No. 78 and also the city limit boundary to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of State Highway FM 2004 for a corner; 
Thence, northeasterly along the right-of-way of said highway also the city limit boundary to its intersection with the east boundary of said Tract 78 for a corner same being a corner of the city limit boundary as described by a 393.35 acre Annexation No. 24 of the city Ordinance No. 72-485; 
Thence, north along the east boundary line of said Tract 78 also the said city limit boundary to the northeast corner of said Tract 78 same being the southeast corner of aforesaid 300-acre Tract No. 75 and beginning corner of city limit boundary described by 1,000-acre Annexation No. 27 of the City Ordinance No. 74-522; 
Thence, west along the southern boundary line of said Tract No. 75 also the said city limit boundary to the southwest corner of said tract; 
Thence, continuing south 87°18'24? west 680 feet also the city limit boundary to the point of beginning and containing 1,800 acres more or less. 
Save and except an airport tract of land containing 267.25 acres of land and described as follows: 
Commencing at a concrete monument for the southeast corner of the Asa Mitchell League Abstract 96 and the northeast corner of the Texas Retrieve State Farm Tract; 
Thence, along the common line of the said Abstract 96 and the north line of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Abstract 66 S 87°23'36? W 1,461.94 feet and S 87°16'54? W 338.03 feet to the point of beginning and corner of the said airport tract; 
Thence, S 01°48'06? E, 4,951.32 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence, S 88°11'54? W, 395.00 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence, S 01°48'06? E, 1,500.00 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence, S 88°11'54? W, 1,510.00 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence, N 01°36'39? W, 1,500.01 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence, N 01°48'06? W, 4,948.12 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence, along the common line of said Abstracts 96 and 66, N 87°16'13? E, 1,700 feet and N 87°16'54? E, 200.03 feet to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 90-1128, § 1, 6-18-90; Code 1958, § 1-40)  
Sec. 12-55. - Annexation number thirty-five. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, and Section 43.052 of the Local Government Code, and in Section 1.03 of the City of Lake Jackson City Charter, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
All that certain 78.728 acres, more or less, lying adjacent to, being contiguous with, and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, said land being out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and out of the Stephen F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, described by metes and bounds using survey terminology referring to the Texas Coordinate System, South Central Zone, except the distances which are horizontal ground level lengths as follows: 
Commencing at the position x = 3,133,754.185 and y = 449,133.760 which is a point on the common line between the J. E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66 and the S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, being located north 86° 50' 40? east, 178.24 feet from the most eastern northeast interior corner of the S. F. Austin League, Abstract No. 19, Brazoria County, Texas, said commencing point being the place of beginning of that certain 123 acres, more or less, described in Tract Three of Annexation Number 32 as printed in Lake Jackson Code, General Provisions section 1-38 [section 12-52 of this Code]; 
Thence north 67° 25' 04? east, 298.63 feet coincident with the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the northwest right-of-way line of a 95-foot drainage ditch known as Diversion Ditch Number 1 to the place of beginning of this 78.728-acre tract; 
Thence north 67° 25' 04? east, 1416.76 feet coincident with the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the northwest right-of-way line of said 95-foot drainage ditch known as Diversion Ditch Number 1 to a point for corner in the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas as described in Lake Jackson Code, General Provisions, section 1-28 [section 12-42 of this Code], Annexation No. 22, said point being in the northeast right-of-way of Flag Lake Drainage Ditch; 
Thence, coincident with the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas as described in said Annexation No. 22, and the northeast line of said Flag Lake drainage ditch along the following courses and distances; 
South 30° 49' 22? east, 22.92 feet; South 40° 04' 15? east, 90.20 feet; South 36° 46' 00? east, 111.06 feet; South 33° 03' 25? east, 99.93 feet; South 32° 51' 12? east, 321.04 feet; South 28° 36' 30? east, 103.25 feet; South 34° 32' 26? east, 56.06 feet; South 31° 43' 26? east, 445.09 feet; South 24° 09' 25? east, 74.83 feet; South 16° 37' 13? east, 192.24 feet; South 09° 39' 23? east, 184.83 feet; South 29° 13' 37? east, 231.23 feet; South 20° 07' 50? east, 75.99 feet; South 10° 21' 55? east, 346.09 feet; 
Thence south 64° 45' 14? west, 304.96 feet to a concrete monument for a corner; 
Thence north 16° 07' 45? west, 52.43 feet to a point for a corner; 
Thence north 10° 21' 55? west, 50.75 feet to a concrete monument for a corner; 
Thence south 64° 45' 14? west, 891.08 feet to a concrete monument for a corner; 
Thence north 43° 21' 00? west, 1144.94 feet to a concrete monument for a corner; 
Thence north 20° 11' 30? west, 1201.89 feet to the place of beginning, containing 78.728 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 90-1133, § 1, 9-10-90; Code 1958, § 1-41)  
Sec. 12-56. - Annexation number thirty-six. 
The following described land and territory owned by the city and lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a], and Section 43.052 of the Local Government Code [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.052], and in Section 1.03 of the City of Lake Jackson City Charter, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
All of a 400-acre tract of land out of the American Savings and Loan Association 1,064.0725-acre tract in the S. F. Austin Survey, Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas, lying adjacent to, being contiguous with, and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas as follows: 
Commencing at a ¾-inch iron pipe found at the southeast corner of the City of Lake Jackson call 0.22-acre tract of land as recorded in Volume 1397, Page 824, Deed Records, Brazoria County, Texas, said point also being the lower northeast corner of the aforementioned 1,064.0726 acre tract; 
Thence south 01 degree 03 minutes 23.8 seconds east along the east line of said 1,064.0726 acre tract, 740.05 feet to a one-inch iron pipe set on said line for the northeast corner and place of beginning of the herein described 400-acre tract of land; 
Thence continuing south 01 degree 03 minutes 23.8 seconds east along the east line of said 1,064.0726 acre tract at 826.37 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, at 1,451.55 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line at the point of intersection and the east line of said 1,064.0726-acre tract and the northeast line of the United Gas Pipeline Company fifty-foot wide easement as recorded in Volume 585, Page 446, Deed Records, Brazoria County, Texas, at 1,522.90 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line at the southwest line of said easement, at 3110.57 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, at 3,948.57 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, and continuing for a total distance of 4,773.57 feet to a one-inch iron pipe set for the southeast corner of the herein described 400-acre tract, same being the southeast corner of the aforementioned 1,064.0726-acre tract (two-inch iron pipe set in 1982 destroyed); 
Thence north 77 degrees 40 minutes 21 seconds west along the southerly line of said 1,064.0726-acre tract, at 1,149.93 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, at 2,083.50 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, at 3,049.62 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, and continuing for a total distance of 4,111.74 feet to a one-inch iron pipe set on said line of said for the southwesternmost corner of the herein described 400-acre tract; 
Thence north 00 degrees 26 minutes 00 seconds west along a line establishing the west line of the herein described tract, at 735.44 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, at 1,650.57 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, at 2,926.24 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, and continuing for a total distance of 3,865.08 feet to a one-inch iron pipe set for the northwesternmost corner of the herein described tract; 
Thence north 89 degrees 34 minutes 00 seconds east along the line establishing the northerly line of the herein described tract, at 724.28 feet pass a one-inch iron pipe set on said line, and continuing for a total distance of 2,234.22 feet to a one-inch iron pipe set for a reentry corner to the herein described tract; 
Thence north 45 degrees 41 minutes 34 seconds west, 408.51 feet to a 5/8 -inch iron rod set at an angle point; 
Thence north 45 degrees 37 minutes 34 seconds west, 727.17 feet to a one-inch iron pipe set on the southerly line of State Highway 332 for a corner; 
Thence north 89 degrees 34 minutes 00 seconds east along the south line of State Highway 332, same being the north line of the aforementioned 1,064.0726-acre tract, 283.80 feet to a one-inch iron pipe set for a corner; 
Thence south 45 degrees 37 minutes 34 seconds east along the easterly line of the United Gas Pipeline Company fifty-foot wide easement, 525.70 feet to a 5/8 -inch iron rod set at an angle point; 
Thence south 45 degrees 41 minutes 34 seconds east along said line, 610.21 feet to a one-inch iron pipe set in the easterly line of said fifty-foot wide easement for a reentry corner to the herein described tract; 
Thence north 89 degrees 34 minutes east along the north line of the herein described tract, 1,439.92 feet to the place of beginning and containing 400 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 90-1147, § 1, 1-7-91; Code 1958, § 1-42)  
Sec. 12-57. - Annexation number thirty-seven. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a], and Section 43.052 of the Local Government Code [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.052], and in Section 1.03 of the City of Lake Jackson City Charter, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such City, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
All that certain 18.931 acre tract lying adjacent to, being contiguous with, and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas and being out of the Stephen F. Austin 5 League Grant, Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas and being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows (bearings and coordinates are referenced to the Texas Coordinate System, South Central Zone, distances are horizontal surface lengths, Sf = 0.999876): 
Beginning at a concrete monument marking the most southerly corner of a 66.183 acre subdivision as recorded in Volume 18 at Pages 305 and 306 of the Plat Records of Brazoria County, Texas, said monument also marks the most southerly corner of a 78.728 acre tract filed in Annexation Number 35 at Page 76.28.15 of the Lake Jackson Code, General Provisions, Section 1-41 [section 12-55 of this Code] and being at position x = 3,135,230.51 and y = 447,288.11; 
Thence North 64°45'14? East, 891.08 feet coincident with the south line of the said 66.183 acre tract and coincident with the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas as described in said Annexation Number 35 to a concrete monument set for corner; 
Thence South 10°21'55? East, 50.74 feet coincident with the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas as described in said Annexation Number 35 to a 5/8 ? iron rod set for corner; 
Thence South 16°07'45? East, 52.43 feet coincident with the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas as described in said Annexation Number 35 to a 5/8 ? iron rod set for corner; 
Thence North 64°45'14? East, 304.96 feet coincident with the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, as described in said Annexation Number 35 to a point for corner in the northeast right-of-way line of Flag Lake drainage ditch as described in Volume 1255 at Pages 577—579 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence coincident with the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas as described in Tract 3 of Annexation Number 32 as printed in Lake Jackson Code, General Provisions, Section 1-38 [section 12-52 of this Code] and coincident with the northeast right-of-way line of said Flag Lake drainage ditch along the following courses and distances: 
South 10° 21' 55? East, 11.05 feet, South 16° 07' 45? East, 42.84 feet, South 44° 44' 43? East, 340.33 feet, South 37° 01' 40? East, 42.02 feet, and South 30° 53' 13? East, 85.47 feet, 
Thence South 46°39'00? West, at 204.83 feet pass a concrete monument set in the southeast right-of-way line of said Flag Lake drainage channel, at 307.24 feet pass a 5/8 ? iron rod, and continue to a total distance of 1044.83 feet to a concrete monument set for corner; 
Thence North 43°21'00? West, 973.67 feet to the Place of Beginning, containing 18.931 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 93-1232, § 1, 3-1-93)  
Sec. 12-58. - Annexation number thirty-eight. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a], and Section 43.052 of the Local Government Code [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.052], and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such City, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Parcel 1. All that certain 23.57728 acres of land lying and situated in that certain tract of land 4,167.6 acres in the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, and the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, Brazoria County, Texas, and described in metes and bounds, using survey terminology relative to the Texas Coordinate System, South Central Zone, except the distances which are the horizontal ground level lengths, as follows: 
Beginning at the position x = 3,127,544.80 and y = 466,448.49, at which is set a concrete monument, for the Northwest corner, which is a point situated in the North line of said 4,167.6 acres, and also the Northeast corner of a tract of 24.92957 acres, from which the point of intersection of said North line with the West waters' edge of Oyster Creek, as determined by survey in March and July, 1970, bears azimuth 266° 31' 25.4? a distance of 860.099 feet; 
Thence, with said North line, azimuth 266° 31' 25.4?, at 469.450 feet to the position x = 3,128,013.33 and y = 466,476.95 which is the point of intersection of said North line with the common line between the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, and the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66, pass said point of intersection and continue azimuth 266° 31' 25.4?, at 819.099 feet to the position of x = 3,128,362.29 and y = 466,498.15 which is a point in said North line marked with an old 1-¼? iron pipe, pass said iron pipe and continue azimuth 266° 31' 25.4? in all a distance of 860.099 feet to the position x = 3,128,403.21 and y = 466,500.63 which, is the point of intersection of said North line with the West waters' edge of Oyster Creek, as determined by survey in March and July, 1970; 
Thence, with the West or right descending waters' edge of Oyster Creek as determined by survey in March and July, 1970, downstream the following meanders: 
Azimuth 7° 56' 36? a distance of 6.079 feet; Azimuth 334° 41' 32? a distance of 110.896 feet; Azimuth 335° 39' 12? a distance of 87.359 feet; Azimuth 330° 10' 40? a distance of 111.936 feet; Azimuth 327° 57' 03? a distance of 100.061 feet; Azimuth 331° 22' 01? a distance of 97.551 feet; Azimuth 321° 18' 28? a distance of 24.910 feet; Azimuth 323° 32' 38? a distance of 100.11 feet; Azimuth 322° 24' 30? a distance of 100.041 feet; Azimuth 318° 58' 33? a distance of 66.572 feet in all to the position x = 3,128,820.97 and y = 465,817.93, which is the point of intersection with the Northwest line of Tract B of Lake Jackson Farms Subdivision, for the East corner; 
Thence, with the Northwest line of said Tract B, Azimuth 27° 44' 16.5?, at 118.651 feet to the position x = 3,128,765.76 and y = 465,712.93 which is a point situated in said line on the West or right descending bank of Oyster Creek, reset a concrete monument, pass said concrete monument and continue Azimuth 27° 44' 16.5? at 367.291 feet to the position x = 3,128,650.05 and y = 465,492.89 which is the point of intersection with an existing 4? pipeline, pass said pipeline and continue Azimuth 27° 44' 16.5? in all a distance of 518.651 feet to the position x = 3,128,579.61 and y = 465,358.94, which is the point of intersection with the Northeasterly right-of-way line of Bayou Road, reset a concrete monument for the South Corner; 
Thence, with the Northeasterly right-of-way line of Bayou Road, along a curve to the left and Westerly with a radius of 2,135.07 feet, at a distance of 554.083 feet, arc length, to the position x = 3,128,061.43 and y = 465,550.53 which is the point of intersection with the common line between said Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues and S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, pass said point of intersection and continue with said right-of-way line and curve, in all a distance of 1,032.202 feet, arc length, to the positions x = 3,127,587.38 and y = 465,604.05, which is a point of reverse curvature in the Northerly right-of-way line of Bayou Road and the Southeast corner of a tract of 24.92957 acres, at which is a reset concrete monument, for the Southwest corner of this tract; 
Thence, with the East line of above mentioned 24.92957 acres Azimuth 177° 06' 48.3? at 834.09 feet pass a four inch (4?) pipeline, in all a distance of 845.620 feet to the position x = 3,127,544.80 and y = 466,448.49 and the point of beginning, lineating and enclosing 23.57728 acres of land, of which an area of 9.47144 acres is in the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 19, and an area of 14.10584 acres is in the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract No. 66; 
Parcel 2. 6.581 acres, more or less, of land and being all of that certain tract, piece or parcel of land known as Tract B, (less and except the road right-of-way 100 feet in width which traverses said tract) lying and being situated in the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract 66, Brazoria County, Texas, in the Lake Jackson Farms Subdivision and in accordance with the official plat of said Lake Jackson Farms Subdivision dated the 6th day of July, 1945, which plat is of record in the Plat Records of said County, and more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
Beginning at the northeasterly corner of said Tract A, which is the intersection of common line between Tract A and Tract B and the west waters' edge of Oyster Creek; 
Thence, with the west or right descending waters' edge of Oyster Creek, downstream the following meanders: 
South 37° 55' 55? east a distance of 161.82 feet; South 39° 32' 28? east a distance of 99.95 feet; South 34° 58' 57? east a distance of 100.44 feet; South 30° 28' 42? east a distance of 101.56 feet; South 33° 17' 08? east a distance of 100.79 feet; South 45° 50' 19? east a distance of 100.33 feet; South 42° 50' 02? east a distance of 72.81 feet; South 51° 36' 45? east a distance of 100.10 feet; South 58° 28' 37? east a distance of 100.09 feet; South 61° 11' 02? east a distance of 100.68 feet; South 54° 28' 10? east a distance of 12.96 feet; which is the point of intersection with the northwest line of the Plantation Subdivision, for a corner; 
Thence, with the northwest line of the Plantation Subdivision, South 27° 44' 30? west a distance of 182.00 feet to a point in the northeasterly right-of-way of Lake Road for a corner; 
Thence, along said right-of-way north 62° 21' 37? west a distance of 980.05 feet, to a concrete monument, which is also the southeast corner of said Tract A, and point of curvature, of a curve to the left, for a corner; 
Thence north 27° 44' 16? east along the common line between Tract A & Tract B a distance of 518.65 feet to the point of beginning, being 6.58 acres of land more or less. 
(Ord. No. 94-1281, § 1, 2-7-94)  
Sec. 12-59. - Annexation number thirty-nine. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, and Section 43.052 of the Local Government Code, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such City, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to-wit: 
All that certain 718 acres more or less lying adjacent to an adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, said land being out of the S.F. Austin 5 Leagues Survey, Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas, comprised of 664.2926 acres out of The American Savings and Loan called 1064.0726 acre tract, also out of the A.E. Fredrich called 1682.4 acre tract described in Volume 190 Pages 851-859 of the official records of the Brazoria County, Texas, and 54 acres more or less out of lots 19, 20 and 21 of Stern and Stern Subdivision, Division 6, S.F. Austin 5 League Grant Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas, according to the map or plat recorded in volume 3, page 95 of the map records of Brazoria County, Texas, and more particularly described as follows; 
BEGINNING at a ½" iron rod for the northeast corner of the City of Lake Jackson called 0.22 acre tract as recorded in Volume 1397, Page 824, deed records of Brazoria County, Texas, said point lies in the southerly right-of-way line of State Highway 332 and bears S 87°-16'20" W, 99.71 feet from a concrete monument lying on the southerly right-of-way line of S.H. 332 and the westerly bank of Buffalo Camp Bayou; 
THENCE S 01°-03'-23.8" E, 800.05 feet along the east line of said 1064.07626 acre tract also the west line of the City of Lake Jackson called 482 acre Wilderness Park Tract described in Volume 1345, Pages 798-800, deed records of Brazoria County, Texas, also being the City Limit boundary established by Annexation # 29 of the City of Lake Jackson Ordinance Records for a corner also being a 1" iron pipe and northeast corner of the City of Lake Jackson called 400 acre tract described in Volume 18, Pages 301-302, of the map records of Brazoria County, Texas; 
THENCE along the boundary lines of said 400 acre tract also being the City Limit boundary line established by Annexation # 36 of the Ordinance Records of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, the following calls; 
S 89°-34'-00" E, 3886.69 feet for a corner also being a 1" iron pipe and northwest corner of said 400 acre tract, S 00°-26'-00" E, 3865.08 feet for a corner also being a 1" iron pipe and southwest corner of said 400 acre tract same being a point on line in the common line of aforesaid 482 acre and 1064.0726 acre tract; 
THENCE along the boundary line of said tracts also being the City Limits Boundary Line established by Annexation # 29 of the Ordinance Record of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, the following calls; 
N 77°-40'-21" W, 6137.68 feet for a corner also being a 2" iron pipe and corner of aforesaid 482 acre and 1064.0726 acre tracts, S 83°-12'-18" W, 598.41 feet for a corner also being a 1 ½" iron pipe and southwest corner of said 1064.0726 acre tract, same being a point on line on the 482 acre tract; 
THENCE along the boundary line of said 1064.0726 acre tract, N 01°-52'-55" W, 3315.97 feet for a corner also being a 1 ½" iron pipe and northwest corner of said 1064.0726 acre tract same being a point on line in the northerly line of the aforesaid 1682.4 acre tract; 
THENCE along the northerly line of said 1682.4 acre and 1064.0726 acre tract the following calls; 
N 88°-37'-41" E, 1110.53 feet for corner also being an iron pipe and point of line inflection corner of said tracts, N 87°-37'-28" E 3610.24 feet for corner also being an iron pipe and point line inflection corner of said tracts and same being the southwest corner of lot 19 of the Stern & Stern Subdivision a called 39.1 acre tract described in Volume 1185, Page 734 the deed records of Brazoria County, Texas; 
THENCE N 2°-53'-10" W, 1765.98 feet for corner also being a point on the arc of a curve to the right with a radius of 1096.28 feet and the southwesterly right-of-way line of State Highway 332. 
THENCE along the southerly right-of-way line of State Highway 332, the following calls as described in TxDot right-of-way map for State Highway 332 widening project; southeasterly along arc of said curve to the right, 296.43 feet for corner also being the point of tangency of aforesaid curve to the right, S 58°-25'-08" E, 2701.8 feet for a corner, to a point of curvature of a curve to the left with a radius of 766.78 feet, southeasterly along arc of said curve to the left, 189.11 feet for corner also being an iron pipe and point on curve and point of intersection with the northerly line of aforesaid 1682.4 acres and 1064.0726 acre tract and also being the southerly line of aforesaid lots 19, 20 and 21, 
THENCE continuing southeasterly along the north line of the 1682.4 acre and 1064.0726 acre tracts also being the southerly right-of-way line of State Highway 332, the following calls as described by TxDot right-of-way map; 
Southeasterly along the arc of said curve to the left with radius of 766.72 feet, 228.21 feet for a corner also being the point of compound curve of aforesaid curve and a curve to the left with a radius of 1206.28 feet, southeasterly along the arc of said curve to the left with radius of 1206.28 feet, 177.32 feet for a corner also being the point of tangency of said curve, N 87°-16'-20" E, 2109.44 feet for corner and point line inflection corner of said tracts and right-of-way, N 89°-33'-50" E, 500.20 feet for corner and point line inflection corner of said tracts and right-of-way, N 87°-16'-20" E, 223.06 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING and containing 718 acres of land more or less. 
Save and except 7.4 acres which is that portion of the above described tract which is within the incorporated limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, as established by Annexation # 36 of the Ordinance Records of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 96-1402, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 12-60. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12-61. - Annexation number forty-one. 
All that certain James L. Demland 19.931 acre tract of land in the Stephen F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract 19, Brazoria County, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
Parcel One 
A 4.982 acre tract of land in the Stephen F. Austin 5 Leagues, Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas; said 4.982 acres being the easterly portion of a 24.92957 acre tract which was conveyed by The Dow Chemical Company to Barbara R. Moffitt by Deed dated the 17 th day of August, 1970, and recorded in Volume 1073, Page 178, of the Deed of Records of Brazoria County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
BEGINNING at a concrete monument marking the Northeast corner of the herein described tract and the Northeast corner of said 24.92957 acre tract; said concrete monument being located at position X = 3,127,544.80 and Y = 466,448.49; 
THENCE South 02° 53' 11.7" East, a distance of 845.620 feet along the East boundary line of the herein described tract and the East line of said 24.92957 acre tract to a concrete monument marking the Southeast corner of the herein described tract and said 24.92957 acre tract; said concrete monument being located on the North boundary line of Bayou Road and being located at position X = 3,127,587.38 and Y = 465,604.05; 
THENCE in a Westerly direction along the North boundary line of said Bayou Road, said North boundary line being on a curve to the right having a radius of 3,715.19 feet, an arc distance of 260.993 feet to a ½ inch iron rod set for the Southwest corner of the herein described tract; said arc having a chord bearing and distance of North 87° 58' 21.9" West, 260.946 feet; 
THENCE North 02° 53' 11.7" West, a distance of 820.592 feet along the West boundary line of the herein described tract to a ½ inch iron rod set for the Northwest corner of the herein described tract in the North line of the aforementioned 24.92957 acre tract; 
THENCE North 86° 31' 25.4" East, a distance of 260.00 feet along the North line of the herein described tract and the North line of said 24.92957 acre tract to the place of beginning, containing 4.982 acres, more or less. 
Parcel Two 
BEGINNING at a ½ inch iron rod set for the Northwest corner of the herein described tract on the North line of the aforementioned 24.92957 acre tract; said ½ inch iron rod being North 86° 31' 25.4" East, a distance of 369.30 feet from a concrete monument marking the Northwest corner of said 24.92957 acre tract; said concrete monument being located at position X = 3,126,019.30 and Y = 466,355.82; 
THENCE North 86° 31' 25.4" East, a distance of 899.21 feet along the North line of the herein described tract and the North line of the aforementioned 24.92957 acre tract to a ½ inch iron rod set for the Northeast corner of the herein described tract; said ½ inch iron rod being South 86° 31' 25.4" West, a distance of 260.00 feet from a concrete monument marking the Northeast corner of said 24.92957 acre tract; said concrete monument being located at position X = 3,127,544.80 and Y = 466,448.49; 
THENCE South 02° 53' 11.7" East, a distance of 820.592 feet along the East line of the herein described tract to a ½ inch iron rod set for the Southeast corner of the herein described tract in the North boundary line of Bayou Road; said North boundary line of Bayou Road being in a curve at this point, having a radius of 3,715.19 feet; 
THENCE in a Westerly direction along said North boundary line of Bayou Road following said curve to the right, an arc distance of 545.375 feet to a concrete monument marking the end of said curve; said arc having a chord bearing and distance of North 81° 45' 17.5" West, 544.885 feet; said concrete monument being located at position X = 3,126,787.46 and Y = 465,691.41; 
THENCE North 77° 27' 15.3" West continuing along the North boundary line of Bayou Road, a distance of 220.630 feet to a concrete monument marking the beginning of a curve to the left on said North boundary line of Bayou Road, having a radius of 1,843.83 feet; said concrete monument being located at position X = 3,126,572.12 and Y = 465,739.33; 
THENCE continuing along said North boundary line of Bayou Road in a Westerly direction along said curve to the left, an arc distance of 150.213 feet to a ½ inch iron rod set for the Southwest corner of the herein described tract; said arc having a chord bearing and distance of North 79° 52' 58.9" West, 150.171 feet; 
THENCE North 03° 24' 13.7" West, a distance of 613.658 feet along the West boundary line of the herein described tract to the place of beginning; and containing 14.949 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 00-1641, § 1, 10-23-2000)  
Sec. 12-62. - Annexation number forty-two. 
The following described land and territory lying adjacent to and adjoining the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby added and annexed to the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 970a of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, and Section 43.052 of the Local Government Code, and the said territory hereinafter described shall hereafter be included within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such City, at the various points contiguous to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to include said area within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to-wit: 
All that certain 687 acre tract of land in the Jared E. Groce 5 Leagues, Abstract 66, and the S. F. Austin 5 League Grant, Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
Parcel Description 
An approximate 687 acre parcel of land herein described for annexation purposes and out of a called 987.49 acre tract and a called 7424.4 acre tract located in Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant Abstract 66 and the S. F. Austin 5 League Grant Abstract 19, Brazoria County, Texas and by metes a bounds described as follows; 
Commencing at a called ¾" iron rod with a "Dannenbaum Engineering" cap for a reference point, and said rod being on the West right of way line of State Highway 288 for the called Northeast corner of said 987.49 acre tract of land conveyed to the State of Texas Permanent School Fund as described by instrument recorded in County Clerks File No. (04) 028-412 of the Official Records of Brazoria County, Texas and being out of that certain 7424.4 acre tract of land conveyed from T. Martin et ux to the Prison Commission of Texas in deed dated February 1, 1918 and recorded in Volume 145, Page 242 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas: 
Thence a called S 83°41'43"W along the North boundary line of the said 987.49 acre tract of land, at a called 2049.26 feet pass a fence corner for reference point, and continuing with said called bearing along the North boundary line and a called existing fence line an approximate total distance of 3500 feet to an intersection with the extended west line called S 01°48'06"E of the Brazoria County Airport Tract 74D, a 124.07 acre tract of land described in Volume 1592, Page 582 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas same extended line being the described West City Limit boundary Line of Parcel No. 3 in annexation No. 34 of the City Ordinance No. 90-1128 and recorded in the Code of Ordinances Records of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas and the Place of Beginning of the annexation parcel herein described; 
Thence, continuing the called S 83°41'43"W along the North boundary line of the said 987.49 acre tract of land and the existing fence, at a called 811.77 feet pass a called ¾" iron rod with "Dannenbaum Engineering" cap for a reference point and continuing along said bearing at a called 891.77 feet pass the called gradient boundary line of Oyster Creek and angle point of the described West boundary line of said 987.49 acre tract, and continuing along the extension of the North boundary line of the said 987.49 acre tract at the called bearing of S 83°41'43"W and crossing Oyster Creek, and the common line of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant Abstract 66 and S. F. Austin 5 League Grant Abstract 19 in sequence for a approximate total distance of 5500 feet to the centerline of a private road in the Texas Department of Corrections Scott unit for corner point of the annexation parcel herein described and said corner point lies southeasterly and approximately 1150 feet from its wye intersection with County Road 209; 
Thence Southeasterly along the approximate centerline alignment of said private road, an approximate total distance of 7400 feet to its intersection with the South boundary line of said called 7424.4 acre tract conveyed to the called Prison Commission of Texas (TDC Scott Unit) same being the North Boundary line of the Jackson Oaks II Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas recorded in Volume 21, Page 319-320 of the Plat Records of Brazoria County, Texas for corner point of the annexation parcel herein described; 
Thence a called N 81°31'25"E, along the South Boundary line of said 7424.4 acre tract and North Boundary line of said Jackson Oaks II Subdivision, at approximate 736 feet pass a called brass disk in concrete for the Northeast corner of said subdivision and the Southwest corner of Jackson oaks Estates Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas recorded in Volume 19, Page 309-312 of the Plat Records of Brazoria County, Texas, at an additional called 861.51 feet pass the Northeast corner of said Jackson Oaks Estates Subdivision in all an approximate total distance of 1600 feet to its intersection with the called Northeasterly water's edge of Oyster Creek and described West City Limit Boundary line of Parcel No. 3 in Annexation No. 34 of the City Ordinance No. 90-1128 for corner of the annexation parcel herein described; 
Thence Northwesterly and upstream following the meanders of the called Northeasterly edge of Oyster Creek and also the said described West City Limit Boundary line a distance of approximate 3,100 feet to an angle point and departure point from said Oyster Creek for corner of the annexation parcel herein described; 
Thence along a called N 01°48'06"W and the extended line of the Brazoria County Airport Tract 74D and the described West City Limit Boundary line of Parcel No. 3 in Annexation No. 34 of the City Ordinance No. 90-1128 an approximate total distance of 4550 feet to the Place of Beginning and containing an approximate 687 acres of land. 
(Ord. No. 06-1803, § 1, 1-17-2006)  
Secs. 12-63—12-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DISANNEXATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-101. - Disannexation number one. 
The 1.67 acre tract of land lying and being situated in the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
A tract containing 1.67 acres of land, more or less, out of a part of Tract No. 551, Brazos Coast Investment Company Subdivision No. 14, A. Calvit League, Abstract No. 49, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the south line of said Tract No. 551, said beginning point being 10 feet from and at right angles to the west right-of-way line of State Highway No. 288; 
Thence West along the said south line of said Tract No. 551 for a distance of 300.00 feet for a corner; 
Thence North 410.17 feet to an intersection with a line 10 feet southwesterly from and parallel to the northeast line of said Tract No. 551 for a corner; 
Thence S 44° 24' E along the said line 10 feet from and parallel to the Northeast line of Tract 551 for a distance of 304.10 feet for a corner; 
Thence S 24° 20' E continuing along the said line 10 feet from and parallel to the Northeast line of said Tract No. 551 for a distance of 211.71 feet to the place of beginning, containing 1.67 acres of land, more or less; 
Be and the same is hereby discontinued as a part of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 1, 12-27-62; Code 1958, § 1-51)  
Sec. 12-102. - Disannexation number two. 
The 1.54 acre tract of land lying and being situated within the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, as shown by the plat attached hereto and more specifically described by metes and bounds as follows: 
A strip of land out of the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of the Brazosport Shopping Center, said point also being the intersection of the south line of Stanford Road and the west line of the Lake Jackson Loop Road; 
Thence in an easterly direction along the common league line between the J. E. Groce 5 Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 66, and the S. F. Austin 5 Leagues Grant, Abstract No. 19, to an intersection with the centerline of the Lake Jackson Loop Road right-of-way, for a corner; 
Thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of said Lake Jackson Loop Road right-of-way a distance of 850 ft., more or less, for a corner; 
Thence 53° 06' 25? W to the intersection with the centerline of Plantation Drive right-of-way (F.M. 1605) for a corner; 
Thence in a northwesterly direction along said centerline of Plantation Drive (F.M. 1605) right-of-way to the intersection with the centerline of Flag Lake Road right-of-way for a corner; 
Thence south along said centerline of the Flag Lake Road right-of-way a distance of 350 ft. for a corner; 
Thence west to the west right-of-way line of Flag Lake Road for a corner; 
Thence north 400 ft., more or less, to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of Plantation Drive (F.M. 1605) for a corner; 
Thence southeasterly along the northerly right-of-way line of said Plantation Drive to the most southerly corner of the Brazosport Shopping Center for a corner; 
Thence N 53 deg. 06' 25? E 81.80 ft., more or less, for a corner; 
Thence northerly along the west right-of-way line of Lake Jackson Loop Road to the place of beginning, containing 1.54 acres of land, more or less, 
Be and the same is hereby discontinued as a part of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 70-416, § 1, 7-23-70; Code 1958, § 1-52)  
Sec. 12-103. - Disannexation number three. 
The subject of this disannexation is a 603 acre tract of land out of an original 1,000 acre annexation by the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, through annexation number twenty-seven, Ordinance No. 74-522, the said 603 acre tract of land being part of the proposed new county airport, said tract lying and being situated along the northern boundary of the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, as shown by the plat attached hereto and more specifically described by metes and bounds as a portion of a tract of land out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, and the Asa Mitchell Grant, Abstract 96, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the south line of the said one thousand acre annexation. Said point of beginning lies on the westerly extension of the south line of the Phillip G. and Theodore H. Harrison 300 acre tract known as Tract 75 of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant and lies south 87° 18' 24? west (grid) 680 feet from an axle of the southwest corner of said 300 acre tract; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the south line of the one thousand acre annexation and the westerly extension of the south line of the said Harrison 300 acre tract a distance of 2,652 feet to the southwest corner of said one thousand acre annexation; 
Thence north at a 90° angle to the previous course a distance of approximately 7,300 feet to a point of intersection with the north boundary line of the Tract 74 and 74A owned by the Texas Department of Corrections; such point also being the south boundary line of the Asa Mitchell Grant, Abstract 96 and Tract 12A-1A owned by Theodore H. Harrison, Phillip G. Harrison and Elizabeth C. Harrison and such point being 1,835.5 feet east of a one inch iron pipe which marks the southwest corner of the 600 acre tract 12A-1A described in Volume 917, page 397 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence north and northeasterly following an arc which is at all times 5,280 feet from the northwest corner of the 234 acre Ted Merchant Tract No. 76 in the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract 66 crossing the north line of said Groce 5 Leagues a total distance of approximately 4,400 feet to a point for a corner which is north 01° 48' 06? west (grid bearing) of the place of beginning; 
Thence grid bearing south 01° 48' 06? east approximately 10,760 feet to the place of beginning. 
The above described tract contains 603 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 76-586, § 1, 3-15-76; Code 1958, § 1-53)  
Sec. 12-104. - Disannexation number four. 
The subject of this disannexation is a 57.34-acre tract of land out of an original 437-acre annexation by the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, through annexation number twenty-six, Ordinance No. 73-504 [section 12-46 of this Code], said 57.34-acre tract of land being part of the Lake Farms Subdivision, said tract lying and being situated along the western boundary of the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, as shown by the plat attached hereto [to Ordinance No. 78-676] and more specifically described by metes and bounds as a portion of a tract of land out of the Jared E. Groce 5 League Grant, Abstract No. 66, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, and the S. F. Austin Abstract 19, City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, described as follows: 
Beginning at a concrete monument marking the northeast corner of the Buffalo Camp Bayou Subdivision, said monument also being located in the south boundary line of the Retrieve Prison Farm of the Texas Department of Corrections, said monument also marking the northwest corner of a 24.93-acre tract; 
Thence north 86° 31' 25.4? east along and with the north boundary line of the 24.93-acre tract and the south boundary line of the Retrieve Prison Farm a distance of 1528.51 feet to a concrete monument marking the northeast corner of said 24.93-acre tract and the northwest corner of a 23.58-acre tract and being in the south boundary line of the aforementioned Retrieve Prison Farm; 
Thence north 86° 31' 25.4? east along and with the north boundary line of said 23.58-acre tract and the south boundary line of the Retrieve Prison Farm a distance of 860.10 feet to the west waters' edge of Oyster Creek; 
Thence in a southeasterly direction along and with the meanders of the west waters' edge of Oyster Creek at approximately 805.42 feet past the eastern line of the aforementioned 23.58-acre tract, to a point at the west waters' edge for a corner, said point also being the east corner of an 8.83-acre tract; 
Thence south 27° 44' 30.7? west along the east line of said 8.83-acre tract a distance of 182.00 feet to an intersection with the north right-of-way line of Lake Road for a corner; 
Thence in a northwesterly direction along and with the northern right-of-way line of Lake Road and Bayou Road, a distance of approximately 3561.35 feet to the eastern boundary of the Buffalo Camp Bayou Subdivision for a corner; 
Thence north 03° 24' 13.4? west a distance of approximately 578.20 feet to the place of beginning; 
Said tract containing 57.34 acres of land, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 78-676, § 1, 11-20-78; Code 1958, § 1-54)  
Sec. 12-105. - Disannexation number five. 
The following-described land and territory lying within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, is hereby deleted and disannexed from the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the powers provided in Article 1.04 of the City Charter, and the said territory hereinafter described shall be hereafter deleted from the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous and adjacent to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to delete said area from the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
Ninety-five (95) acres more or less, comprised of the territory mainly south of the Brazos River lying in the Stephen F. Austin Survey, Abstract No. 20, Brazoria County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows: 
From a point of intersection of the extension of the centerline of Buffalo Camp Bayou with the centerline of the Brazos River along and adjacent and contiguous with the existing southerly boundary of the city; 
Thence, along the centerline of the Brazos River and the existing southerly boundary of the city with its meanders in a southeasterly direction past a point on the eastern right-of-way line of Farm Road 2004, and continuing along the centerline of the Brazos River and the existing southerly boundary of the city with its meanders in a southeasterly direction to a point on the western boundary line extended of Tract 3P out of the Stephen F. Austin Abstract No. 20 for the place of beginning; 
Thence, in a southerly direction along the western boundary line extended of Tract 3P to an intersection with the northerly right-of-way line of County Road 400, for a corner; 
Thence, in a southerly direction along the western boundary line of Tract 3P, across County Road 400, to an intersection with the southern right-of-way line of County Road 400, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the western right-of-way line of Tract 3P to a point on the north bank of the creek known as Jones Creek, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the western right-of-way line of Tract 3P to a point on the south bank of Jones Creek, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the western boundary line of Tract 3P to a point of intersection on the north boundary line of Tract 22A which is also the southwest corner of Tract 3P, for a corner; 
Thence, in a southeasterly direction along the southern boundary line of Tract 3P and the northern boundary line of Tract 22A for approximately 1,000 feet to a point of intersection with the eastern boundary line of Tract 3P, which is also the southeastern corner of Tract 3P, for a corner; 
Thence, in a northerly direction along the eastern boundary of Tract 3P to a point on the south bank of the creek known as Jones Creek for a corner; 
Thence, continuing in a northerly direction along the eastern boundary of Tract 3P to a point on the north bank of the creek known as Jones Creek, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the eastern boundary line of Tract 3P past County Road 400, to a point of intersection with the south bank of the Brazos River, for a corner; 
Thence, continuing along the eastern boundary line extended of Tract 3P to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Brazos River, for a corner; 
Thence, upstream along the centerline of the Brazos River in a northwesterly direction to a point which is the place of beginning, containing ninety-five acres, more or less. 
The above-described and disannexed territory shall cease to be a part of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and the inhabitants thereof shall be exempt from all of the rights, privileges and obligations of all citizens and shall not be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 81-829, §§ 1, 2, 11-16-81; Code 1958, § 1-55)  
Sec. 12-106. - Disannexation number six. 
The following described territory, all of which is currently within the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, is uninhabited and unimproved, and is not necessary for city purposes, is hereby disannexed from and discontinued as a part of the city limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas: 
All that certain tract of land within the city limits of Lake Jackson, Texas, being bound on the north by the south line of that certain excluded tract described as Exception "A" in Lake Jackson, Texas, Ordinance Number 248, dated August 7, 1961, bound on the south by a line 500 feet northerly of and parallel with the city limit of Freeport, Texas, as described in Freeport, Texas, Ordinance Number 1022, dated April 25, 1960, and Number 1031, dated July 6, 1960, bound on the east and west by lines marked on the ground and more particularly described as follows (all bearings and coordinates are based on Texas State Coordinate System, South Central Zone, 0 - 1° 45' 55?): 
Commencing for reference at the southwest corner of that certain City of Lake Jackson 5 Acre Sewage Treatment plant-site described in deed to the City of Lake Jackson, dated March 29, 1954, and recorded in Volume 1280 at Page 288 of the Deed Record of Brazoria County, Texas, said 5 acre sewage treatment plant-site being referred to in the description of said Exception "A"; 
Thence coincident with a northeast boundary of said Exception "A," along the southwest line of said 5 acre tract, northwest to the intersection of the southeast right-of-way line of an easement of the City of Lake Jackson for a sewage out fall pipe being described in that certain instrument from Dow Chemical Company to the City of Lake Jackson dated March 29, 1954, and referred to in said description of Exception "A"; 
Thence coincident with the northwest boundary of said Exception "A," along the southeast line of said easement, southwest to the intersection of the centerline of the Brazos River Flood Protection Levee; 
Thence coincident with the southwest boundary of said Exception "A," along the centerline of the Brazos River Flood Protection Levee with its meanders, as described in said Ordinance 248, in a southeasterly direction to a railroad spike set for the Point of Beginning of the herein described tract of land, said point of beginning having coordinates of x = 3,140,852.07 and y = 439,604.55; 
Thence continuing coincident with the southwest and south boundary lines of said Exception "A," along the centerline of the Brazos River Flood Protection Levee with its meanders, as described in said Ordinance 248, in a southeasterly direction to a 5/8 inch iron rod set for corner at coordinate x = 3,153,189.48 and y = 435,827.11; 
Thence south 2° 28' 27? west, to a point 500 feet northerly of the northerly line of the city limit line of Freeport, Texas, as described in said Freeport, Texas, Ordinance Number 1022, said point being 500 feet northerly of the centerline of the Brazos River; 
Thence northwesterly coincident with a line 500 feet northerly of and parallel with the northerly city limit line of Freeport, Texas, as described in said Freeport, Texas, Ordinances Numbered 1022 and 1031, said northerly city limit line of Freeport, Texas, being a line in the centerline of the Brazos River, to a point for corner; 
Thence north 50° 00' 00? east to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 87-1026, § 1, 1-19-87; Code 1958, § 1-56)  
Sec. 12-107. - Disannexation number seven. 
The following described land and territory lying within the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, is hereby deleted and disannexed from the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, in accordance with the powers provided in Article 1.04 of the City Charter, and the said territory hereinafter described shall be hereafter deleted from the boundary limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. The present boundary limits of such city, at the various points contiguous and adjacent to the area hereinafter described, are altered and amended so as to delete said area from the corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, to wit: 
A 0.250 acre tract of land more or less, lying within the existing boundary of the City of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, Jared E. Groce Abstract No. 66, and being more and particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at a concrete monument found marking the intersection of the east right-of-way line of the H. & B. V. Railroad and the south right-of-way line of College Drive, same point referred to as a point of inflection in the city limit boundary alignment described in Ordinance No. 80-750 of the City Ordinance Records of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence, departing from the existing city limit boundary alignment, along a proposed city limit realignment N 54° 10' 23? E, 301.63 feet for a point of intersection and corner; 
Thence, S 51° 07' 54? W, 946.85 feet to the eastmost intersection of the existing city limit alignment with the recognized south right-of-way of Oyster Creek Drive, a barbed wire fence line indicating the boundary of Tract 56; same point bears the following call courses along the existing city limit described alignment (1) S 43° 55' 09? W, approximately 450 feet, and (2) 517.25 feet along the arc of a curve to the right having a delta angle of 61° 27' 14? and radius of 1034.94 feet to the point of beginning; 
Thence, N 43° 22' 46? E, 14.38 feet for a corner and intersecting the common boundary line of Tracts 56 and 56F the latter described by the deed recorded in Volume 1578, Page 916 of the Deed Records of Brazoria County, Texas; 
Thence, S 35° 48' E along the common line of Tract 56F and Tract 56, 54.78 feet to a point of intersection with the existing city limit boundary for a corner; 
Thence, along the existing city limit boundary 321.29 feet along the arc of a curve to the right having a delta angle of 61° 27' 14? and a radius of 1034.94 feet to the point of beginning and containing 0.250 acres of land more or less. 
(Ord. No. 88-1087, § 1, 10-3-88; Code 1958, § 1-57)  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007, amended Ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-275, pertained to Buildings and Building Regulations. For complete derivation of former Ch. 14, see the Code Comparative Table at end of volume. 
Charter reference— Authority of city council to adopt and modify building code, §§ 3.07(g), 8.03(d)(6). 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; alarm systems, § 34-26 et seq.; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; signs, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; taxation, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 102; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Trench excavation safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.021 et seq.; fire escapes, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq.; protection of workmen on buildings, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 5182, 5182-1; Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f; industrialized housing and buildings, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f-1; Plumbing License Law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101; Residential Service Company Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6573b; establishment of building lines, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; municipal regulation of structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Adoption of technical codes. 
(a)  The following codes and the standards contained therein, are hereby adopted as the minimum building standard codes of the city, save and except those sections added, deleted or amended in this chapter: 
(1)  Building code. The 2018 International Building Code, including all appendixes except A (Employee Qualifications), B (Board of Appeals), H (Signs), and K (Administrative Provisions) 
(2)  Fire code. The 2018 International Fire Code, including all appendixes except A (Board of Appeals). 
(3)  Electrical code. The 2015 National Electrical Code, including the annexes. 
(4)  Plumbing code. The 2018 International Plumbing Code including all appendixes except A (Plumbing Permit Fee Schedule). 
(5)  Swimming pool code. The Texas Department of State Health Services, Standards for Swimming Pools and Spas. 
(6)  Property maintenance code. The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, including the appendix. 
(7)  Mechanical code. The 2018 International Mechanical Code, including all appendixes except B (Permit Fee Schedule). 
(8)  Residential code. The 2018 International Residential Code (IRC), including all appendixes except G (Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs), I (Private Sewage Disposal), L (Permit Fees), and excluding Ch. 11. Ch. 11 of the 2015 International Residential Code is adopted. Any requirement that one- or two- family dwellings be protected by fire sprinkler systems shall not become effective until mandated by the State of Texas. 
(9)  Fuel gas code. The 2018 International Fuel Gas Code including the appendixes. 
(10)  Life safety code. The 2018 Life Safety Code, including supplements. 
(11)  Energy code. The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code. 
(12)  Accessibility code for multi-family residences. The 2009 ICC/ANSI A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities Code. 
(b)  If there is a conflict between a state law and an adopted code or this chapter, then the state law will take precedence. In cases of conflicts between a provision of this chapter and these adopted codes, the provision of this chapter will take precedence. Otherwise, all structures shall be designed, built, and maintained in accordance with these adopted codes. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-1900, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 1, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 15-2064, §§ 1, 2, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 16-2111, § 1, 9-6-2016; Ord. No. 16-2116, § 1, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 17-2141, § 1, 9-5-2017; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 1, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-2. - Drainage to be provided. 
All new construction within the city limits shall be placed on a site which will eliminate low areas beneath buildings and provide complete and proper drainage for the building site and the complete lot. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 3, 4-7-2015)  
Sec. 14-3. - Standards for trench excavations. 
All trenching and excavations on public or private property within the city shall comply with federal occupational safety and health standards. All bid documents and contracts for city projects, including excavation, shall contain provisions requiring the same. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 2, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-4. - Street numbers. 
(a)  Each main residential, business, commercial and industrial building shall have placed on the front of the building a street number of a size and color legible enough to be seen by the public from the street immediately in front of the building in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
(b)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of all builders to place these numbers on new buildings. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house or building used for residential, business, commerce or industry in the city to place and maintain the numbers on their buildings. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 4, 4-7-2015)  
Sec. 14-5. - Street curb address numbers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of contractors, builders and solicitors that paint address numbers on street curbs in any area of the city to procure a solicitor's license. If the contractor, builder or solicitor makes representations that the city endorses or supports the contractor's, builder's or solicitor's services or products, the license may be revoked. 
(b)  All individuals painting or causing the painting of address numbers on curbs in any area of the city shall comply with the following: 
1.  Prior to painting the base background, the surface shall be prepared by removing all foreign particles, substances or mildew by wire brushing and/or scraping. 
2.  The numbers shall be painted at the approximate mid-lot location of the property. 
3.  The numbers shall be placed upon a dark green (i.e., forest green) background (base) that is sixteen (16) inches long (i.e., curb run) and from top to bottom of the curb rise. 
4.  The numbers shall be painted white and be four (4) inches tall, leaving at least a two-inch side margin of the dark green background. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 3, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-6. - Satellite-signal receiving antennae. 
(a)  A device used for or designed for receiving electromagnetic signals from one or more satellites either directly or through repeating transmitters, including but not restricted to those of dish or disc shapes, shall be the definition of satellite-signal receiving antennae. 
(b)  Satellite-signal receiving antennae may be permitted as long as it is located, placed and installed behind all setback lines specified in the zoning code, and is located on the property in a place that will diminish any danger to neighborhood property in the event of collapse or other failure. All other placements of satellite-signal receiving antennae shall be prohibited and violations subject to the provisions of section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-7. - Fees. 
All fees required under this chapter shall be approved by city council either by minute order or as part of the annual budget. A copy of the schedule shall be on file with the city secretary and building official. A permit shall not be issued nor any amendment made to a permit until all fees have been paid. The city council may waive permit fees for work being performed by humanitarian or charitable organizations that work to provide people affordable housing. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-8. - Appeals. 
All appeals of administrative decisions under articles I through X of this chapter shall be handled by the board of adjustment and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-9. - Inspections. 
(a)  The building official or his designee may enter a building to perform any inspection under this chapter with the express consent of a person in control of the property or if a building is unsecured to the extent that it could be entered by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
(b)  If entry is refused, the building official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law, including all rights and authority granted under the Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. Article 18.05. 
(c)  All medical gas piping inspections and required third party inspections are the financial responsibility of the property owner or the property owner's designee. Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, reports for medical gas piping inspections and required third party inspections shall be submitted to the city building official. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 16-2116, § 1, 11-7-2016)  
Secs. 14-10—14-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-25. - Definitions. 
Improvements means the construction, alteration, modification, repair or replacement of buildings or building systems. 
(Ord. No. 18-2171, § 4, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-26. - Building official. 
The office of building official is hereby created, which office shall be filled by the city manager or by appointment by the city manager. The building official shall be well versed in the requirements of the city building code. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-27. - Amendments to code. 
(a)  The following parts of the Adopted International Building Code are deleted: 
(1)  The definition of "Height, Building" in Section 102. 
(2)  Section 105.1.1 (Annual Permit). 
(3)  Section 105.1.2 (Annual Permit Records). 
(4)  Numbers 1 through 6 (Work not requiring a permit). 
(5)  Section 113 (Board of Appeals). 
(6)  Section 116 (Unsafe Structures and Equipment). 
(b)  Section 102.6 of the Adopted International Building Code is hereby amended and supplemented as follows: 
(1)  If, within any twelve (12) months period, alterations or repairs costing in excess of fifty (50) percent of the then physical value of the building are made to an existing building, such building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new buildings. 
(2)  If an existing building is damaged by fire or otherwise in excess of fifty (50) percent of its then physical value before such damage is repaired, it shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new buildings. 
(3)  If the cost of such alterations or repairs within any twelve (12) month period or the amount of such damage as referred to in paragraph 2 is more than twenty-five (25) but not more than fifty (50) percent of the then physical value of the building the portions to be altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new buildings to such extent as the Building Official may determine. 
(4)  For the purpose of this section physical value of the buildings shall be determined by the Building Official. 
(5)  If the occupancy classification of an existing building is entirely changed the building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for the new occupancy classification. If the occupancy classification of only a portion of an existing building is changed and that portion is separated from the remainder as stipulated in section 302.32, then only such portion need be made to conform. 
(6)  Repairs and alterations, not covered by the preceding paragraphs of this section, restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering it in conformity with the provisions of this code or in such manner as will not extend or increase an existing non-conformity or hazard, may be made with the same kind of materials as those of which the building is constructed; but not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof covering of a building shall be replaced in any period of twelve (12) months unless the entire roof covering is made to conform with the requirements of this code for new buildings. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 10-1935, § 1, 5-3-2010; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 2, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 15-2064, §§ 5, 6, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 15-2068, § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 5, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-2171, § 6, adopted Nov. 19, 2018, repealed § 14-28, which pertained to fire districts and derived from Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007.  
Sec. 14-28.1. - Erection or use of pier on city-owned land or waters. 
It shall be unlawful to erect any pier or mooring site on, along, over or in any city-owned land or water areas such as Shy Pond. 
It shall also be unlawful to use or operate any houseboat, powerized boat or any other boat that is designed to be powered by anything but human power on, along, over or in any city-owned land or water areas such as Shy Pond. 
No boats or surface vessels may be tied at any city-owned shoreline or on city property or unloaded from any trailer or other vehicle on city property except at locations where permitted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-946, § 1, 10-15-84)  
Sec. 14-29. - Elevation of ground floor. 
The ground floor elevation of all buildings constructed after July 22, 1968, within the city limits must be at least twenty-four (24) inches above the center of the street in front of such lot or other building site. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-30. - Foundations slab/form survey required. 
(a)  All foundations for new construction shall have a forms survey completed and an exact duplicate copy given to the inspection department prior to the foundation inspection being approved by the city. 
(b)  With regard to construction involving remodeling and/or additions to a property which has a current survey, the building official shall decide if a forms survey is needed at the time the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Secs. 14-31—14-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 
 
Sec. 14-36. - Definitions. 
NICET means the National Institute for the Certification of Engineering Technologies. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-1900, § 2, 2-17-2009)  
Sec. 14-37. - Duties and powers of fire marshal and building official. 
The fire marshal and building official are authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. The fire marshal and building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-1900, § 2, 2-17-2009)  
Sec. 14-38. - Amendments to code. 
(a)  The following parts of the Adopted International Fire Code are deleted: 
1.  Section 108 (Board of Appeals) 
2.  Section 110 (Unsafe Buildings) 
3.  The exceptions to 907.2.1, 907.2.2, 907.2.3, 907.2.4, 907.2.6, 907.2.6.1, 907.2.6.2, 907.2.8.1, 907.2.8.2, 907.2.10.1, 907.2.11.2, 1103.7.1, 1103.7.2, 1103.7.3, 1103.7.5.1, 1103.7.5.2, 1103.7.5.2.1, 1103.7.6, and 1103.7.7. 
(b)  Section 907.2.9 is deleted and replaced with the following: 
907.2.9 Group R-2. A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancy classifications. 
(c)  Section 903 of the code is deleted and replaced with the following: 
A.  Fire sprinklers. 
(1)  Plan certification for fire alarm systems and occupant notification. All fire alarm and occupant notification system plans submitted to the fire marshal and building official for review and approval shall bear a review certification of a minimum level III NICET in fire alarms. 
(2)  Plan certification for fire sprinkler systems. All fire sprinkler plans submitted to the fire marshal and building official for review and approval shall bear a review certification of a minimum level III NICET in fire sprinklers. 
(3)  Plan certification for all other fire protection systems. Plan certification for all other fire protection systems will be accompanied by a certification of competence when required. 
(4)  On-site plans. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the fire marshal and building official for review and approval prior to construction. One (1) set of approved plans shall be on the job site for each inspection. 
B.  Fire sprinklers—Where required. 
(1)  Where required. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with this section throughout all levels of all new group A, B, E, F, M, and S occupancy classifications of more than eight thousand (8,000) square feet. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with this section throughout all levels of new H, I, and R occupancies. New Group U occupancies will be required to have an automatic sprinkler system if the level of fire hazard their use encompasses shows the need for said system. This subsection shall become effective immediately for one- and two-family dwellings once mandated by the State of Texas. For all other occupancy classifications, this subsection becomes effective March 9, 2009. 
a.  All buildings—In every story or basement. Fire-resistive substitutions may be allowed in accordance with provisions in the International Building Code, provided that the automatic sprinkler is not otherwise required throughout the building by any other provision or section of the building code. 
b.  At the top of rubbish and linen chutes and in their terminal rooms. Chutes extending through three (3) or more floors shall have additional sprinkler heads installed within such chutes at alternate floors. Sprinkler heads shall be accessible for servicing. 
c.  In rooms where nitrate film is stored or handled. See section 306 of the International Building Code. 
d.  In protected combustible fiber storage vaults. 
e.  In any building that has a change in occupancy classification as defined in the building code. For example, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed if a building is converted from the Group E (Educational) occupancy classification to the Group M (Mercantile) occupancy classification. 
(2)  Exception. If the International Fire Code or International Building Code has a stricter square footage or occupancy requirement, then the requirements in the International Fire Code and/or International Building Code shall be followed. 
The following accessory structures shall be exempt from fire sprinkler requirements. 
a.  Gazebos and ramadas for residential and public use. 
b.  Independent rest room buildings that are associated with golf courses, parks and similar uses. 
c.  Guardhouses for residential and commercial developments. 
d.  Detached non-combustible carports for residential and commercial developments with covered parking less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet (1394 m 2 ). 
e.  Barns and agricultural buildings for private, residential, non-commercial use, not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet (139.35 m 2 ) with no habitable areas. 
f.  Detached storage sheds for private, residential, non-commercial use, not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet (139.35 m 2 ). 
g.  Detached one-, two- and three-car garages (without habitable spaces) in existing residential lots for replacement only within four hundred (400) feet hydrant spacing. 
h.  Fuel dispensing canopies exceeding fifteen (15) feet in clear height. 
i.  Open shade horse stalls of non-combustible construction for private, residential, non-commercial use, not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet (464.52 m 2 ) and no storage of combustible products, vehicles, or agricultural equipment. 
j.  Detached one-story accessory building used as tool and storage shed of non-hazardous materials, and not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet (11.15 m 2 ). 
k.  Special use non-combustible structures as approved by the fire marshal and building official. 
(3)  Groups A, E, F, H, M, S-1, Repair Garages, S-2 Occupancy Classifications, Commercial Parking Garages, Group B Occupancy Classifications. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13 installation of sprinkler systems. 
(4)  Group I. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all group I occupancy classifications in accordance with NFPA 13 installation of sprinkler systems. 
a.  Exception: In jails, prisons and reformatories, the piping system may be dry, provided a manually operated valve is installed at a continuously monitored location. Opening of the valve shall cause the piping system to be charged. Sprinkler heads in such systems shall be equipped with fusible elements or the system shall be designed as required for deluge systems in the building code. 
(5)  Group R, Installation Requirements. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all group R occupancy classifications in accordance with NFPA 13, 13-R, or 13D installation of sprinkler systems. This subsection shall become effective immediately for one- and two-family dwellings once mandated by the State of Texas. For all other group R occupancy classifications, this subsection becomes effective January 1, 2008. 
(6)  All group R-3 and U occupancy classifications. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all group R-3 and U occupancy classifications in accordance with NFPA 13 or 13-D installation of sprinkler systems. This subsection shall become effective immediately for one- and two-family dwellings once mandated by the State of Texas. For all other group R-3 and U occupancy classifications, this subsection becomes effective March 9, 2009. 
(7)  Section 1103.5.1 of the Adopted International Fire Code is deleted and replaced with the following: 
Where alcoholic beverages are consumed in a Group A-2 occupancy having an occupant load of 301 or more, the fire area containing the Group A-2 occupancy shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-1900, § 2, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 09-1901, § 1, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 3, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 7, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 18-2171, §§ 7, 8, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-39. - Alarm systems. 
(a)  Where required. 
(1)  New buildings and structures. An approved manual, automatic, or manual and automatic fire alarm system shall be provided in buildings and structures in accordance with the most current adopted fire code and most current referenced NFPA standard. Where automatic sprinkler protection installed is provided and connected to the building fire alarm system, automatic heat detection required by this section shall not be required. The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such as boiler rooms where, during normal operation, products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to actuate a smoke detector. 
(2)  Owner landlord and occupant responsibilities. In a dwelling unit occupied under the terms of a rental agreement or under a month-to-month tenancy: 
a.  At the time of each occupancy, the landlord shall provide smoke detection devices in working condition and, after written notification by the tenant, shall be responsible for replacement; and 
b.  The tenant shall keep the devices in working condition and shall refrain from disabling the devices. 
(b)  Records and maintenance. The landlord or owner of any rental property shall inspect all smoke detection devices as required under NFPA 72 annually and a record of all inspections and maintenance activities shall be kept by the landlord or owner and available for inspection upon request by the fire marshal's office or building official. 
(c)  Activation. Where an alarm notification system is required by another section of this code, it shall be activated by: 
(1)  Required automatic fire alarm system. 
(2)  Sprinkler water-flow devices. 
Multilevel structures. All multilevel structures are required to have a flow switch and tampered control valve per floor. 
Exception: Group R-1 and R-2, occupancy classifications with a domestic water supply serving six (6) units or less and group R-3. 
(3)  Manual fire alarm boxes at locations designated by the fire marshal and building official. 
(d)  Additions, alterations and repairs. When alterations or repairs within a 12-month period exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of an existing building or structure, such building or structure shall be made to conform to the requirements for new buildings or structures. 
(e)  Partial systems. When additions to existing non-sprinkled buildings and structures increase the value of the existing building or structure by more than fifty (50) percent, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in said addition in accordance with this section. Sprinkled and non-sprinkled areas of a structure shall be separated in accordance with all applicable codes and standards. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 8, 4-7-2015)  
Secs. 14-40—14-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apprentice or helper electrician means any person other than master electrician or journeyman electrician who, as his principal occupation, is engaged in learning and assisting in the installation of electrical systems by assisting a journeyman and who has a letter from a master electrician to the effect that he will be employed by the master. There shall be no more than two (2) apprentices/helpers on a job for each journeyman. 
Electrical inspector means any person employed by the city for the purpose of inspecting electrical work and installation in connection with enforcing health and safety laws and ordinances of the city. 
Electricity means and includes: 
(1)  All wiring, fixtures, conduits and appurtenances or other devices used for the distribution of electrical energy for all personal or commercial purposes in and through buildings where people live, work or assemble; all wiring, fixtures, conduits and appurtenances or conductors attached to a building connecting the building with the source of electrical supply, on the premises; and 
(2)  The installation, repair and maintenance of all wiring, fixtures, conduits, appurtenances or other devices used in and about a building where a person or persons live, work or assemble, for the distribution of electrical energy. 
Journeyman electrician means any person other than a master electrician who immediately supervises and engages in or works at the actual installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical systems and who has successfully fulfilled the examination and requirements of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations. 
Master electrician means an electrician who, by himself or through a person or persons in his employ, performs electrical work; who has the sole responsibility for adequate performance of the work; who is actively a part of the job; and who has successfully fulfilled the examinations and requirements of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-57. - Amendments to code. 
(1)  The following parts of the Adopted National Electrical Code are deleted: 
a.  Annex H, section 80.15 (Electrical Board) 
b.  Annex H, section 80.19(D) (Annual Permits) 
c.  Annex H, section 80.27 (Inspector's Qualifications) 
(2)  Any and all code references permitting or requiring aluminum wire shall not be applicable, except when used as an option in underground service to the electric utility meter or when all of the following requirements are met: 
(a)  The building consists of at least 3 stories or 75,000 sq. ft.; 
(b)  The building electrical service from the utility provider is 480Y/277V, 3 phase, 4 wire; 
(c)  The building has a main service of 1600 Amps or larger; 
(d)  The building Main Service Disconnecting Means is of Switchboard Construction. (Buildings served with Gutter and Disconnect Switch configurations will not be permitted to use above ground aluminum feeders.); 
(e)  All aluminum conductors are compression type conductors and use an approved joint compound with compression termination fittings. 
(f)  The electrical contractor provides the number of lugs and proper lug sizes to accept the larger aluminum conductor sizes required; 
(g)  Aluminum feeders are not used to serve chillers, elevators or equipment utilizing variable frequency drives; 
(h)  Aluminum conductors are not used on the secondary side of step down transformers; and 
(i)  Aluminum conductors are only to be used on feeders that are 200Amps and larger. 
(3)  All references concerning the size of wiring are amended to require that all wiring be adequate for planned facilities, and in no case shall wiring be less than #12, including the switch legs and throughout the system. 
(4)  All references concerning grounding are amended to require that all light fixtures, switches, plugs, etc., must be grounded to an equipment grounding conductor. 
(5)  All references concerning ground rods are amended to require that each service entrance conductor (meter loop) be furnished with an eight-foot copper, copper clad or galvanized ground rod (not pipe). 
(6)  All references concerning disconnecting means are amended to require that with the service entrance conductors required by the Lake Jackson amendments, the following disconnecting means must be used: 
a.  #2 copper or #1/0 A1-100 amp. 
b.  #0 copper or #3/0 A1-150 amp. 
(7)  All references concerning disconnecting means are amended to require that main breakers or disconnecting means be used if there are more than six (6) circuits on any one (1) service entrance conductor (meter loop). 
(8)  All applicable sections of the code are amended to require that no circuit shall contain a combination of more than eight (8) duplex receptacles or lighting fixtures, on a Standard 20A breaker. Lighting only circuits intended for more than 8 fixtures must be approved by the building official, and electrical load calculations by a licensed master electrician must be submitted at the time of permit application. 
(9)  With respect to residences, all references concerning service entrance conductors (meter loops) are amended to require a conduit of at least ridge metal, intermediate metal 2, one and one-quarter (1 1/4) inches consisting of a #2 copper or #1/0 aluminum wiring (aluminum allowed only on underground service) for residences of one thousand (1,000) to one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and consisting of #0 copper or #3/0 aluminum wiring (aluminum allowed only on underground service) for residences of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or more. 
(10)  With respect to residences, all references concerning kitchen utilities are amended to require: 
a.  That a three-wire branch circuit supplying a household electric range shall be at least #6-3/g with a fifty-amp breaker; 
b.  Ranges with cook tops shall have a #10-3/g with thirty-amp breaker; 
c.  Ranges with separate ovens shall have #10-3/g with thirty-amp breaker. 
(11)  With respect to residences, rooms such as kitchens and utility rooms shall have not more than three (3) outlets on the same circuit and lighting and other service in these two (2) areas shall not be on the same circuit. 
(12)  Conductors of different systems shall not be installed in the same raceway, box, gutter, or other type of enclosures without the approval of the building official. 
(13)  With respect to commercial and residential ceiling grid and tile systems, all lights, luminaries, and other appurtenances must be suspended independently of the ceiling grid system. 
(14)  When there is any work involving an electrical panel in a clothes closet, other than the replacement of individual breakers, the electrical panel must be moved to a location that is in compliance with the adopted electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 4, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-2047, § 1, 7-7-2014; Ord. No. 15-2064, §§ 9—13, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 17-2141, §§ 2—4, 9-5-2017; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 9, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-58. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violation of any of the provisions of this article or neglecting or refusing to comply with any order or notice of the electrical inspector or other officer made pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day for each day the violation exists or continues. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-59. - Permit—Alteration or change in connection with electrical wiring or fixtures. 
No alteration or change shall be made in the electric wiring or fixtures located within a building for use in connection with the production of electric light, heat or power, with the exception of a power plant; nor shall any such electric wiring for the distribution of electrical energy be installed in any building without first securing a permit therefor; nor shall any change be made in any wiring or fixtures after inspection without notifying the electrical inspector and securing a permit therefor. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 10, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-60. - Same—Application, filing, permission to deviate therefrom. 
Before issuing a permit for the installation of any wiring or fixtures or the alteration or change of any wiring or fixtures as provided in section 14-59, an application shall be filed with the electrical inspector describing such installation or the alteration or changes to be made, including the fixtures and material used. Any changes in the permitted job shall require approval by the inspector in writing. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-61. - Interference with fire department or obstruction of fire escapes by wires—Prohibited. 
No wire or wires shall be installed, operated or maintained over any street, alley, sidewalk or building in the city which shall be liable to interfere with the work of the fire department in the use of ladders or other apparatus, or which shall obstruct or render hazardous the use of fire escapes; and on complaint of the fire chief, such obstructing, interfering or hazardous wires shall be removed or properly rearranged. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-62. - Same—Powers to remove wires and turn off current; unsafe conditions, powers of officers. 
(a)  The fire marshal, fire chief, building official, electrical inspector, or one (1) of their designees, shall have the power to immediately cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all electrical current where the circuits interfere with the work of the fire department during the progress of a fire. 
(b)  The fire marshal or building official is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the turning off of electric current from all conductors or fixtures, which, under section 14-101 were not corrected within sixty (60) days after notification of a dangerous or unsafe condition, or which have not been installed in conformity with the provisions of this article; and the corporation, company, partnership, association or individual agent, owner, user or operator has been given sixty (60) days' notice and failed to correct the condition. 
(c)  The fire marshal or building official is authorized to cause the turning off or disconnection of electric current from all conductors or fixtures and/or to cause the disconnection of power or fuel sources from utility distribution systems if the electricity is posing an immediate danger to life or property. Written notification to the property owner at their last known address and to the occupant of the building shall be given within twenty-four (24) hours of the disconnect. No person shall reconnect the power or fuel after a disconnection under this subsection until the fire marshal or building official authorizes the reconnection. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 14, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 11, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-63. - Joint occupancy of signal wires and high-potential wires. 
Signal wires and open conductor spacings shall be in conformity with the electrical code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-64. - Liability for injury. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person installing, operating or controlling any electric wiring for the distribution of electrical energy for damages to anyone injured thereby; nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or certificate or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Secs. 14-65—14-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR 
 
Sec. 14-76. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2064, § 15, adopted Apr. 7, 2015, repealed § 14-76, which pertained to creation of office, qualifications and derived from Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007.  
Sec. 14-77. - Enforcing regulations. 
It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to enforce the provisions of this article or any ordinance now in force or which may be adopted concerning the distribution of electrical energy and installation of electrical circuitry, except for those functions delegated to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2064, § 15, adopted Apr. 7, 2015, repealed § 14-78, which pertained to supervision of erection of signs and derived from Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007.  
Sec. 14-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2064, § 15, adopted Apr. 7, 2015, repealed § 14-79, which pertained to assistants and derived from Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007.  
Sec. 14-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2064, § 15, adopted Apr. 7, 2015, repealed § 14-80, which pertained to deciding questions not herein provided for and derived from Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007.  
Sec. 14-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2064, § 15, adopted Apr. 7, 2015, repealed § 14-81, which pertained to records and reports and derived from Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007.  
Sec. 14-82. - Interference with inspector. 
No person shall interfere with the electrical inspector. Each such interference shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 16, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 12, 11-19-2018)  
Secs. 14-83—14-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Periodically by fire marshal; notice to repair. 
The fire marshal shall periodically make inspections of electrical work in buildings to which the general public has access. Where wires are in dangerous or unsafe condition, or are deemed to be an interference with the work of the fire department, he shall notify the person owning, using or operating them to place them in a safe, secure and noninterfering condition. Any person failing, neglecting or refusing to make the necessary corrections within sixty (60) days after notification of a dangerous or unsafe condition shall be deemed guilty of violation of this article. Every day which shall elapse after the expiration of such 60-day period until such wires for the distribution of electrical energy are repaired, removed or changed as required by the electrical inspector shall be considered a separate offense within the intent and meaning of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-2171, § 13, adopted Nov. 19, 2018, repealed § 14-102, which pertained to notice to inspector, certificate of satisfactory inspection, conformity with code and derived from Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 17, adopted April 7, 2015.  
Sec. 14-103. - Permission to conceal after inspection, notice thereof. 
(a)  No person shall conceal or cause to be concealed any electric wiring for the distribution of electrical energy mentioned in this article except with the express permission of the electrical inspector, and he is hereby authorized and directed to remove any flooring, lathing, plaster, sheet metal or other material which may conceal any electric wiring or fixture contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  On completion of the inspection of any wiring for the distribution of electrical energy or fixtures designed to be concealed and found to be in full compliance with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to post a notice to that effect at the main cutout center, and such notice shall be considered as an express permission to conceal such electric wiring and fixtures. No concealment shall take place until such notice has been posted by the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Secs. 14-104—14-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
House sewers means the sewers leading from the main or lateral sewers to the house on either side. 
Main or lateral sewers means the sewers in the alleys or streets adjacent to the various lots. 
Plumbing is defined as provided in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1301.002. 
Sanitary sewers means the sanitary sewer system of the city, consisting of main and lateral conduits of salt-glazed vitrified earthenware, and number one concrete sewer pipes, or other similar pipe, with necessary accessories. They are designed to carry off liquid wastes. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-117. - Amendments to the Adopted International Plumbing Code. 
The following parts of the Adopted International Plumbing Code are deleted: 
(1)  Section 109 (Means of Appeal) 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 5, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 14, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-118. - Bond or certificate of insurance of permittee. 
(a)  All plumbers must be licensed through the State of Texas and meet all requirements stated in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1301. 
(b)  All plumbers must: 
(1)  Obey all ordinances regulating excavations in or puncturing of streets, alleys, or other public property; 
(2)  Refill and refinish such excavations or punctures according to standards established by the city; 
(3)  Replace all pavement in as good condition as same was prior to such excavation of puncture; 
(4)  Place lights and guards around all plumbing materials or apparatus left in any street, alley or other public way; 
(5)  Place lights and guards around all excavations or punctures; and 
(6)  Repair all damages that arise in making connections with water, gas and sewer mains or laterals. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-119. - Inspection requirements. 
(a)  The plumbing inspector shall be given notice when any work is ready for inspection, and all work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. Such inspection shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours after notification is received. The plumber shall perform the tests required in the Adopted International Plumbing Code, in the presence of the plumbing inspector, and the plumber shall remove and repair any defective material or labor when so ordered by the plumbing inspector. 
(b)  Before fixtures are placed in connection with the plumbing of any house or building, and before the soil pipe is connected with the sewer, the outlets of the soil pipe and openings into it below the top of the stack shall be hermetically sealed; the pipe shall be filled with water to its top and every joint be carefully examined for leaks. Defective pipes discovered must be removed or replaced with sound ones and all defective joints made tight and every part of the work made to conform to this article, and subject to the approval of the plumbing inspector. 
(c)  In cases where plumbing work has been completed in a building before this article became effective, if the plumbing has been done in accordance with this article, permits will be granted for making connections with the sewer as in new work, but in case such plumbing work does not meet with these requirements, alterations shall be made as the plumbing inspector may direct, to make the plumbing safe to the persons in the house, and such as to be no source of injury or stoppage to the sewer. There shall be at least one (1) four-inch stack on each independent connection with a house sewer. This stack shall be in all cases at the end of the longest horizontal line, and where practicable a minor fixture shall be connected between closet opening and riser. Traps are to be ventilated, fixtures and pipes clean, waste and soil pipes to be of accepted materials and to have sufficient fall, all as specified in this article. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the plumber to provide "AS BUILT" plumbing plans for all underground or under slab plumbing work prior to inspection of such work. Plans shall show all waste, vent, and distribution lines; fixtures, appurtenances and sizes of all domestic or commercial plumbing lines; and underground sewer, storm drainage and fire lines. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 6, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 18-2171, §§ 15, 16, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-120. - Sewer connections required. 
Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and all premises having drainage piping shall be connected to the public sewer system. If there is no public sewer available, the owner of the building or premises shall request, from the plumbing inspector, special approval to be connected to a private sewage disposal system. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-121. - Open gutter, cesspool, privy vault; not to be connected. 
No open gutter, cesspool or privy vault shall be connected with any sewer or drain. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-122. - Laying pipe over sewer. 
Any person desiring to lay pipes for water, gas, steam or any purpose in any street or alley upon which sewers are laid, shall give at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the plumbing inspector before opening the street or alley and the manner of excavating for the laying and backfilling over such pipe shall be subject to the approval of the plumbing inspector. All such work shall be planned and executed so that no injury shall occur to any house or sewer or drain connected therewith, and so that the excavation and backfilling can be completed in daylight hours if possible. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-123. - Same—Enforcing by city. 
The city, acting through the plumbing inspector or other authorized officer, shall have the power to stop and prevent from discharging into the sewer system substances which are liable to injure the sewers or obstruct the flow of the sewage, or interfere with the operations of the lift stations and the sewage treatment plants. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-124. - Old drains, connections thereto. 
Before any old private drains shall be connected with the sewer system the owner of the private drain shall prove to the satisfaction of the plumbing inspector that it is clean and conforms in every respect with this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-125. - House sewer trenches. 
The house sewer trench shall be dug so as to meet the public sewer at the position of the "Y" branch, if there be one so located by the inspector. The material thrown from the trench shall be placed so as not to obstruct and so as to cause the least inconvenience to the public. Proper barriers and lights must be maintained on the banks of the trench which shall be so dug as to avoid accidents during the progress of the work. In backfilling the earth shall be carefully rammed or flooded so as to keep the pipe in proper position and avoid settling, and no stone shall be used in filling until there has been a depth of at least two (2) feet of fine earth placed over the pipe. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-126. - Miscellaneous prohibitions and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building or premises within this city to use, or to permit anyone else to use, any privy or water closet on such premises, that is connected with the sewer system of the city, unless the same shall be used in connection with sufficient water flowing into the sewer to keep the pipes connecting such privies or water closets with the sewers free from obstruction. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building where people reside or are regularly employed within reach of the sewer systems as provided by this article to fail to have at least one (1) water closet connected with the city sewer system; except, where two (2) adjoining buildings are owned and operated by the same person, only one (1) connection is required. The building owner or occupant is required to maintain the minimum number of plumbing facilities as required by the building code at all times. 
(c)  If on account of the distance from the sewer system, any owner is not required to connect with the sewer system as provided in this article, then privies shall be made to conform with city ordinances now in effect or that may be enacted governing sanitation and outdoor privies. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or allow to be thrown, or deposited upon the surface of the ground or in any hole in or under the surface of the ground where such premises are within the distance prescribed to be connected with the sewer, any water which has been used for domestic or manufacturing purposes, or any liquid or solid filth, feces or urine, after such 30-day period following the enactment and legal publication of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to make or have made any connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city that will permit any surface or drain water from the ground or roof of houses, or the overflowing of cisterns or cesspools, to enter any sanitary sewers, directly or indirectly; provided, however, that the drainage of cellars may be connected with said sanitary sewer system when made in accordance with the regulations in this article and by plans and specifications of the plumbing inspector and under his direct supervision. 
(f)  The use or specification of air admittance vents shall only be permitted upon written approval of the building official. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a building to install a grease interceptor that has not been sized by an architect or engineer and approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 18, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 16-2092, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-127. - Plumbing pipe requirements. 
(a)  The plumbing pipe used above or below the floor slab in all buildings in the city shall comply with the Adopted International Plumbing Code and may include cast iron, copper with wiped joints, plastic. 
(b)  All plumbing pipe used in the city shall comply with the schedules established by the Adopted International Plumbing Code. 
(c)  All pipe must have identifying marks that indicate that it is acceptable for use under the building code adopted by this city. 
(d)  All plastic pipe that is used must be stored in a manner that will not alter the appearance and structure of the pipe. Warped, bent, distorted or discolored pipe is not to be used. 
(e)  All plastic pipe shall be made of materials approved by the Adopted International Plumbing Code, including: 
(1)  Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS). 
(2)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC). 
(f)  All pipe shall be marked and graded in accordance with the standards contained in the Standard Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 7, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 17, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-128. - Gas lines. 
Any person desiring to install a gas line shall provide a gas piping plan and sizing calculations. Gas pipe sizing calculations shall include the demand for the entire system including any proposed piping extensions and appliances. The building official shall approve the gas line if it meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  All requirements of the International Fuel Gas Code adopted in section 14-1 of this chapter; 
(2)  For piping systems designed to carry in excess of seven (7) ounces of pressure then the system must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Underground piping installations shall be sleeved in a conduit of minimum schedule 40 PVC, ABS, or other approved material. The conduit shall be a minimum one (1) pipe size larger than the gas pipe and be sealed on both ends. The installed underground piping shall have a minimum two (2) feet of cover. 
b.  Above ground installations shall be of steel or wrought-iron and shall be of standard weight (schedule 40). Piping shall be supported a maximum every six (6) feet on center. 
c.  Gas piping shall be permanently identified with the designed pressure at both ends and at an interval not to exceed twenty (20) feet. 
d.  Gas piping shall be provided with a permanent shut off valve on the fuel line prior to entering the ground or entering a structure. 
(Ord. No. 08-1889, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 15-2080, § 1, 10-5-2015)  
Secs. 14-129—14-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SWIMMING POOLS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 14-141—14-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FENCES 
 
Sec. 14-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Swimming pool means and includes any constructed pool used for swimming or bathing over twenty-four (24) inches in depth or with a surface area exceeding two hundred (200) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-162. - Fence required for swimming pools. 
Every person in possession of land within the city, either in the capacity of owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which there is situated a swimming pool shall at all times maintain a fence, wall or other enclosure not less than four (4) feet in height completely surrounding such swimming pool and effectively denying accidental entrance into the pool by any person. During the period of construction, all swimming pools shall be barricaded or safely covered with mesh, netting or other effective covering to deny accidental entrance until the construction is concluded. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-163. - Minimum size of openings. 
No openings, holes or gaps shall be permitted in any fence required by the provisions of this division that would allow the passage of a four-inch diameter sphere. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 18, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-164. - Gates and doors—Latching device required. 
All gates and doors opening directly into any fence required by the provisions of this division shall be equipped with latching devices designed to keep and being capable of keeping such doors or gates securely closed at all times when not in actual use. Such latching device shall be attached not less than three and one-half (3½) feet from the bottom of such gate or door. The door of any dwelling, not including any attached or unattached garage, occupied by human beings and forming any part of a fence or other enclosure required by this division need not be equipped with such latching devices required of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-165. - Same—Kept fastened or latched. 
Every person in possession of land on which there is situated a swimming pool around which there is situated a fence shall keep the gates or doors thereto securely fastened or latched at all times except whenever such door or gate is being used by such person, his agent, servant, employee or invitee for entrance into such fenced enclosure. Upon such entry into such enclosure or exit therefrom, such person shall keep such gate or door securely fastened or latched. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Secs. 14-166—14-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-180. - Definitions. 
Condominium means a single dwelling unit with a recordable deed, incorporated into a building with multiple dwelling units with shared ownership of common areas. 
Rental dwelling means a single-family dwelling, duplex, triplex, or condominium that is being rented or is available to be rented. 
(Ord. No. 18-2171, § 19, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-181. - Amendments to code. 
(a)  The following parts of the Adopted International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted: 
(1)  Section 103.5 (Fees) 
(2)  Section 110 (Demolition) 
(3)  Section 111 (Means of Appeal) 
(b)  Sections of the Adopted International Property Maintenance Code are hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 304.7 is amended to add the following: 
304.7.1 Unsafe equipment. Unused, unsafe, or unnecessary equipment shall be removed from all roofs and roofing areas. 
(2)  Section 304.14 Insect Screens is amended to read as: Every door, openable window, and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or used in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. Dwellings shall be provided with insect screens at every openable window. 
(3)  Section 302.3 is amended to read as follows: 
302.3 Sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas. Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking lots and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and be maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(c)  Sections of the Adopted International Property Maintenance Code are hereby amended, for rental dwellings only, as follows: 
(1)  Section 108 is amended to add the following: 
108.8. Providing Habitable Units and Structures. Within 24 hours of the building official posting a notice that a structure or unit is uninhabitable, the tenants of the posted structure or unit must be provided with a habitable unit or structure, if available. The tenants must be allowed to stay in the habitable unit or structure until sufficient repairs are made to the posted unit or structure for the building official to remove the notice. If a habitable unit or structure is not available, then the tenant's rent must be abated until the building official removes the notice. 
Exception: 
(a)  When the actions of the tenant cause the unit or structure to be placarded as uninhabitable, the tenant is responsible for finding his own habitable unit or structure to live in. 
(b)  This section does not apply if the unit or structure is not habitable due to a force majeure event such as a fire, hurricane, flood, or tornado. 
108.8.1. This section does not: 
(a)  Other than the abatement of rent, give a tenant a legal right to violate the terms of his lease; 
(b)  Give a tenant in an apartment community the right to be moved to a structure or unit in a different apartment community; 
(c)  Amend or extend the tenant's lease for the uninhabitable unit or structure, other than allowing the tenant to occupy the habitable unit while the uninhabitable unit or structure is being repaired; 
(d)  State that the owner or operator must give the tenant a new lease for the habitable unit or structure; or 
(e)  Apply if the tenant is in default of the lease for the uninhabitable unit or structure, whether the tenant goes into default before or after being moved to the habitable unit. 
(2)  Section 403 is amended to add the following: 
403.6 All ventilation systems installed in the unit, including central air and air conditioning window units, shall be maintained in working order. (2) Section 403 is amended to add the following: 
403.6 All ventilation systems installed in the unit, including central air and air conditioning window units, shall be maintained in working order. Air conditioning units must be capable of cooling all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms to a temperature of 82ºF or less. Temperature measurements shall be taken from a distance of three (3) feet above floor level. The owner and operator must repair or cause to be repaired the air conditioning system within 72 hours from the time the owner or operator is notified. If repairs cannot be made within 72 hours, the owner and operator must submit a timeline for the repairs to the building official. The timeline must be submitted within the 72 hours. 
(3)  Section 505.4 is amended to add the following: 
505.4.1 Maintenance of Boilers and Water Heaters. Notification must be given to the city within 24 hours of loss of hot water. Boiler systems and hot water heaters must be repaired within 72 hours. If repairs cannot be made within 72 hours, a timeline for the repairs must be submitted to the building official within 48 hours of the loss of hot water. Any changes to the timeline must be approved by the building official. 
Exception: This section does not apply if the failure of the boiler systems or loss of hot water is due to a loss of utilities that is not the fault of the property's operator or owner. 
(4)  Section 602.3 Heat supply is amended to read as: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
602.3.1 All heating systems installed in the unit shall be maintained in working order. 
602.3.2 The temperature measurements shall be taken from a distance of three (3) feet above floor level. 
Exceptions: 
When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operation at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
(1)  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
(5)  Section 602.4 Work spaces able to be occupied is amended to read as. Indoor work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
(2)  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(6)  Section 704.2 is amended to add the following: 
704.2.1 Smoke alarms to be tested. Smoke alarms and/or fire alarms shall be tested at least once every 12 months. A record of the testing of the smoke alarms shall be kept on property and available to the fire marshal's office or building official upon request. An owner or operator may be exempted from testing the alarms of a specific unit if that tenant gives the owner or operator a letter stating that they refuse entry for the purposes of testing the alarms. 
702.2.1.1 This section does not impose a duty on owners or operators to protect tenants that fail to comply with Ch. 92, Subchapter F (Smoke Alarms and Fire Extinguishers) of the Texas Property Code. 
(7)  Section 705 Carbon Monoxide Alarms in is added as follows: 
705. Property owners who rent or lease dwelling units shall supply and install carbon monoxide alarms where the following conditions exist in new or existing rental dwellings: 
1.  The dwelling contains a fuel-fired appliance; or 
2.  The dwelling has an attached garage with an opening that communicates with the dwelling unit. 
705.1. Maintenance of the carbon monoxide alarm shall be the responsibility of the owner and the occupants. 
705.2. Location. Carbon monoxide alarms in dwelling units shall be installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. Where a fuel-burning appliance is located within a bedroom or its attached closet or bathroom, a carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed within the bedroom. 
705.3. Listings. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed in accordance with UL 2034. Combination carbon monoxide and smoke alarms shall be listed in accordance with UL 2034 and UL 217. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 11-1959, § 1, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 8, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 15-2064, § 19, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 20, 11-19-2018)  
Secs. 14-182—14-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES 
 
Sec. 14-191. - Applicability and administration. 
(a)  This article shall apply to multi-family dwelling complexes with three (3) or more dwelling units. 
(b)  The building official or his designee shall be responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-192. - Definitions. 
Landlord means the owner, operator, lessor, management company, managing agent, or on-site manager of a multi-family dwelling complex. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-193. - Registration required. 
(a)  The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex with three (3) or more dwelling units shall annually register the complex by January 1 of each calendar year. 
(b)  A registration is valid for one calendar year, unless the ownership of the complex changes. 
(c)  If a change in ownership of the complex occurs during period the calendar year, the landlord of the complex shall have thirty (30) days from the date of change of ownership to file a new registration. 
(d)  The registration shall be on a form prescribed by the building official and shall at a minimum contain the following information about the complex: 
(1)  The trade name, physical address, business mailing address and total number of units; 
(2)  The names of designated employees or authorized representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during any 24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, burst pipes, collapse hazard and violent crime; 
(3)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner, property manager, resident manager, and registered agent; 
(4)  The type of business entity that owns the complex; 
(5)  The number and type of security systems and fire alarm systems maintained on the premises and the names and telephone numbers of the alarm companies which respond to alarms or relay alarms to emergency services. 
(e)  The landlord commits an offense if he or she operates a multi-family dwelling complex with three (3) or more dwelling units which is not currently registered with the building official. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-194. - Multi-family dwelling complex inspection fee. 
(a)  A multi-family dwelling complex inspection fee of two dollars ($2.00) per unit per month will be charged to each complex. 
(b)  There is no inspection fee for first and second inspections. 
(c)  There shall be a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for third and subsequent inspections. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-195. - Inspections. 
(a)  To determine compliance with minimum building and property maintenance standards in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code and other applicable city codes and to determine compliance with this article, the building official may conduct: 
(1)  Periodic inspections; 
(2)  Follow-up inspections; and 
(3)  Inspections based on indications of code violations, including complaints filed with the building official. 
(b)  The following areas of a multi-family dwelling complex shall be subject to periodic inspection by the building official: 
(1)  All building exteriors; 
(2)  All exterior and interior common areas; 
(3)  Vacant dwelling units; and 
(4)  Comparative sample of occupied dwelling units upon receipt of consent by the unit's tenant. 
(c)  A report listing all vacant units must be provided to the building official upon request. 
(d)  Vacant units that have not been inspected within a one-year period or that have been damaged must be inspected by the building official prior to being occupied. If the building official does not respond to the request for a vacant unit inspection within five (5) business days, the unit may be rented. If extenuating circumstances exist, the building official may shorten the above-mentioned time frame from five (5) business days to seventy-two (72) hours. 
Exception: All units will be inspected upon immediate request by the building official if the building official is able to do so. The building official reserves the right to have up to seventy-two (72) hours to inspect the unit before move in for extenuating circumstances . 
(e)  The landlord that fails a periodic inspection shall eliminate all violations identified at the time of the periodic inspection. The landlord must allow follow-up inspections by the building official after a reasonable period of time to determine if the violations have been abated. 
(f)  If entry is refused, the building official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law, including all rights and authority granted under Article 18.05 of the Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 11-1959, § 1, 4-18-2011)  
Sec. 14-196. - Posting. 
Each multi-family unit described herein shall have prominently displayed in a conspicuous, publicly accessible area on the premises of the complex: 
(1)  Current and valid registration certificates. 
(2)  Signs posted by the owner or owners representative showing the names of designated employees or authorized representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during the 24-hour period. 
(3)  A notice for reporting code violations to the city as follows: TO REPORT UNRESOLVED VIOLATIONS OF CITY PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, CONTACT THE BUILDING OFFICIAL AT (979) 415-2430. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-197. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A violation of this article is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in this article prevents the city from pursuing civil and criminal remedies concurrently or availing itself of any other remedy allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Secs. 14-198—14-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 14-216. - Amendments to code. 
The following part of the Adopted International Property Mechanical Code is hereby deleted: 
(1)  Section 106.5.2 (Fee Schedule) 
(2)  Section 106.5.3 (Fee Refunds) 
(3)  Section 109 (Means of Appeal) 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 9, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 21, 11-19-2018)  
ARTICLE IX. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 14-217. - Amendments to code. 
(a)  The following parts of the Adopted International Residential Code are hereby deleted: 
(1)  In Section R105.2, permit exception numbers 1-3, 5 and 10, which are permit exceptions for one-story detached accessories, fences, retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways, and decks. 
(2)  Section R112 (Board of Appeal). 
(b)  Sections AJ.102.2, AJ.201, AJ.301 and AJ.501.3 (Existing Buildings and Structures) of the Adopted International Residential Code are hereby supplemented as follows: 
(1)  If, within any twelve (12) months period, alterations or repairs costing in excess of fifty (50) percent of the then physical value of the building are made to an existing building, such building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new buildings. 
(2)  If an existing building is damaged by fire or otherwise in excess of fifty (50) percent of its then physical value before such damage is repaired, it shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new buildings. 
(3)  If the cost of such alterations or repairs within any twelve (12) month period or the amount of such damage as referred to in paragraph 2 is more than twenty-five (25) but not more than fifty (50) percent of the then physical value of the building the portions to be altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new buildings to such extent as the building official may determine. 
(4)  For the purpose of this section physical value of the buildings shall be determined by the Building Official. 
(5)  Section R314.2.2 is amended as follows: Alterations, repairs, and additions. Where alterations, repairs, or additions require a permit and involve the removal or installation of sheetrock, the smoke alarms shall be installed and the smoke alarms shall be located in the same locations as is required for new buildings. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of roofing or siding, the addition or replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck. 
2.  Installation, alteration or repair of plumbing or mechanical systems. 
3.  Interior work that does not require the removal or installation of sheetrock such as kitchen cabinet replacements, kitchen islands, and bathroom remodels. 
(c)  Section 1004 of the Adopted International Building Code is hereby referenced and supplemented as follows: 
(1)  For purposes of this section: 
(a)  Square footage of a single-family residential dwelling will be based on the square footage of living area on record with the county appraisal district. 
(b)  Occupant means any person who occupies a single-family dwelling as that person's principal place of residence, i.e., where such person usually sleeps. 
(c)  Owner means any person or entity that has legal title, whether singly or jointly, to the single family residential dwelling, or a person who has a right to possession of the single family residential dwelling due to tenancy or other agreement with the legal title owner. 
(2)  The number of occupants allowed in a single family residential dwelling is one per 200 square feet. For example, for a 2,400 square foot house, no more than twelve (12) occupants are allowed. 
(3)  The building official shall give written notice, either through certified mail or hand delivery, to the owner and/or any occupant over the age of 18, of a violation of this section. The notice shall contain a date when the violation must be corrected. If the violation is not corrected, any person to whom the building official gave a written notice of violation may receive a citation. Each occupant in excess of the maximum number of occupants allowed shall be considered a separate violation. 
(4)  Variance. An owner that wishes to exceed the maximum number of occupants allowed may appear before city council to request a variance to this section. Factors to be considered by city council include but are not limited to parking, traffic, noise, age of occupants, and number of complaints in the past year related to the single family dwelling and to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 10, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 15-2078, §§ 20, 21, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 18-2171, §§ 22—25, 11-19-2018)  
Secs. 14-218—14-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 14-226. - Amendments to code. 
(a)  The following part of the Adopted International Fuel Gas Code is hereby deleted: 
(1)  Section 109 (Means of Appeal) 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-2022, § 11, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 26, 11-19-2018)  
Secs. 14-227—14-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - IRRIGATION CODE 
 
Sec. 14-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Installation means fabrication of an irrigation system using components that include piping, fittings, valves, sprinkler heads and pumps; replacement, repair, alteration or maintenance of a lawn sprinkler system component; or lawn sprinkler system site preparation including digging, trenching, vibratory flow operation, and final grading. 
Irrigation system means an assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. 
Irrigator means a person who sells, designs, offers consultation regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply. 
(Ord. No. 09-1915, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 14-232. - License required. 
An irrigator must hold a license issued under Ch. 37 of the Texas Water Code and Ch. 1903 of the Texas Occupational Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-1915, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 14-233. - Permit and inspection requirements. 
(a)  All irrigators, prior to performing any irrigation system installation in the territorial limits or the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the city, shall apply for and be issued an irrigation permit. Application for irrigation systems must include system specifications, plans, and a current copy of the site survey. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector shall be given notice when any work is ready for inspection, and all work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. Such inspection shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours after notification is received. 
(c)  The irrigator shall remove and repair any defective material or labor when so ordered by the plumbing inspector. 
(d)  The irrigator shall provide an "AS BUILT" drawing of all underground irrigation lines and systems. 
(Ord. No. 09-1915, § 1, 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 27, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-234. - Minimum standards and specifications. 
The installation shall be built in accordance with Ch. 1903 of the Texas Occupations Code and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) rules as codified in Vol. 30, Ch. 344 of the Texas Administration Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-1915, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 14-235. - Exceptions. 
This article does not apply to: 
(1)  An on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by Ch. 366 of the Health and Safety Code; or 
(2)  An irrigation system: 
a.  Used on or by an agricultural operation as defined in Ch. 251 of the Agriculture Code; or 
b.  Connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use. 
(Ord. No. 09-1915, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Secs. 14-236—14-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND DISTRESSED PROPERTIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, adopted November 19, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as article XVI, §§ 14-301—14-345. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as article XI, §§ 14-301—14-345. Additionally, former Art. XI was renumbered as Art. XII, at the discretion of the editor, to facilitate inclusion of a new Art. XI, as set out by Ord. No. 09-1915, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2009. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-301. - Purpose of this article. 
This article is adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 54 and 214, to protect the health, safety and welfare, and to preserve the good government, order, and security of the City of Lake Jackson and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-302. - Definitions. 
Building official means the building official or his duly authorized representative. 
City means the City of Lake Jackson. 
Cleaning an unoccupied building shall include clearing the lot so that it is free and clear of garbage, trash, debris, rubbish, waste, wood and metal scrap, inoperative or abandoned appliances, and furniture. 
DSDB means the dangerous structure determination board. 
Dangerous building means a building or structure that is: 
(1)  Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare; or 
(2)  Vacant; or 
(3)  Unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or 
(4)  Boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if: 
a.  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; 
b.  The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or 
Vacant means the building has not been legally occupied for one year or more and at least one of the following has occurred throughout the period of non-occupancy: 
(1)  The utilities have been turned off or are not in use; or 
(2)  The doors and windows have been boarded up or secured against entry; or 
(3)  The building is in disrepair to a state that it is visibly not habitable; or 
(4)  The building is not in compliance with the maintenance and security requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 28, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-303. - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any dangerous building is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, is illegal, and shall be abated according to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-304. - Inspection by building official. 
(a)  The building official may inspect all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, apartment complexes, tenement, commercial buildings, manufacturing buildings, loft buildings, flea markets, and tents to determine whether any condition exists which would render any such place a dangerous building within this article. 
(b)  The building official, based on a reasonable suspicion standard, may also inspect buildings under the following conditions: 
(1)  A complaint is filed by any person alleging that a premises or a building, wall, or structure is in violation of this article; or 
(2)  A city employee alleges that a premises or a building, wall, or structure is in violation of this article. 
(c)  The building official may enter a building to perform an inspection: 
(1)  With the express consent of a person in control of the property; 
(2)  In accordance with Article 18.05 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; or 
(3)  If a building is unsecured to the extent that it could be entered by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-305. - Placarding. 
(a)  In emergency situations, the building official shall post the following notice upon each entrance to a dangerous building: 
DANGEROUS BUILDING 
DO NOT ENTER 
Any person who trespasses upon this property shall be prosecuted for criminal trespass under section 30.05 of the Texas Penal Code. 
(b)  Such notice shall remain posted until after the DSDB public hearing and until all orders issued by the DSDB are completed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter any property that contains the notice depicted in subsection (a). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the notice depicted in subsection (a). 
(e)  The building official shall also post other warning notices that the building official deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-306. - Other proceedings not affected. 
This article does not affect the ability of the city to pursue any other legal remedies allowed by law, including prosecution in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-307. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  In this article, a building meets minimum standards if it is not dangerous and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  The following conditions violate minimum standards: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (1½) times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to the extent that structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion, member, or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building, any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one and one-half (1½) times that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stress permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary to support such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(8)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is unmistakably unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(9)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third ( 1/3 ) of the base. 
(10)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting members, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(11)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, or flood, or has become so dilapidated, deteriorated or neglected so as to become a harbor for vagrants or criminals. 
(12)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of the city's minimum housing standards or technical building codes, to the extent violation poses a threat or potential threat to life, health, safety, or property. 
(13)  Whenever a building or structure is used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, arrangement, inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities, is determined by the health inspector to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(14)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections, or heating apparatus, or other mechanical, structural, or social cause, is determined by the fire marshal or building official to be a fire hazard. 
(15)  Whenever any building or structure is in such condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(16)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains for a period of time on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building, unless such structure has been approved for partial demolition by the dangerous structure determination board or the department of building inspections in its permitting process. 
(17)  Whenever any building or structure, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered by children. 
(18)  Whenever any building or structure is secured by a means inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use in the manner described in subsection (17). 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Secs. 14-308—14-315. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURE DETERMINATION BOARD 
 
Sec. 14-316. - Dangerous structure determination board established. 
The dangerous structure determination board (DSDB) is hereby established, and shall consist of five (5) members, as follows: the city engineer, one member appointed by the city council that is either a medical doctor or a registered nurse, and three (3) members appointed by the city council from among the following professions: architecture, real estate, building construction, framing, contracting or engineering. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-317. - DSDB functions. 
(a)  The DSDB shall act as authorized under this article and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 54 and 214. 
(b)  The DSDB may: 
(1)  Order that a building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a the timeframe established in this article; 
(2)  Order that the occupants of a building be relocated within a reasonable time; 
(3)  Order, in appropriate cases, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property, and order entry onto private property to secure the removal if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation of an ordinance, and order action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate, or remove any dangerous building found to exist; 
(4)  Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the chief of police of the city, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the DSDB; and 
(5)  Determine the amount and duration of a civil penalty the city may recover as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.017 and issue an order in accordance with such determination. 
(c)  The DSDB may only meet if at least four (4) members are present. 
(d)  DSDB actions require the following: 
(1)  Deliberation and discussion of any matter within the board's jurisdiction require a motion and a second. 
(2)  Orders for demolition require the affirmative vote of four (4) members. 
(3)  All other orders require the affirmative vote of three (3) members. 
(e)  The DSDB shall devise its administrative procedures, review and adjust such procedures annually, and make available a copy of such procedures to any interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Secs. 14-318—14-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 14-326. - Commencement of proceedings. 
(a)  Whenever the building official has determined that a building or structure is a dangerous building, he shall obtain a date and time for a public hearing before the DSDB to determine whether the building complies with the building codes adopted in this chapter. The building official may seek voluntary compliance with this chapter before seeking a hearing before the DSDB. If the building official receives voluntary compliance, the building official need not ask for a hearing before the DSDB. 
(b)  Meetings of the DSDB shall be held at the call of the chairman and at other times as determined by the DSDB. All meetings of the DSDB are open to the public. The chairman, or acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-327. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)  On or before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing, notice shall be: 
(1)  Sent by personal delivery, by certified mail with return receipt requested, or by delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service to the owner and each lienholder and mortgagee, as can be ascertained through a diligent effort; 
(2)  Posted on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable; and 
(3)  Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Lake Jackson on one (1) occasion. 
(b)  The notice of the hearing may also be filed in the official public records of real property for Brazoria County, Texas. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(c)  The notice must contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the affected property, if that information can be determined; 
(2)  A legal description of the affected property; 
(3)  A description of the hearing; 
(4)  The date, time, and place of the hearing; and 
(5)  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgage shall be required to present proof at the hearing of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will reasonably take to perform the work. 
(d)  A diligent effort shall mean a search of the following records: 
(1)  County real property records of Brazoria County; 
(2)  Appraisal district records of Brazoria County; 
(3)  Records of the secretary of state; 
(4)  Assumed name records of Brazoria County; 
(5)  City of Lake Jackson tax records; and 
(6)  City of Lake Jackson utility records. 
(e)  If the notice is returned as "refused" or "unclaimed", the validity of the notice is not affected and the notice is considered delivered. 
(f)  If the DSDB opens a properly noticed public hearing, it may then continue the public hearing to another date without following the above notice requirements. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-328. - Public hearing. 
(a)  At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it would reasonably take to perform the work. 
(b)  At the hearing, the building official shall present evidence of the condition of the building and may recommend a course of action. Personnel of other departments or appropriate agencies may also present facts bearing on the condition of the building. 
(c)  At the hearing, the owner, lienholder, mortgagee, or any other interested person may present evidence on any relevant issue. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-329. - Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition; DSDB review of demolition settlement. 
The following standards shall guide the building official in his discretion in ordering a hearing to repair, vacate, secure, and/or demolish a dangerous building and these shall be observed and applied by the hearing officers who comprise the DSDB: 
(1)  If the alleged dangerous building can be feasibly repaired or the condition remedied so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall first be ordered remedied or repaired by the hearing officers. Demolition shall be regarded as a remedy of last resort. 
(2)  If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health or safety of its occupants, it shall be ordered by the hearing officers to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building is fifty (50) percent or more damaged or decayed or deteriorated in its structure, or fifty (50) percent or more diminished in its value due to damage, decay, or deterioration, a presumption shall arise that the building cannot be repaired. Such presumption may be appropriately rebutted by the weight of the evidence. 
(4)  Principles of sound engineering practices shall be respected. 
(5)  In all cases of settlement in which a responsible party enters into a voluntary demolition agreement to accept city serviced demolition, all settlement agreements shall be reviewed by the DSDB prior to execution by the duly authorized city official possessing settlement authority. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-330. - DSDB orders. 
(a)  After the public hearing, if a building is found to be a dangerous building, the DSDB shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to, within thirty (30) days: 
(1)  Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or 
(2)  Repair, remove, or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days. 
(b)  If the DSDB allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the DSDB shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. 
(c)  The DSDB may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee: 
(1)  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
(2)  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed with[in] ninety (90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(d)  If the DSDB allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the DSDB shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building official to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the DSDB to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on property, within the municipal boundaries that exceeds one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) in total value, the DSDB may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing, or demolishing a building under this subsection. In lieu of a bond, the DSDB may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the municipality. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the municipality issues the order. 
(e)  The DSDB, by order, may assess and recover a civil penalty against the property owner in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each violation, if the city proves: 
(1)  The property owner was notified of the requirements of this article and the owner's need to comply with the requirements; and 
(2)  After notification, the property owner committed an act in violation of this article or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with this article. 
(f)  The DSDB may also order a civil penalty that the city may assess if the owner fails to repair, remove or demolish the building in accordance with the board's order. Such penalty shall not exceed the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day that the building is out of compliance with the order. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-331. - Post hearing notice. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days after the date the order is issued, the city shall file a copy of the order in the city secretary's office and publish once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of: 
(1)  The street address or legal description of the property; 
(2)  The date of the hearing; 
(3)  A brief statement of results of the hearing; and 
(4)  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(b)  After the hearing, the city will mail by certified mail with return receipt requested, deliver by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or personally deliver a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-332. - Post hearing actions. 
(a)  If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the municipality may: 
(1)  Vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense; or 
(2)  Assess a civil penalty against the owner of the building for failure to comply with the DSDB order. Notice of the civil penalty shall be sent by certified mail return receipt requested to the owner and each lienholder and mortgagee. 
(b)  If the city incurs expenses or assesses a civil penalty under this section, the city may assess expenses and file a lien against the property, unless it is homestead property protected by the Texas Constitution. The notice of lien filed with the county clerk's office must contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, if known; 
(2)  A legal description of the property; 
(3)  The amount of expenses incurred by the city; and 
(4)  The amount owed to the city. 
(c)  If notice is given to the mortgagee and lienholder, as authorized under this article, then the lien is a privileged lien, subordinate only to tax liens. 
(d)  This section does not limit the ability of a municipality to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that may be required by section 14-330. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-333. - Obstruction of official action. 
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative is engaged in the work ordered by the DSDB or is engaged in any act that is preliminary to or incidental to such work. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Secs. 14-334—14-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT MEASURES 
 
Sec. 14-341. - Securing buildings. 
The city may secure and clean a building, regardless of its structural condition, that is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-342. - Notice of secured building. 
(a)  Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured and/or cleaned pursuant to section 14-341, the city will give notice to the owner of the building by either: 
(1)  Personally serving the owner with written notice; 
(2)  Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown: 
a.  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in the official newspaper of the city; or 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building. 
(b)  The notice will contain: 
(1)  An identification of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(2)  A statement that the city has secured and/or cleaned the building; 
(3)  The amount of expenses that shall be assessed against the property; and 
(4)  The owner's right to request a hearing about any matter relating to the city's securing and/or cleaning of the building. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-343. - Hearing of secured building. 
(a)  If, within thirty (30) days after the date the city secures and/or cleans a building pursuant to section 14-341, the owner files with the city a written request for a hearing, the DSDB will conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing and/or cleaning of the building. 
(b)  The DSDB will conduct the hearing within twenty (20) days after the date the request is filed. 
(c)  After the hearing, the DSDB shall enter an order stating that: 
(1)  The city's securing and/or cleaning of the building was necessary and stating the amount of expenses that shall be assessed against the property; or 
(2)  The city's securing and/or cleaning of the building was not necessary and state that the city shall not recover any expenses. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-344. - Procedure after secured building hearing. 
After the hearing before the DSDB, the city will provide notice of the order in the same manner provided for in section 14-331. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 14-345. - Emergency abatement by city officials. 
(a)  In order to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the city and its inhabitants, if the building official or fire marshal determine that one or more structural conditions threaten the structural integrity of a building or structure and that the building or structure pose a clear and imminent danger to the life, safety or property of any person, the city manager and either the building official or fire marshal shall order the immediate vacation, and demolition or repair of such building or structure. In the case of demolition, concurrence of the building official is required. 
(b)  The foregoing emergency abatement action shall be executed not later than seventy-two (72) weekday hours, exclusive of weekends and holidays, after the official views the subject building or structure. 
(c)  After the building is vacated and either repaired or demolished, the official taking action shall immediately provide notice to the DSDB and to the owner and the lienholder/mortgagees of said dangerous building in the manner provided in section 14-327. 
(d)  All costs, including asbestos and special or hazardous waste removal/disposal, grading, leveling, and clearance of such emergency vacation, repair, or demolition shall be collected in the manner provided in section 14-332. 
(e)  If, within thirty (30) days after the date the city vacates, repairs or demolishes a building pursuant to subsection 14-345(a), the owner files with the city a written request for a hearing, the DSDB will conduct a hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 14-343. 
(f)  Upon ordering and executing emergency abatement by demolition, the building official shall execute an affidavit describing his actions. Copies of the affidavit shall be maintained among the official records of the building official's department and in the minute records of the DSDB for two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 07-1872, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 18-2171, § 29, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 14-346. - Emergency abatement for safety of first responders. 
(a)  If the building official or fire marshal determines that one or more structural conditions threaten the immediate safety of first responders, the building official or fire marshal shall order the immediate vacation of the building or structure, and shall demolish or repair the building or structure or portions thereof to the extent that it no longer poses such a hazard. 
(b)  After the building or structure is vacated and either repaired or demolished, the procedure set forth in section 14-345 shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 18-2171, § 30, 11-19-2018)  
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; emergency services, ch. 34; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 70; signs, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 102; vehicles for hire, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Public houses of amusement, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 178 et seq.; Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4413(29bb); consumer protection, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5069-9.01 et seq.; licensing of persons with criminal backgrounds, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-13c et seq.; municipal regulation of use of highways by motor vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6698; occupational and business regulation, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8402 et seq.; weights and measures, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 13.001 et seq.; municipal regulation of miscellaneous businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.001 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented business, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq.; deceptive business practices, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 32.42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DONATION DROP BOXES 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.] 
Donation drop box means any unattended outdoor container, receptacles, or similar device used for soliciting and collecting donations such as clothing, toys, or other salvageable personal property. 
Property owner means the person that has care and control of the parking area where the donation drop box is placed. 
Operator means a person who manages the organization for which the donations are solicited or the person who applies for the donation drop box permit. 
(Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 18-2. - Permit required. 
(a)  Operators of donation drop boxes are prohibited from placing donation drop boxes on all public and private property in the city without first obtaining a permit from the building official. The permit must be renewed annually. 
(b)  To obtain a permit, the operator must pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee and show: 
(1)  A sketch indicating the spot where the donation drop box will be placed; 
(2)  The dimensions of the donation drop box; 
(3)  The signage that will be on the donation drop box; 
(4)  Written consent from the property owner, property manager, or person who has a right to possession of the property, indicating that the donation drop box may be placed on their property and acknowledging that they will be held responsible for maintenance of the area around the donation drop box; and 
(5)  That the donation drop box will comply with all requirements in this article. 
(c)  The operator may not transfer the permit to any other person or organization. 
(d)  The operator shall affix a copy of the permit to the donation drop box in a manner that ensures that it will not [be] damaged by rain. 
(Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 18-3. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  The building official may revoke the permit for failure of the operator or property owner to comply with the requirements in this article. The operator may appeal the revocation to the city manager or his designee within seventy-two (72) hours of the revocation notice. 
(b)  The donation drop box must be removed within seven (7) days of the permit revocation. If not removed within seven (7) days, the city shall have it removed and the operator shall be billed the removal and storage costs. 
(Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 18-4. - Construction and placement. 
(a)  Donation drop boxes may not be placed on any residentially zoned property with the exception of R-4. 
(b)  Donation drop boxes must: 
(1)  Be constructed of metal, fiber glass or wood; 
(2)  Have a sign or label indicating the name, address, and telephone number of the organization; 
(3)  Be secured at all times, except when they are being emptied; 
(4)  Have a lid or a top to protect the contents from the weather; and 
(5)  Be no larger than one hundred two (102) cubic feet. 
(c)  Donation drop boxes may not be placed so that they block driveways, interfere with traffic flow or visibility, are on minimum required parking spaces, are in front, rear, or side yard setback, or on a required landscape area. 
(d)  Only one (1) donation drop box may be placed on a platted lot. 
(Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 18-5. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The area around the donation drop box shall be kept free of debris and shall be emptied often enough so that the donations do not overflow. 
(b)  Donation drop boxes shall not have structural damage, holes, or visible rust. 
(c)  The city shall give the property owner seventy-two (72) hours written notice to clear the debris. If the debris is not cleared, the city shall clear the debris and bill the property owner for the clean-up costs. 
(Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 18-6. - Existing donation drop boxes. 
(a)  Operators of existing donation drop boxes shall be given oral notice that they have thirty (30) days to obtain a permit. If the operators do not apply for a permit, the operators and the property owners have thirty (30) days to remove the donation drop boxes or the property owners may give the city permission to remove the donation drop boxes. 
(b)  If an operator cannot be reached, a letter will be mailed to the address on the donation drop box, if available, and posted on the donation drop box itself. The operator shall have thirty (30) days from the day the letter is mailed or posted on the box. 
(c)  If the city removes the donation drop box, the property owner or the operator shall be billed the removal and storage costs. 
(Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 8-5-2013)  
Secs. 18-7—18-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ITINERANT PRECIOUS METALS, CRAFTED PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS, AND SEMIPRECIOUS STONES DEALERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Crafted precious metals, dealer purchase and disposition, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 2010, amended Art. II, Div. 1, to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 18-26—18-32, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 81-785, § 1, adopted Apr. 6, 1981; and Code 1958, §§ 14-29(b), (f), (g) and (i). 
 
Sec. 18-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Crafted precious metal means jewelry, silverware, an art object, or another object, other than a coin or commemorative medallion, made in whole or in part from precious metal. 
Itinerant dealer means a person who engages in the business of purchasing and/or selling crafted precious metal or gems or semiprecious stones from a building, structure or any part thereof that the person has leased, occupied, or used for a period or term of less ninety (90) days or from a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this article, any person conducting such business from a hotel or motel room shall be presumed to be an itinerant dealer. 
Precious metal means gold, silver, platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium, osmium, ruthenium, or an alloy of those metals. 
Gems or semiprecious stones shall mean any natural or industrially produced gem of some value whether of precious or semiprecious quality, customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 18-27. - Applicability of subchapter. 
This subchapter applies only to the sale and/or purchase of precious metal, crafted precious metal, gems, and semiprecious stones that have been used primarily for personal, family, or household purposes and that is sold to itinerant dealers. It does not apply to dental or pharmaceutical applications; liquidations, government, or judicial sales; pawnshops; or dealer to dealer sales. This article does not replace V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 1956, which regulates the sale and purchase of precious metals. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 18-28. - Permit. 
(a)  No itinerant dealer may purchase or sell precious metal, crafted precious metal, gems, or semiprecious stones in the City of Lake Jackson without an itinerant precious metals dealers permit issued by the chief of police. The information provided on the permit application shall include: 
(1)  A copy of the registration statement required under state law to be filed with Texas Department of Public Safety; 
(2)  The name and address and local contact phone number of the itinerant dealer; 
(3)  The location where business is to be conducted within the city; 
(4)  If the itinerant dealer is an association, the name and address of each member of the association; 
(5)  If the itinerant dealer is a corporation, the name and address of each officer and director of the corporation; 
(6)  Driver's license number of the itinerant dealer and employees who will be working in Lake Jackson; 
(7)  Whether or not the itinerant dealer or any employee of the itinerant dealer, has been found guilty of any criminal offense by any court of competent jurisdiction and, if so, the venue of such offense and penalty imposed; 
(8)  Whether or not the itinerant dealer has been or is currently a party of any civil litigation arising out of sales or purchases or any goods or services and if so, the identity of other parties to the suit, the location of the suit, and the outcome of the suit; 
(9)  Whether the itinerant dealer has ever before engaged in business under an assumed name, and if so, the name assumed by such business; and 
(10)  Any other information deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued to an itinerant dealer if he has been convicted of, in the past three (3) years, a crime involving theft or a violation of V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 1956. 
(c)  A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid before the permit is issued. 
(d)  The permit is nontransferable and shall be kept publicly displayed at the itinerant dealer's place of business. 
(e)  The permit shall expire thirty (30) days after it has been issued. However, if the itinerant dealer changes the location within the city where business is to be conducted, the itinerant dealer must apply for a new permit. 
(f)  Itinerant dealers may apply for another permit no earlier than seven (7) days before the initial permit expires. There is no limit on the number of permits that an itinerant dealer may apply for. 
(g)  The permit may be revoked by the chief of police if the itinerant dealer is found guilty of a criminal offense of theft or if the itinerant dealer has violated this article. Within ten (10) days of such revocation by the chief of police, the permit holder shall have the right of appeal to the city council whose decision shall be final. Once a permit is revoked, the itinerant dealer may not apply for another permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 18-29. - Seller information required; filing. 
(a)  Before the itinerant dealer may accept any of a seller's property, the seller must file with the itinerant dealer a list describing all of the seller's precious metal, crafted precious metal, gems, and semiprecious stones to be accepted by the itinerant dealer. The list must contain: 
(1)  The seller's name, address, and age; 
(2)  A complete and accurate description of the articles, including weight and names, letters, numbers, and/or other identifying marks appearing on the items; and 
(3)  The seller's certification that the information is true and complete. 
(b)  The itinerant dealer shall record the seller's driver's license number, or personal identification number, military ID number or passport number upon physical presentation of the license or personal identification certificate by the seller. The record must accompany the list. 
(c)  The list shall be submitted to the chief of police not later than forty-eight (48) hours after the information is given to the itinerant dealer. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 18-30. - Report; filing. 
(a)  In addition to the abovementioned list, the itinerant dealer must also file a report with the chief of police stating: 
(1)  The amount paid or sold for the article. 
(2)  A concise description of the article including make, model, brand name and physical description. 
(b)  The report shall be filed with the chief of police not later than 48 hours after the item is purchased or sold. 
(c)  The itinerant dealer shall retain a copy of the report until the third anniversary of the date the report is filed. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 18-31. - Required retention of precious metal, crafted precious metal, gems, and semiprecious stones. 
(a)  An itinerant dealer may not melt, deface, alter, or dispose of precious metal, crafted precious metal, gems, or semiprecious stones that are the subject of the list required by this article before the twenty-first day after the date the list is filed unless: 
(1)  The chief of police to whom the report is submitted authorizes disposition of the articles; or 
(2)  The itinerant dealer obtains the name, address, and description of the buyer and retains a record of that information. 
(b)  Within the twenty-one-day period, the itinerant dealer may not make or cause to be made any change to the item purchased. If the chief of police has reasonable suspicion that the item is stolen or to believe that the information furnished by the seller is false, the retention period may be extended for a reasonable amount of time for the police to conduct an investigation. 
(c)  An itinerant dealer who retains information under subsection (a)(2) shall make that information available for inspection by any peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 18-32. - Inspection of precious metal, crafted precious metal, gems, and semiprecious stones by peace officer. 
An itinerant dealer shall make precious metal, crafted precious metal, gems, and semiprecious stones purchased by the itinerant dealer available for inspection by a peace officer during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 18-33. - Purchase from minor. 
An itinerant dealer may not purchase precious metal, crafted precious metal, gems, or semiprecious stones from a person younger than 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 18-34. - Violation. 
A violation of this division shall be a Class C misdemeanor and the penalty for violating this article shall be as provided for in section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake Jackson. Each and every item acquired in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate transaction and each failure of an itinerant dealer to keep a record of each transaction as required by this article or to comply with any other provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-1931, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Secs. 18-35—18-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 18-46. - Required. 
No itinerant dealer or dealer regularly licensed to do business in the city may purchase gold, silver, platinum, gems or semiprecious stones without a license, nor shall any dealer hold himself out by advertising or otherwise as a purchaser located in the city without first obtaining a license. Such advertising prior to the granting of the license shall constitute cause for its denial. Such application shall be made on a form prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 81-785, § 1, 4-6-81; Code 1958, § 14-29(a))  
Sec. 18-47. - Fee and procedures. 
(a)  Licenses required by this division shall be issued by the chief of police to any applicant able to produce satisfactory evidence of good character who has not been convicted of a crime as described in applicable provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 6252-13c and 6252-13d within the immediate past seven (7) years, upon payment of the required fees, posting of the required bonds and compliance with all other requirements of this section. Application for such license shall be made on forms prescribed by the chief of police, the information upon which shall include the applicant's full name, any aliases, address, age, sex, social security number, criminal record if any, fingerprints and photograph, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer or proposed employer. 
(b)  The license shall designate the premises on which the licensee shall conduct his business and specify the date or dates upon which the business may be conducted. The license shall be issued on a twelve-month basis; except that itinerant dealer licenses shall be valid for the period of time stated in the application or one (1) year, whichever is shorter. 
(c)  A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day shall be charged to itinerant dealers and a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per year shall be charged to dealers regularly licensed to do business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-785, § 1, 4-6-81; Code 1958, § 14-29(c))  
Sec. 18-48. - False statements. 
Any false statements made on the application form for a license under this division void the license from its inception. 
(Ord. No. 81-785, § 1, 4-6-81; Code 1958, § 14-29(e))  
Sec. 18-49. - Nontransferable and display. 
The license issued under this division shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable, nor shall there be any abatement of the tax upon such license by reason of the fact that the licensee shall have exercised the privilege for any period of less than that for which it was granted. The license shall at all times be kept publicly exposed by the licensee on his business premises. 
(Ord. No. 81-785, § 1, 4-6-81; Code 1958, § 14-29(d))  
Sec. 18-50. - Bond. 
Every itinerant dealer licensed under this division shall at the time of license and before the same shall be operative, enter with either one (1) corporate or two (2) personal sufficient sureties into a joint and several recognizance to the city in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 81-785, § 1, 4-6-81; Code 1958, § 14-29(h))  
Secs. 18-51—18-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALK CAFES 
 
Sec. 18-76. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person who makes an application for a permit for a sidewalk cafe. 
City manager means the city manager or his designee, including code enforcement officers. 
Contiguous restaurant means a restaurant that adjoins the area where the sidewalk cafe will be located and in which food preparation, sanitation and related services for the sidewalk cafï¿½1/21/2 shall be performed. 
Downtown means the triangular area bounded by State Highway 332, Oyster Creek Drive, and Oak Drive. 
Permittee means a person who receives a permit to operate a sidewalk cafï¿½1/21/2. 
Public necessity means any lawful need or use of property by a governmental body including needs created by a change in circumstances affecting pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
Public street means the entire width of a way which is held by the city in fee or by easement or dedication that has a part open for public use for vehicular travel. 
Restaurant means a food service establishment where food is served in individual portions for consumption on the premises. This term shall not include an establishment which operates exclusively as a caterer, a mobile food unit, a retail food store or a temporary food service establishment. 
Roadway means that portion of a public street which is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the curb, berm, or shoulder. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a public street which is between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, that is improved and designed for or is ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. 
Sidewalk cafe means an outdoor dining area located on a public sidewalk and containing removable tables, chairs, plants, and related appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-77. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, vend, operate, maintain or serve any item from a sidewalk cafe without a valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-78. - Permit application. 
(a)  Application for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be made in writing to the city manager. 
(b)  Sidewalk cafes shall be permitted only when such are abutting and contiguous to a restaurant in the downtown area in which food preparation, sanitation and related services for the sidewalk cafe shall be performed. 
(c)  The following shall be included in the application: 
(1)  Proof of general liability insurance as further described in this article; 
(2)  Proof of ownership of the property that adjoins the area where the sidewalk cafe will be located, or written permission from the owner of such property for the applicant to operate a sidewalk cafe; and 
(3)  A sketch showing the proposed layout of the site, including sidewalk dimensions; location of existing fixtures; number, size, and location of tables and chairs; location and size of barriers; and location of entrances and exits to the contiguous restaurant. 
(d)  Prior to issuance of the permit, adjacent properties shall be notified of the application. The property owners and tenants shall be given fourteen (14) calendar days to contact the city manager with any concerns or questions. The city manager may take the concerns into account when deciding whether to issue the permit. 
(e)  If the permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial to the city council within fourteen (14) calendar days of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-79. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafes may only be open during the hours the contiguous restaurant is open. 
(b)  The permittee must clean the area and adjacent sidewalk and street of spills and litter each night after the sidewalk cafe is closed. 
(c)  If a sidewalk cafe uses disposable or paper plates or napkins, the sidewalk cafe shall provide an outdoor trash receptacle for patrons. 
(d)  All sidewalks shall be pressure washed when directed to do so by the city manager. 
(e)  Neither food nor beverages shall be served to a patron at a sidewalk cafe unless that patron is seated at a table. 
(f)  Alcohol may be served in glasses or mugs only. It may not be served in bottles or cans. 
(g)  The city manager may impose additional requirements not addressed in this article to protect against health hazards related to sidewalk cafe operation and may modify requirements for physical facilities when health, safety or welfare concerns arise. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-80. - Insurance and indemnification. 
(a)  The permittee's insurance policy shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. The insurance shall meet or exceed the following minimum amounts: two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for each person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for each single occurrence for bodily injury or death and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each single occurrence for injury to or destruction of property. The city shall be an additional insured on each such policy and such policy shall include a provision to the effect that the city will be notified in writing by the insurance company thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation of such policy. The permittee shall then have ten (10) days to replace that coverage or the permit shall be deemed revoked without further action on the part of the city. 
(b)  The permittee shall bear all risk of loss or damages to permittee's property and will indemnify and hold harmless the city for all liabilities arising out of the operation of the sidewalk cafe. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-81. - Encroachment; barriers; obstructions. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafes shall not encroach in whole or in part upon any sidewalk or public walkway in such a manner that it significantly impedes or inconveniences pedestrians. 
(b)  No sidewalk cafe may be enclosed by fixed walls. 
(c)  Sidewalk cafe boundaries must be outlined by the use of temporary barriers such as balustrades, planters, cordons or railings unless a barrier outlining the area already exists. Temporary barriers must be easily removed and shall not be affixed to the sidewalk or to any permanent structure. 
(d)  All sidewalk cafes shall be open to the air, but canopies are permitted. 
(e)  Sidewalk cafes shall in no way obstruct the ingress to or egress from any other building or business. 
(f)  All sidewalk cafes and their attendant facilities or improvements shall comply with clearances required for structures in relation to utility lines. 
(g)  Sidewalk cafes shall not obstruct access to hydrants, street lights, or mailboxes. 
(h)  Tables, chairs, and barriers do not need to be removed nightly. However, all table umbrellas must be closed every night. 
(i)  The permittee is responsible for the condition of the sidewalk and the making of repairs to the sidewalk area. Repairs shall be made within thirty (30) days notice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-82. - Lighting. 
Sidewalk cafes shall provide and maintain adequate lighting so as allow pedestrians to observe and avoid obstructions. Additionally all lighting shall be in compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Lighting shall not be located or affixed in a manner which shall interfere with or obscure the vision of vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Lighting shall be shaded and directed in such a way that it is not obtrusive to adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-83. - Hours of operation. 
A sidewalk cafe may operate only during the normal and regularly operated hours of the restaurant to which it is adjacent. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-84. - Permit length and fees. 
Permits shall expire on March 31 of each year. The initial permit fee shall be twenty-four dollars ($24.00), calculated on a pro rata basis. The permit renewal fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-85. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafe permits constitute a privilege, not a right and as such are subject to demands to remove, either temporarily or permanently, any and all facilities, without liability, upon notice by the city manager that public necessity exists. 
(1)  Written notice shall be provided as promptly as possible. 
(2)  The notice shall provide the reason or reasons for removal. 
(b)  Aside from public necessity, the following shall be grounds for revocation of the sidewalk cafe permit: 
(1)  Three (3) violations of this article within a twelve-month span; 
(2)  Disturbance of the peace; 
(3)  Risk to public safety; or 
(4)  Allowing alcohol to leave the premises. 
(c)  Prior to revocation for the reasons listed in subsection (b), the permittee shall give ten (10) days' written notice. If the permittee requests a hearing prior to the expiration of that ten-day notice period, the city council shall hold a hearing to determine if the permit shall be revoked. If the permittee fails to request such a hearing, the revocation shall become effective upon the expiration of the ten-day notice period. If operations under a permit granted under this section are revoked, all tables, chairs and other appurtenances used as a part of the sidewalk cafe shall be immediately removed from the sidewalk. 
(d)  A new sidewalk cafe permit shall not be issued for one (1) year following revocation, unless the ownership of the sidewalk cafe changes. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Sec. 18-86. - Bond requirement. 
No sidewalk cafe permit shall be issued until an applicant has provided a cash bond or surety bond, with permittee as the principal and a corporate bonding company licensed to do business in the State of Texas as a surety, in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of removal of the facilities or improvements by the city or any public utility under any of the provisions of this article. Should permittee fail to timely remove its facilities upon request or demand, said permittee shall reimburse the city or any public utility in the event that the city or public utility removes the facilities pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-1924, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Secs. 18-87—18-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-101. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Achromatic means colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. The term includes, but is not limited to, grays, tans, and light earth tones. The term does not include white, black, or any bold coloration that attracts attention. 
Adult bookstore/adult video store means a commercial establishment or enterprise which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade, or which derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for sale or rental, or any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motions pictures, video cassettes, digital video discs, or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, toys, novelties, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities". 
Adult cabaret means a restaurant or similar commercial establishment that regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motions pictures, video cassettes, digital video disc, or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(2)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Offers a sleeping room with films, motions pictures, video cassettes, digital video disc, or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
Designated operator means an individual who is in control of the operations of a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to a manager, assistant manager, floor manager, or shift manager. 
Nude or seminude means the showing of one (1) or more "specified anatomical areas" with less than a full opaque covering or a state of dress which fails to completely and opaquely cover one (1) or more "specified anatomical areas". 
Operate or cause to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation, regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner, licensee or manager of the establishment. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, or any type of business entity. 
Residential area means any area zoned E-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4, PURZ, MH-1, or MH-2, or the residential areas within a planned unit development (PUD). 
Sexually oriented business means any commercial establishment or enterprise which as one (1) of its principal business purposes offers a product or service that is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to a customer, and that is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or where the employer, employees, or customers in the presence of another adult, may be nude, partially nude, or have "specified anatomical areas" not covered. This term shall include, but not be limited to, adult video arcades, adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult cabarets, adult movie theaters, sex parlors, massage parlors, nude modeling studios, love parlors, adult tanning salons, topless or nude bars, or topless carwashes. 
Specified anatomical areas means one (1) or more of the following: Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock, female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means the depiction or display of, in person or by picture of, one (1) or more of the following: human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts; or any combination of the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-102. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Based on the studies of secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses conducted in Los Angeles, California; Palm Beach County Florida; Daytona Beach, Florida; Toledo Ohio; Austin, Texas; Amarillo, Texas; and by the Texas City Attorneys Association; and based on the paper "Rural Hot Spots: The Case of Adult Businesses" by Richard McLeary; and based on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); and based upon the public hearing that council held on August 2, 2010, the council finds that: 
(1)  The Legislature of the State of Texas has determined that unrestricted operation of sexually oriented businesses may be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of a community by contributing to the decline of neighborhoods and contributing to the growth of criminal activity; and 
(2)  There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime, such as the possession or use of controlled substances, the proliferation of drug-related activity, prostitution, disorderly conduct, vandalism, robberies, and assaults; and 
(3)  Regulating the appearance of the premises of sexually oriented businesses and regulating the signage of such businesses preserves the value of neighboring properties and protects minors from exposure to sexual materials; and 
(4)  Licensing sexually oriented businesses is a legitimate and reasonable means of regulation to ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal activities; and 
(5)  Charging a fee for a sexually oriented business license is necessary to offset costs of inspections, investigations, and enforcement; and 
(6)  Sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to urban blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area. 
(b)  Further, the council hereby states that the purpose of this article is to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to control their negative secondary effects in the community. The purpose is not to deny access to or deny expression of materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or the Article I, section 8 of the Texas Constitution; and 
(c)  Further, the Texas legislature, by enacting V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Chapter 243, allow cities to regulate sexually oriented businesses. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-103. - Location. 
(a)  A sexually oriented business shall be located at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from the property line of any residential area, and one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from the property line of any church, public or private school, park, licensed day care, or from another sexually oriented business. Further, because the commercial establishments along Highway 288 and Highway 332 attract or are oriented towards families with young children, and in as much as the city is dependent on the continuation of this family oriented atmosphere for its economy and continuing health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, no sexually oriented business may be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of commercial establishments on Highway 332 between Highway 288 and FM 2004 and on Highway 288 between Highway 332 and This Way. 
(b)  Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening objects or structures, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used or to be used as a sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the residential area, church, public or private school, park, licensed day care or commercial establishments on Highway 332 between Highway 288 and FM 2004 and on Highway 288 between Highway 332 and This Way. 
(c)  A sexually oriented business may only be located in a free-standing building. A sexually oriented business may not be located in an indoor or outdoor shopping center, shopping plaza, strip mall, or similar type of building. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-104. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 18-105. - License. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to operate, or cause to be operated, a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  The application fee for a new or a renewed sexually oriented business license is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). This fee is nonrefundable. 
(c)  The sexually oriented business license shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the sexually oriented business for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-106. - Application for license. 
(a)  Not later than sixty (60) days before filing an application for a sexually oriented business license, the applicant must comply with the notice by sign requirement contained in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.0075. Not later than five (5) days after the date of the sign's posting, the applicant must notify the chief of police, by either certified mail or hand delivery, of the posting. The notification must be in the form of a sworn statement indicating the location of the sign and the date it was posted. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. See section 18-129 for additional diagram requirements for sexually oriented businesses that show adult films or videos. 
(c)  Only a person who is an officer of or who has an ownership interest in a sexually oriented business may apply for a license for the business. Each applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If an applicant who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as the applicant. If an applicant is other than an individual, each individual who is an officer of the business or who has a twenty (20) percent or greater ownership interest in the business must sign the application for a license as an applicant. The application must be sworn to be true and correct by each applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The application must identify those persons required to sign the application under subsection (c) and the application must identify all parent and related corporations or entities of any person who will own or operate the sexually oriented business and include the names of the officers of each parent or related corporation or entity. 
(f)  The application must include the name, address, and telephone number of one (1) or more designated operators who will be present on the premises of the sexually oriented business during any hours of operation. The licensee shall maintain a current list of designated operators with the chief of police. Before a person may serve as a designated operator of the sexually oriented business, the person must be named in the license application, or a supplement or amendment to the license application, and not be disqualified to operate a sexually oriented business under this article. 
(g)  The application must include a current official Texas criminal history report with a fingerprint card (issued within the preceding twelve (12) months) for the applicant, the applicant's spouse, and each licensee and designated operator showing that they are not disqualified to operate a sexually oriented business under this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-107. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within sixty (60) days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under the age of 18. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information required under this article or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant, an applicant's spouse, a licensee, or a designated operator has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. 
(5)  Any fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant or the sexually oriented business is in violation of or is not in compliance with a provision of this article. 
(7)  An applicant, an applicant's spouse, a licensee, or a designated operator has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; or 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; or 
(iii)  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
(8)  An applicant has been operating the proposed business as a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued under this article. 
(9)  Operation of the proposed sexually oriented business would violate the city's zoning ordinances. 
(10)  Operation of the proposed sexually oriented business would violate a provision in this article. 
(b)  For offenses listed under subsection (a), the fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the disqualification of the applicant, the applicant's spouse, or a designated operator. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, when the chief of police denies issuance or renewal of a license, the applicant may not apply for or be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year after the date the denial became final. If, subsequent to the denial, the chief of police finds that the basis for the denial has been corrected or abated, the applicant may apply for and be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. If issuance or renewal of a license is denied for a violation of subsection 18-103(a) (Location) only, the applicant may be granted a license immediately upon compliance with subsection 18-103(a) of this article. If issuance or renewal of a license is denied under subsection (a)(7)a. (state crimes), the applicant may not apply for or be issued another sexually oriented business license until the appropriate number of years required by subsection (a)(8)b. has elapsed. If issuance or renewal of a license is denied under subsection (a)(4) (violation of this article), the applicant may not apply for or be issued another sexually oriented business license until the time period required by subsection (a)(4) has elapsed. 
(d)  The chief of police, upon approving issuance of a sexually oriented business license, shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of that action and state where the applicant may obtain the license. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-108. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant, licensee, designated operator, or employee shall permit representatives of the police department, the fire marshal's office, and the building official's office to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(b)  An applicant, licensee, designated operator, or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department, the fire marshal's office, and the building official's office at any time the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for business and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel that are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-109. - License renewal. 
Each license expires one (1) year from the date of issuance. A license may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 18-106. Application for renewal should be made at least sixty (60) days before the expiration date, and when made less than sixty (60) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected by the pendency of the application. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-110. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-111. - Suspension. 
(a)  The chief of police shall suspend a license if the chief of police determines that a licensee, a designated operator, or an employee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with division 3 (Regulations) [section 18-116 et seq.] of this article; 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; or 
(3)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(b)  The suspension shall last thirty (30) days from the date that the violation is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-112. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if the chief of police determines that one (1) or more of the following is true: 
(1)  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process. 
(2)  A licensee or a designated operator has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises. 
(3)  A licensee or a designated operator has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises. 
(4)  A licensee or a designated operator knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
(5)  A licensee or designated operator has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection 18-107(7)a. for which the time period required in subsection 18-107(7)b. has not elapsed. 
(6)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the sexually oriented business premises of a crime listed in subsection 18-107(7)a. for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the licensee or the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. 
(7)  A licensee or a designated operator has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(9)  A licensee or a designated operator has violated section 18-110 (Transfer of license) of this article. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the specified sexual activity to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation will continue for one (1) year, and the licensee, for one (1) year after the date revocation becomes effective, shall not apply for or be issued a sexually oriented business license. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may apply for and be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5), an applicant may not apply for or be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under subsection 18-107(7)b. has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-113. - Notice of denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented business license or suspends or revokes a sexually oriented business license, the chief of police shall deliver to the applicant or licensee, either by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action, the basis of the action, and the right to an appeal. 
(b)  If the chief of police suspends or revokes a license or denies renewal of a license that was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted, the chief of police may not enforce such action before the 11th day after the date the written notice required by subsection (a) is delivered to the applicant or licensee. 
(c)  The licensee shall discontinue operating the sexually oriented business and surrender the license to the chief of police by 11:59 p.m. of the 10th day after the date notice required by subsection (a) is delivered to the applicant or licensee, if no appeal is filed. 
(d)  For purposes of this article, written notice is deemed to be delivered: 
(1)  On the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or licensee; or 
(2)  Three (3) days after the date the notice is placed in the United States mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or licensee at the address provided for the applicant or licensee in the most recent license application. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-114. - Appeal of denial, suspension, or revocation. 
Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, the licensee shall have the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within thirty (30) days after the notice of the decision of the chief of police is deemed delivered. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-116. - Offense. 
It is an offense for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business that is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-117. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, shall be operated at any time between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and midnight and noon on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-118. - Operators on premises. 
Each sexually oriented business shall have at least one (1) designated operator present on the premises of the sexually oriented business during operation. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-119. - Alcoholic beverage sales and consumption prohibited. 
It shall be an offense for any person, including employees and patrons, while on the premises of a sexually oriented business, to possess, serve, offer for sale or consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-120. - Exterior appearance. 
(a)  Merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business shall not be visible from any point outside the premises. 
(b)  Signs shall not advertise, either graphically or verbally, including explicit or literal expression, connation, implied reference, slang, or jargon, any specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Signs shall also not contain the letter "x" unless the letter is used to spell a word, such as "exam". 
(c)  Each sexually oriented business shall comply with all of the city's sign ordinance requirements, as the requirements exist upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derived and as they may be amended from time to time. 
(d)  Each sexually oriented business shall have a sign clearly visible from the outside identifying it as a sexually oriented business and notifying people that persons under eighteen (18) are prohibited from entering the premises. 
(e)  Exterior portions of the sexually oriented business shall not be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(g)  No sexually oriented business shall construct or erect a fence, wall, or similar barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot for the establishment from being visible from the public right-of-way. 
(h)  No sexually oriented business shall have a revolving light or strobe light that flashes or projects illumination, single-colored or multicolored, outside of the building, except for lighting devices required by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar agencies. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-121. - Monitoring. 
It shall be the duty of the designated operator to designate one (1) or more employees to monitor the parking lot premises by the use of a video camera and monitors, which shall operate and record continuously during all hours that the sexually oriented business is operating. The recordings shall be preserved for a period of not less than thirty (30) days and are subject to the inspection requirements in section 18-108. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-122. - False statements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, when complying with this article, to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material fact or to give or use any assumed name or fictitious name other than the one (1) duly filed for record in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act (Texas Business and Commerce Code Annotated, Chapter 71). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity to use a license which has been issued to another individual, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a license. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-123. - Not to legalize anything prohibited by state law or city ordinance. 
These regulations do not legalize anything prohibited under the penal code or any other state law or city ordinance. Further any violation of the penal code or other state law or city ordinance shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the license issued. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-124. - Prohibition against minors in a sexually oriented business. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) commits an offense if he or she knowingly enters the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-125. - Additional restrictions for nude model studios. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to appear in a state of nudity or knowingly allow another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises that can be seen from outside the premises. 
(b)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-126. - Additional restrictions for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel, as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person, in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, to rent or subrent a sleeping room to another person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, to rent or subrent the same sleeping room again. For purposes of this subsection, the term "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-127. - Adult bookstores, adult video stores, and adult arcades. 
Adult bookstores, adult video stores, and adult arcades shall have a manager's station that affords an unobstructed view of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-128. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be an offense for a person to appear in person in a nude or semi-nude condition in a sexually oriented business, unless the person is an employee who, while nude or semi-nude, is at least ten (10) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two (2) feet from the floor. 
(b)  It shall be an offense for an employee, while nude or semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is nude or semi-nude in the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  It shall be an offense for an employee, while nude or semi-nude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch a nude or semi-nude employee or the clothing of a nude or semi-nude employee. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-129. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, digital video disc, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license or renewal of such license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of any walls or doors or of a manager's station may be made after a license is granted, without the prior approval of the chief of police. 
(4)  The owner and designated operator of the premises shall ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside any part of the premises which can be viewed from each manager's station. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, the interior of the premises shall be configured in a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  The owner and designated operator and any agents and employees present in the premises shall ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and shall ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place in which patrons are permitted access. 
(8)  The owner and a designated operator and any agents and employees present in the premises shall ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty as provided in subsection (a) of this section commits an offense if the person knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 11-1974, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Secs. 18-130—18-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 18-141. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Bulb means an incandescent light bulb or an LED (light-emitting diode) bulb. 
C6 bulb means a bulb that has a base that is three-quarter (¾) inch (nineteen (19) mm) in diameter. 
C7 bulb means a bulb that has a base that is seven-eighths ( 7/8 ) of an inch in diameter (twenty-two (22) mm). 
C9 bulb means a bulb that has a base that is one (1) inch in diameter. 
Christmas lights or mini lights mean light fixtures that use bulbs that are sized C6, C7, or C9 or LED bulbs that are eight (8) mm or smaller. 
Rope light means a light that has Christmas lights or mini lights inside of a PVC tube. 
String lights means a lighting fixture that is composed of electrical wiring encased in plastic with sockets for bulb placement. 
(Ord. No. 14-2049, § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 18-142. - Intent. 
The intent of this article is to promote a higher level of quality and design for storefronts and streetscapes. 
(Ord. No. 14-2049, § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 18-143. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to the outdoor lighting of eating or drinking establishments, such as restaurants, cafes, coffee houses, and bars. 
(Ord. No. 14-2049, § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 18-144. - String lights. 
(a)  String lights may only be used in outdoor patio areas. All string lights must be turned off when the eating establishment is closed. 
(b)  String lights must be designed to meet GCFI standards and installed in accordance with the National Electric Code. 
(c)  String light bulbs must be of standard wattage and designed for outdoor use. 
(d)  String light bulbs may only be white or clear. Colored lights are not allowed. 
(e)  String lights must be securely hung from a sturdy fixture and should hang no lower than six and one-half (6½) feet above the ground. 
(f)  String lights must have at least twelve-inch socket spacing. 
(g)  Structural supports for the string lights cannot belong to the city. The structural supports must be privately owned and privately maintained. 
(Ord. No. 14-2049, § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 18-145. - Prohibitions. 
It is unlawful to erect, maintain, or install: 
(a)  Red or green lights, except traffic-control lights, within ten (10) feet of public rights-of-way or two hundred (200) feet of traffic-control lights, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Flashing, blinking, animated, or intermittent lighting. 
(c)  Lights that glare or shine onto the street or adjacent properties. 
(d)  Miniature, mini, Christmas, and rope string lights, except for a maximum of forty (40) days during the Christmas season. 
(Ord. No. 14-2049, § 1, 9-2-2014)  
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Plans for disaster areas, § 3.07(j). 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; local and interjurisdictional emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101 et seq.; false alarm or report, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.06. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Designation of director and coordinator. 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor. 
(1)  The city manager shall act as the emergency management coordinator, and the assistant city manager shall act as the assistant emergency management coordinator. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 22-29. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-1) 
State Law reference— Notice of person who heads local agency, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101(b).  
Sec. 22-27. - Powers and duties of director generally. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the director shall include an on-going survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city; and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. 
(b)  The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. 
A state of disaster may be declared in cases of hurricane, flood, fire, chemical release, terrorist act, riot or other similar events. 
(c)  The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-2; Ord. No. 05-1801, § 1, 11-21-2005) 
State Law reference— Local emergency management plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.106.  
Sec. 22-28. - Authorization to participate in formation of county program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-3) 
State Law reference— County emergency management programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.102.  
Sec. 22-29. - Additional duties and responsibilities of director. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal or other emergency management organizations. 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy. 
(6)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(7)  The supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(8)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-4) 
State Law reference— Mutual aid, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.109.  
Sec. 22-29.1. - Regulations in effect during declared disaster. 
The following regulations shall take effect immediately, within the entire corporate limits of the City of Lake Jackson, upon issuance of a declaration of disaster, and shall remain in effect until the state of disaster is terminated: 
(1)  Curfew. 
a.  A person shall not remain or travel upon any public or private property during the hours of or under the conditions determined by the city manager or the police chief. 
b.  Subsection a. shall not apply to: 
1.  A person authorized by the emergency management director to assist in the protection of the health, safety, or welfare of the public; or 
2.  A person who remains or travels upon private property which is owned by him or upon which the person has been invited. 
(2)  Movement of people and occupancy of premises. 
a.  A person shall not remain or travel upon any public or private property under conditions as determined by the city manager or the police chief. 
b.  Subsection a. shall not apply to a person authorized by local government officials to assist in the protection of the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(3)  Utilities. All utility services shall be discontinued, under conditions as determined by the city manager or the police chief. 
(4)  Flammable products. 
a.  A person shall not sell or give away gasoline or flammable or combustible products. 
b.  All gasoline stations shall be closed. 
(5)  Explosives. 
a.  A person shall not sell or barter, loan, or give away arms, ammunition, dynamite or other explosives. 
b.  All establishments where arms, ammunition, dynamite or other explosives are sold shall be closed. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages. 
a.  A person shall not sell or distribute beer, wine, liquor or alcoholic beverages of any kind. 
b.  Subsection a. shall not apply to the sale of medicine that contains alcohol. 
(7)  Price controls. A person shall not sell any of the following goods or services for more than the price the person charged for the goods or services before the date of the declaration of disaster: 
a.  Groceries, beverages, toilet articles, ice; 
b.  Construction and building materials and supplies, and earthmoving equipment and machinery; 
c.  Electric and gas generating/transmitting equipment, parts and accessories; 
d.  Charcoal briquettes, matches, candles, lamp illumination and heating unit carbides, dry batteries, light bulbs, flashlights and hand lanterns; 
e.  Hand tools (manual and power), hardware and household supplies, and equipment rental; 
f.  Automotive parts, supplies and accessories; 
g.  Plumbing and electrical tools and supplies; 
h.  Apartment, duplex, multi-family dwelling, rooming house, hotel and motel rental; 
i.  Gasoline, diesel oil, motor oil, kerosene, grease and automotive lubricants; 
j.  Restaurant, cafeteria, and boarding house meals; 
k.  Services of roofing and building contractors, plumbers, electricians, mechanics, tree surgeons, and automotive wrecker companies; 
l.  Medicine, pharmaceutical and medical equipment and supplies; 
m.  Blankets, quilts, bedspreads, bed linens, mattresses, bedsprings, bedsteads, towels, and toilet paper; and 
n.  Furniture and clothing. 
(Ord. No. 05-1801, § 1, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 07-1863, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 22-30. - Operational organization. 
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-5)  
Sec. 22-31. - Simulating termination of alarm. 
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate the termination of a warning shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-6) 
State Law reference— False alarm or report, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.06.  
Sec. 22-32. - Article regulations supersede others. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-7)  
Sec. 22-33. - Conflict with state, federal, military regulations. 
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-8)  
Sec. 22-34. - Limitation of liability. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city, a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-9) 
State Law reference— Personal liability exemption of member of emergency planning council or local emergency planning committee, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.174.  
Sec. 22-35. - Expenditure of funds. 
All expenditures of public funds for emergency management services shall be made as provided by law for making appropriations of ordinary expenses. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-10; Ord. No. 08-1887, § 1, 8-18-2008) 
State Law reference— Local finance, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.107.  
Sec. 22-36. - Loyalty oath required. 
Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the constitution of the United States, laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-12)  
Sec. 22-37. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-5. 
(Ord. No. 84-922, § 1, 3-19-84; Code 1958, § 4B-11) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of emergency management plan, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.173; impersonating public servant, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 37.11.  
Chapter 26 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, adopted July 16, 2012, amended ch. 26 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 26, §§ 26-1—26-30, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 10-1925, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2010. 
Charter reference— Power of city to implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters, § 2.01; power of city council to compromise and settle claims and lawsuits, § 3.07(q); municipal court, § 4.04; city attorney, § 4.05; city not required to give security or execute bond, § 11.07; damage suits, § 11.08. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq.; general law for municipal courts of record, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.481 et seq.; court procedures, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - COURT ESTABLISHED 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Court of record established. 
The Municipal Court of Record in the City of Lake Jackson is hereby established in order to provide a more efficient disposition of cases arising in the city and to provide a more effective enforcement of the ordinances of the city. The municipal court shall become a court of record from and after the 17th day of July, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Sec. 26-2. - Governing authority. 
The municipal court of record is established pursuant to the authority granted by the Uniform Municipal Courts of Record Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 30. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Sec. 26-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The municipal court of record shall have concurrent jurisdiction with any justice court in any precinct in which the city is located in criminal cases that arise within the city and are punishable by fine only. The municipal court of record has the jurisdiction and authority provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code chs. 29 and 30. 
(b)  The municipal court of record shall have: 
(1)  Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing the city's ordinances enacted under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214, subch. A; 
(2)  Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing the city's ordinances enacted under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683, subch. E; 
(3)  Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, subch. B within the city's territorial limits and property owned by the city located in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances; and 
(4)  Authority to issue: (a) search warrants for the purpose of investigating health and safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violations; and (b) seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending property and removing the debris from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Secs. 26-4—26-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Sec. 26-26. - Judge, powers, term, and removal. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court and all duly appointed temporary, alternate, or relief judges shall have and perform all the duties and powers conferred upon such office by state law, the city charter and city ordinances. 
(b)  The judge shall serve a term of two (2) years, unless removed sooner by city council according to procedures set out in the city charter, Article V of the Texas Constitution, or V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 21. During the removal proceedings, the city council may appoint a temporary judge to conduct municipal court proceedings and to fulfill all other judicial duties. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Sec. 26-27. - Prosecuting officer. 
The city attorney shall conduct all prosecutions in the municipal court. The city attorney shall have the authority to name a deputy to conduct or assist in conducting the prosecutions in the municipal court if she sees fit. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Sec. 26-28. - Seal, form, use. 
The municipal court shall have a seal with a star of five (5) points in the center and the words "Municipal Court of Record of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas," the impress of which shall be attached to all papers issued out of such court, and shall be used to authenticate the official acts of the clerk and of the judge. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Sec. 26-29. - Court clerks. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a clerk of the municipal court to perform all of the duties and have all the powers bestowed upon clerks of municipal courts by state law, the city charter and city ordinances. The city manager may also appoint such deputy clerks for the municipal court as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the municipal court and such deputy clerks shall perform all of the duties and have all the powers bestowed upon clerks of municipal courts by state law, the city charter and city ordinances. 
(b)  During the proceedings of the court, the clerk and deputy clerks shall serve at the direction of the municipal court judge. At all other times, they shall serve at the direction of the city manager who shall have the authority to remove the court clerk or deputy clerks according to the rules set forth in the city's personnel policies. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Sec. 26-30. - Municipal court technology fund. 
The municipal court technology fund is hereby created as authorized by the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. All defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the Lake Jackson Municipal Court shall pay a technology fee of four dollars ($4.00) as a cost of court. The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the director of finance for deposit in a fund to be known as the Municipal Court Technology Fund. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Sec. 26-31. - Recordings of court proceedings, record fees. 
(a)  The court proceedings shall be recorded by a good quality, electronic recording device. A court reporter is not required to be present to certify the reporter's record. The recording shall be kept for the twenty-day period beginning the day after the last day of the court proceeding, trial, or denial of motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. 
(b)  After giving written notice of appeal, the defendant shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the preparation of the clerk's record. The defendant shall also pay for the transcription of the recording. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Sec. 26-32. - Scofflaw fee. 
A twenty dollar ($20.00) fee shall be imposed on vehicle owners whose vehicle registration is denied due to delinquent City of Lake Jackson Municipal Court traffic fines or fees. The fee shall be paid to the Brazoria County Tax Assessor-Collector as reimbursement for expenses incurred while providing the registration hold service. 
(Ord. No. 15-2082, § 1, 10-19-2015)  
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, adopted June 4, 2007, amended ch. 34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 34, §§ 34-1—34-51, pertained to Emergency services, and derived from Ord. No. 01-1651, § 1, 3-26-2001. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Emergency Medical Services Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq.; fire detection and alarm devices, V.A.T.S., Insurance Code art. 5.43-2; Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4413(29bb); municipal regulation of burglar alarm systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 218. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm business means a business, all or part of which sells, leases, installs, monitors, maintains, services, repairs, alters or responds to any alarm system, in or on any building, structure or facility within the city. A business which manufactures or sells alarm systems from a fixed location is not an alarm business if it does not engage in the activities indicated above, nor designs any scheme for physical location and installation of an alarm system in a specific location and has no alarm agent visit the location where an alarm is to be installed. 
Alarm site means a premises or location served by an alarm system. 
Alarm system means a device or systems, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit, transmit or relay a remote or local audible, visual, or electronic signal intended to summon an emergency agency of the city to respond to an alarm site. The categories of alarm systems are burglary, robbery, fire, and panic. Alarm system does not mean an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants within a premises, but does include an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. 
Alarm user means a person who owns, leases, possesses, resides at, or manages the alarm site. 
Burglary alarm notification means a notification intended to summon the police, which is initiated or triggered by an alarm system designed to respond to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
False alarm notification means an alarm notification to the police department or fire department, when the responding officer or firefighter arrives within thirty (30) minutes after receipt of the alarm notification, and upon inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises, finds there is no evidence of a criminal offense, attempted criminal offense, or smoke or fire. 
Fire alarm notification means any audible or monitored alarm signal that is triggered by fire, smoke, or heat and is intended to summon the fire department. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible from the exterior of a structure. 
Permit holder means the person to whom an alarm permit is issued. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, or organization of two (2) or more persons having a joint or common economic interest or similar entity. 
Robbery or panic alarm notification means an alarm designed to be purposely activated by a person and intended to summon the police when a robbery is in progress. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-27. - Permit required. 
No person may operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system at an alarm site without a valid alarm permit. A separate permit is required for each type of alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-28. - False alarms; fees. 
(a)  If the permit holder has had five (5) false burglary alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding a false burglary alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each false burglary alarm in excess of five (5). 
(b)  For single-family or two-family residential properties, if the permit holder has had (3) three false fire, robbery, or panic alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding a false fire, robbery, or panic alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each false alarm in excess of three (3). 
(c)  For all properties that are not single-family or two-family residential properties: 
(1)  If the permit holder has had more than three (3) but fewer than six (6) false fire, robbery, or panic alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding a false fire, robbery, or panic alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each false alarm in excess of three (3). 
(2)  If the permit holder has had more than (5) but fewer than eight (8) false fire, robbery, or panic alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding a false fire, robbery, or panic alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each false alarm in excess of three (3). 
(3)  If the permit holder has had more than seven (7) but fewer than ten (10) false fire, robbery, or panic alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding a false fire, robbery, or panic alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each false alarm in excess of seven (7). 
(4)  If the permit holder has had more than nine (9) false fire, robbery, or panic alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding a false fire, robbery, or panic alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of one thousand dollars ($1000.00) for each false alarm in excess of nine (9). 
(d)  A permit holder must pay any service fee assessed under the provisions of this section within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice that the fee has been assessed. 
(e)  A permit holder violates this subsection if he or she fails to pay the assessed fee within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-29. - When alarm not considered a false alarm. 
(a)  The city shall not consider an alarm notification to be false if it determines that the alarm was caused by: 
(1)  A natural or manmade catastrophe, such as a fire. 
(2)  Severe weather that causes physical damage to the premises. 
(3)  Vandalism. 
(4)  Telephone line outage or faulty telephone equipment. 
(5)  Attempted burglary or attempted robbery. 
(6)  Animals that are not owned or harbored by the permit holder. 
(7)  Repairs to the system when a mechanic is in attendance and has informed the police department, and fire department in the case of a fire alarm, of the repairs. 
(b)  The police or fire department, as appropriate, shall determine from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises whether the alarm was false. 
(c)  The determination of the police chief or fire marshal in classifying an alarm notification as false or actual is final. 
(d)  The city will not consider an alarm notification to be false if the proper notification that the alarm is false is given within two (2) minutes of activation, as required in subsection 34-30(a). 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-30. - Accidental activation; testing; termination of service. 
(a)  When a residence or commercial establishment that has an alarm system that is accidentally set off or activates when there is no evidence of a criminal offense, attempted criminal offense, smoke, or fire, the alarm business or alarm user shall notify the police department within two (2) minutes that the alarm is false. Proper notification will consist of the caller identifying himself and giving the correct assigned access code, in which case the police or fire department should not respond. 
(b)  The alarm business or alarm user shall cause alarm sounding devices to be disconnected from the alarm system prior to repairing or testing of system equipment, except when the sounding devices are being repaired or tested. 
(c)  The permit holder shall, and an alarm business may, notify the city, in writing, when an alarm business has ceased to lease, rent, maintain, service or monitor the alarm system and that the service has been terminated or is being provided by another alarm business. The permit holder shall identify any alarm business that is providing replacement services. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-31. - Response. 
(a)  When the alarm business notifies the police department of an alarm activation in a residence or commercial establishment, it shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the alarm user. 
(2)  The type of alarm. 
(3)  The area protected by the alarm. 
(4)  The estimated time of arrival of the alarm user or agent if requested. 
(b)  An alarm business shall arrange for the permit holder, alarm user, or alarm user's responsible party to go to the premises of an activated alarm system within twenty (20) minutes of the activation of the alarm to be available to assist the police or fire department in determining the reason for the activation and securing the premises. 
(c)  A permit holder, alarm user, or alarm user's responsible party shall respond to the scene of an alarm activation within twenty (20) minutes, or as expeditiously as safety permits, but without unnecessary or unreasonable delay. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-32. - Operation of system. 
(a)  A permit holder must: 
(1)  Adjust or modify the sensory mechanism of his alarm system to suppress false indications so that the alarm system will not be activated by impulses due to: 
a.  Transient pressure changes in water pipes; 
b.  Flashes of light; 
c.  Wind noise caused by the rattling or vibrating of doors or windows; 
d.  Vehicular noise adjacent to the installation; or 
e.  Other forces unrelated to actual emergencies; and 
(2)  Maintain premises in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system. 
(b)  An alarm user of a local alarm must: 
(1)  If a non-fire alarm, adjust the mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than fifteen (15) minutes after being activated. 
(2)  If a fire alarm, adjust the mechanism so that it sounds until the fire department determines that it may be shut off. 
(3)  Come to the alarm site promptly after receiving a request from a member of the police department or the fire department to do so and grant access to the site and deactivate the alarm if necessary. If the alarm user of the local alarm fails to respond to such requests within twenty (20) minutes on any two (2) separate occasions within a 12-month period, the city shall assess a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for each such failure. 
(4)  If a mechanism sounds a burglary, robbery, or panic alarm signal for longer than fifteen (15) minutes after being activated, the chief of the police department, or his designated representative, is authorized to disable the alarm. All costs of the city in disabling such an alarm shall be assessed to the operator of the alarm system and shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days after the operator has received notice that the costs have been assessed. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article constitutes a grant of approval by the operator of the alarm system for the city to deactivate the local alarm system under the provisions of this subsection. 
(5)  Assure that automatic dialing devices may not be programmed to any telephone number in the city government, including, without limitation, the police department or the fire department. 
(c)  The city may assess a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee for each response by the city to a nonpermitted business location. After the first response, the city shall send the business, by either hand delivery or certified mail, a remainder of the need for a permit. 
(d)  The city may assess a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee for each response by the city to a nonpermitted residence location after the first alarm notification and after the city sends the resident, by either hand delivery or certified mail, a permit remainder, an application, and a copy of the city's alarm system ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-33. - Inspection. 
Upon reasonable notification, the police chief, fire chief, or fire marshal may inspect an alarm site and alarm system of a permit holder during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-34. - Failure to pay assessment; suspension of permit. 
The police chief shall suspend an alarm system permit for failure to pay any fee assessed under this article. Failure to pay any fee assessed under this article is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Secs. 34-35—34-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 34-46. - Required. 
Any person operating or causing to be operated an alarm system must apply to the police chief for a permit. An annual (calendar year prorated) municipal permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year shall be paid before a business or residence may use an alarm system in the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-47. - Application, renewal. 
(a)  Each application for a permit required by this division must contain: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number and also the billing address of the person responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm user; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of at least two (2) persons who are able and have agreed to receive notification from a member of the police department or fire department at any time and to come to the alarm site promptly after receiving such notification; and 
(4)  The following statement: "By applying for an alarm permit, the permit holder acknowledges that response may be influenced by factors such as the availability of police or fire units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, and prior response history." 
(b)  The permit must be renewed no later than January 1st of each year. If the permit is not renewed by January 1st, the police department shall give written notice to the permit holder that the permit must be renewed. If the permit is not renewed within thirty (30) days after notice is given, the permit shall be canceled. 
(c)  All businesses that have a fire alarm system installed before August 1, 2007 are required to apply for an alarm permit by January 2, 2008. All other businesses that plan to install a fire alarm system must apply for a permit before the system is installed. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-48. - Standards for issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed application form for a burglary, robbery, or panic permit required by this division, the police chief shall issue a permit unless there is reasonable cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained or operated in accordance with this article or the applicant will not comply with each provision of this article. The police chief may refuse to permit particular systems which in the chief's discretion have a history of unreliability. 
(b)  A permit will be issued for fire alarm systems if the system meets the city adopted fire code's fire alarm requirements and is approved by the city fire marshal. 
(c)  The permit shall be valid for up to one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-49. - False statements. 
Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit or renewal, or for the purpose of making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause to suspend or refuse to grant a permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-50. - Transfer; changes in information. 
An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. However, the individual designated to respond to an alarm or relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder must inform the police department of any change that alters information listed on the permit application, within ten (10) days of the change. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-51. - Denial or suspension of permit; appeal. 
If the police chief denies the issuance of a permit under this division, or suspends a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action, setting forth the reason for such action and advising the applicant or permit holder of the right to an appeal. The applicant, or permit holder, may appeal the decision of the police chief to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth his objections to the action of the police chief, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the police chief. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays the action of the police chief in denying the issuance of or suspending a permit until a final decision on the appeal is made by the city manager. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten (10) day limit, the action of the police chief is final. The city manager or a hearing officer designated by the city manager shall hear the appeal. At the hearing the formal rules of evidence do not apply. The hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented. The hearing officer must render a decision within sixty (60) days after the appeal is filed. The hearing officer may affirm, revoke or modify the action of the chief. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 34-52. - Governmental immunity. 
Alarm permits are not intended to, and do not create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the permit holder acknowledges that response may be influenced by factors such as the availability of police or fire units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, and prior response history. 
(Ord. No. 07-1850, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of health and sanitation, § 4.06; drilling operations, § 11.03. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 50; solid waste, condition and use of premises, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Soil and water conservation, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 201.001 et seq.; common and public nuisances, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 125.001 et seq.; air quality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 381 et seq.; oil and gas hazardous waste, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 91.601 et seq.; water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001 et seq.; waste disposal and control of stormwater, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 51.331 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - SMOKEFREE AIR ACT OF 2005 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Findings and intent. 
The city council does hereby find that: 
Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing second hand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute determined in 1999 that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early deaths of up to sixty-five thousand (65,000) Americans annually. (National Cancer Institute (NCI), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke: the report of the California Environmental Protections Agency. Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph 10," Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (NCI), August 1999.) 
The Public Health Service's National Toxicology Program (NTP) has listed secondhand smoke as a known carcinogen. (Environmental Health Information Service (EHIS), "Environmental tobacco smoke: first listed in the Ninth Report on Carcinogens," U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Public Health Service, NTP, 2000; reaffirmed by the NTP in subsequent reports on carcinogens, 2003 2005.) 
A study of hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction in Helena, Montana before, during, and after a local law eliminating smoking in workplaces and public places was in effect, has determined that laws to enforce smokefree workplaces and public places may be associated with a reduction in morbidity from heart disease. (Sarget, Richard P.; Shepard, Robert M.; Glantz, Stanton A., "Reduced incidence of admissions for myocardial infarction associated with public smoking ban: before and after study," British Medical Journal 328: 977-980, April 24, 2004.) 
Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. (California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal EPA), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke", Tobacco Control 6(4): 346-353, Winter, 1997.) 
The Americans With Disabilities Act, which requires that disabled persons have access to public places and workplaces, deems impaired respiratory function to be a disability. (Daynard, R.A., "Environmental tobacco smoke and the Americans with Disabilities Act," Nonsmokers' Voice 15(1): 8-9.) 
The U.S. Surgeon General has determined that the simple separation of smokers and nonsmokers within the same air space may reduce, but does not eliminate, the exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke. (Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Involuntary Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon General. Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 1986.) The Environmental Protection Agency has determined that secondhand smoke cannot be reduced to safe levels in businesses by high rates of ventilation. Air cleaners, which are only capable of filtering the particular matter and odors in smoke, do not eliminate the known toxins in secondhand smoke. (Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), "Indoor air facts no. 5: environmental tobacco smoke," Washington, D.C.: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), June 1989.) 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has determined that the risk of acute myocardial infarction and coronary heart disease associated with exposure to tobacco smoke is non-linear at low doses, increasing rapidly with relatively small doses such as those received from secondhand smoke or actively smoking one (1) or two (2) cigarettes a day, and has warned that all patients at increased risk of coronary heart disease or with known coronary artery disease should avoid all indoor environments that permit smoking. (Pechacek, Terry F.; Babb, Stephen, "Commentary: How acute and reversible are the cardiovascular risks of secondhand smoke?" British Medical Journal 328: 980-983, April 234, 2004.) 
A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a twenty-five (25) to fifty (50) percent higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable decreased in lung function. (Pitsavos, C.; Panagiotakos, D.B.; Chrysohoou, C.; Skoumas, J.; Tzioumis, K.; Stefanadis, C.; Toutouzas, P., "Association between exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and development of acute coronary syndromes: The CARDIO2000 case-control study," Tobacco Control 11(3): 220-225, September 2002.) 
Smoke-filled workplaces result in higher worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease, lower productivity, higher cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and increased liability claims for diseases related to exposure to secondhand smoke. ("The high price of cigarette smoking," Business & Health 15(8), Supplement A: 6-9, August 1997.) 
Numerous economic analyses examining restaurant and hotel receipts and controlling for economic variables have shown either no difference or a positive economic impact after enactment of laws requiring workplaces to be smokefree. Creation of smokefree workplaces is sound economic policy and provides the maximum level of employee health and safety. (Glantz, S.A. & Smith, L. The effect of ordinances requiring smokefree restaurants on restaurant sales in the United States. American Journal of Public Health, 87: 1687-1693, 1997; Colman, R.; Urbonas, C.M., "The economic impact of smoke-free workplaces: an assessment for Nova Scotia, prepared for Tobacco Control Unity, Nova Scotia Department of Health," GPI Atlantic, September 2001.) 
Smoking is a potential cause of fires; cigarette and cigar burns and ash stains on merchandise and fixtures causes economic damage to businesses. ("The high price of cigarette smoking," Business & Health 15(8), Supplement A: 6-9, August, 1997.) 
The smoking of tobacco is a form of air pollution, a positive danger to health, and a material public nuisance. 
Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purposes of this article are (1) to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; and (2) to guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smokefree air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smokefree air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Billiard or pool hall shall mean premises used primarily for any of several games played on an oblong table by driving small balls against one another or into pockets with a cue and wherein at least fifty (50) percent of the area accessible to the public, excluding restrooms, hallways, and entries, has to be occupied by pool tables. 
Bingo facility shall mean premises used primarily for the purpose of conducting games of chance. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid smoke impermeable walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of disease, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentist, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Private club means organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established by laws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. A private club in this article is not a private club as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code or Beverage Commission. 
Private office shall mean a space for an officer or employee sequestered or withdrawn from public areas; not intended primarily for general public use or entry. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurant, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishment, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private club is a "public place" when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of their products is merely incidental. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form. 
Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasium, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-3. - Reserved.  
Sec. 38-4. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed public places within in the City of Lake Jackson: 
(1)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels. 
(3)  City facilities that are enclosed, including buildings, owned, leased or operated by the City of Lake Jackson. 
(4)  Convention facilities. 
(5)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(6)  Elevators. 
(7)  Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance. 
(8)  Hotel and motel lobbies, and hallways. 
(9)  Licensed childcare and adult day care facilities. 
(10)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple unit residential facilities. 
(11)  Polling places. 
(12)  Restaurants. 
(13)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, and other common use areas. 
(14)  Retail stores. 
(15)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(16)  Service lines. 
(17)  Shopping malls. 
(18)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas, excluding bowling alleys. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-5. - Enclosed areas require solid wall isolation and separate isolated ventilation systems. 
Permitted smoking areas may be created within an enclosed area. However, the permitted smoking area created within an enclosed area shall be no larger than thirty (30) percent of the total public accessible floor space of the entire facility, and shall be separate from the other areas, by demarcated solid wall isolation and separate ventilation systems. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-6. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor arenas and stadiums. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the seating areas of all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-7. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking is prohibited within the reasonable distance of fifteen (15) feet radius from any exterior door and operable windows outside an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. Enclosed public places where smoking is prohibited may establish smoking areas outside of the building as long as placement does not violate this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-8. - Where smoking not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 38-4 and 38-5: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; providing, however, that not more than twenty (20) percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores; providing that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Private clubs as defined under section 38-2. 
(6)  Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the provisions of sections 38-6 and 38-7. 
(7)  Bars. 
(8)  Billiard or pool halls. 
(9)  Bingo facilities. 
(10)  Private offices. 
(11)  Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of the City of Lake Jackson, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-9. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection 38-10(a) is posted. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-10. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted between four (4) and six (6) feet above the ground or floor on the entry door in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign posted between four (4) and six (6) feet above the ground or floor on the entry door clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-11. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-12. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the city manager or an authorized designee. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of the article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the City of Lake Jackson. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the city manager. 
(d)  The health department, fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. 
(g)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the city manager or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-13. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city manager by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-14. - Public education. 
The city manager shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance within. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-15. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city manager shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. This includes urging all federal, state, city, and school district agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-16. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-17. - Liberal construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. 
(Ord. No. 05-1799, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Secs. 38-18—38-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Dangerous buildings, § 14-241 et seq. 
State Law reference— Abatement of public health nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.011 et seq.; control of nuisances generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.041 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-26. - Penalty for violation—Generally. 
Any person convicted of maintaining any nuisance as specified by this article or who violates any provisions of this article shall be penalized as provided in section 1-5. 
(Code 1958, § 13-14)  
Sec. 38-27. - Same—Recurring violation. 
Any person having been found guilty of creating, keeping or maintaining a nuisance under this article who shall neglect to abate and remove the same within twenty-four (24) hours next after his conviction therefor, shall, for each twenty-four (24) hours thereafter, during which such nuisance is continued, be subject to a like penalty as that originally incurred for keeping, creating or maintaining a nuisance. 
(Code 1958, § 13-15)  
Sec. 38-28. - Health and sanitation. 
In addition to those things which are elsewhere by this Code and ordinances of the city declared to be and constitute nuisances, it is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person within the limits of the city: 
(1)  Businesses. 
a.  To conduct any business or use any premises so as to create such an offensive smell as may taint the air and render it unwholesome or disagreeable to the neighborhood. 
b.  To operate or maintain a business lot, parcel or tract in the city on which unnecessary or unusual noise occurs within two hundred fifty (250) feet of residences. 
c.  To fail, within ten (10) days of written notice, to take corrective steps to eliminate nuisances or to take advantage of city codes when available to remedy nuisances. 
(2)  Garbage, swill, etc. To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any animal or vegetable matters, slop, swill, suds, garbage, filth, stable drippings or offal or noisome substances of any kind to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place in the city to the prejudice of others. 
(3)  Garbage in watercourses. To throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any offal or any offensive matter, or the carcass of any animal, in any watercourse, pond, spring or well, or on land within five thousand (5,000) feet of the city. 
(4)  Night soil. To deposit any night soil, dead animal or other filthy, offensive or noisome substance upon any lot, street, alley, highway, park or other place. 
(5)  Impure water. To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any drinking hydrant, spring, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others. 
(6)  Noxious exhalations. To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smell or otherwise is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals, or of the public. 
(7)  Packing houses. To locate and carry on, without compliance with the ordinances of the city, any packing houses, renderies, tallow chandleries, glue or bone factories, soap factories and tanneries within the limits of the city and within the distance of five thousand (5,000) feet without the city limits. 
(8)  Houses of ill fame. Every house of ill fame or house of assignation, where men and women resort for the purpose of prostitution, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(9)  Readers and fortunetellers. Every place that is used and every person who engages, advertises or maintains himself in whole or in part as a reader, clairvoyant, foreteller of future events, fortuneteller, or as having supernatural knowledge with respect to present or future conditions, transactions, happenings or events, or advises individuals or families on problems through use of fortunetelling or reading techniques is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(10)  Massage parlors. Any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private facility, that operates a massage salon, bath parlor, or any similar type business, where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex, is a nuisance. This section shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist or massage therapist duly licensed by the state, licensed nurse acting under direct prescription of such physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor to barbershops, beauty parlors or to athletic trainers licensed by the state board of athletic trainers. 
(11)  Animals and fowl. To keep or suffer any swine, horses, sheep, goats, chickens, ducks or geese in any enclosure or pen within the city. 
(12)  Sinkholes. For any person to suffer or permit any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, sewer or sink upon any premises belonging to or occupied by him to become nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the public health. 
(13)  Bees. Any person who shall keep bees within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or dwelling place within the city shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-5 in every case, for every day the same shall continue after written notice from the health department or chief of police to remove and abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 75-573, §§ 1—3, 11-3-75; Ord. No. 75-574, §§ 1, 2, 11-3-75; Ord. No. 89-1097, § 1, 3-20-89; Code 1958, § 13-1) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Regulation of massage therapists and massage establishments, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4512k.  
Sec. 38-29. - Excavations, refilling, barricades. 
Whoever under lawful authority shall for any purpose injure or tear up any pavement of any street, alley or sidewalk or any part thereof or dig any hole, trench, ditch or drain or remove any sod, stone, curb, earth, sand or gravel from or under any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place within the city and shall not within a reasonable time refill the same and repair such street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place to as good condition as the same was found, or whoever shall, during a lawful continuance or existence of any such ditch, drain, excavation or hole, fail to have the same so watched, guarded or protected as to insure the safety of all persons who may or might pass by or be near thereto shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance. 
(Code 1958, § 13-2)  
Sec. 38-30. - Junkyards, dumping grounds for wrecks. 
All places used or maintained as junkyards, or dumping grounds, or for the wrecking or dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, are hereby declared to be nuisances. 
(Code 1958, § 13-3)  
Sec. 38-31. - Scaffolding, ladders. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to erect or use or cause or suffer to be erected or used within the city any insecure or unsafe scaffold whereby the safety of persons working thereon or passing thereunder may be in any manner endangered. 
(b)  Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang or can fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the city shall be firmly and properly placed, constructed and safeguarded. It shall be unlawful to place or leave any tools or articles on any such scaffold or ladder in such a manner that the same can fall onto such street, sidewalk or other public way from a greater height than four (4) feet. 
(Code 1958, § 13-4) 
Cross reference— Building code generally, § 14-31 et seq.  
Sec. 38-32. - Obstructing or encroaching upon streets. 
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to erect, suspend, keep or maintain any sign, awning, goods, clothing, cornice or other structure or thing over or across any sidewalk, street or alley or any other public place or immediately contiguous thereto or any tree or shrub with branches overhanging any street, sidewalk or alley in such manner as to obstruct the same or render travel thereon inconvenient or unsafe. No person shall, in any manner obstruct or encroach upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city without lawful permission. 
(Code 1958, § 13-5)  
Sec. 38-33. - Broken sidewalks. 
Whoever shall suffer or permit any sidewalk or footway within the city, which it is the duty of any person to maintain and repair, to become or continue so broken, uneven or out of repair as to endanger life or limb, shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. 
(Code 1958, § 13-6) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86.  
Sec. 38-34. - Insecure structures. 
(a)  Whoever shall, within the city, erect or maintain any insecure or unsafe building, stack, wall, chimney, cornice, sign, awning or other structure which from situation, mode of construction or other cause may be dangerous to persons or property shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance. 
(b)  Whoever shall permit any awning or sign or any cornice or structure over any street, alley or sidewalk or immediately contiguous thereto to be out of repair so as to be insecure or in an unsafe condition, shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance. 
(Code 1958, § 13-7) 
Cross reference— Building code generally, § 14-31 et seq.  
Sec. 38-35. - Sand pits—Definition. 
For the purpose of sections 38-35 and 38-36, "sand pit" means an open pit left by excavation of sand, silt, clay or other earthy materials for the purpose of using such excavated materials at another location. 
(Ord. No. 208, § 1, 8-6-57; Code 1958, § 13-8)  
Sec. 38-36. - Same—Operation declared a nuisance and unlawful. 
The operation of a sand pit within the city limits, and outside the city limits for a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet, is declared to be a public nuisance and is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 208, § 2, 8-6-57; Code 1958, § 13-9)  
Sec. 38-37. - Conditions not enumerated herein. 
In all cases where no provision is made defining what nuisances are and how the same may be removed, abated or prevented, in addition to what may be declared such in this article, those offenses which are known to the common law of the land and the state statutes as nuisances may in case the same exist within the city limits or within five thousand (5,000) feet thereof, be treated as such, and proceeded against as is in this article provided. 
(Code 1958, § 13-10)  
Sec. 38-38. - Abatement—By court order. 
When judgment shall be rendered against any person for creating, keeping or maintaining any nuisance it shall be the duty of the court before whom such conviction is had, to order the defendant in such suit, to forthwith abate the nuisance; and also, that if the same is not done by such defendant within twenty-four (24) hours, the same may be abated and removed by the chief of police. The order shall be entered upon the docket of the court, and be made a part of the judgment in the cause. 
(Code 1958, § 13-11)  
Sec. 38-39. - Same—Unnecessary destruction prohibited. 
In any case where a nuisance is to be abated by the chief of police or any officer, it shall be the duty of such chief of police or officer to proceed with due care and without any unnecessary destruction of property. He shall in all cases be authorized to employ such assistance and adopt such means as may be necessary to effect abatement of the evil in question. 
(Code 1958, § 13-12)  
Sec. 38-40. - Same—Liability for expense. 
Every person keeping, creating or maintaining any nuisance shall be liable for all costs and necessary expenses of abating the same when done by the city. In all cases where the chief of police or other officer shall abate any such nuisance, he shall keep an account of all such expenses attending such abatement, and shall forthwith report the same to the mayor, who shall thereupon bring suit for the same in the name of the city against the person creating, keeping or maintaining the nuisance so abated. 
(Code 1958, § 13-13)  
Secs. 38-41—38-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2062, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2015 repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 38-51—38-57, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1958, §§ 13-20—13-26. 
Cross reference— Noise from vehicles generally, § 98-8; motor vehicle to be equipped with muffler, § 98-103. 
 
Sec. 38-51. - Construction noise at night. 
(a)  It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person to engage in, or cause or permit the engaging of, construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, maintenance or repair work between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if such work causes noise loud enough to be heard inside occupied neighboring residential buildings. 
(b)  A person may apply to city council for a variance from this section. The applicant must provide: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, and phone number as well as the name, address and phone number of the night construction supervisor; 
(2)  The source of the noise; 
(3)  The location of the noise source; 
(4)  The type of noise that will occur; 
(5)  The hours that the noise will be generated; 
(6)  The reason for the variance request, including the hardship that will happen if the variance is not granted; and 
(7)  A description of the noise control measures to be taken to minimize the noise. 
(c)  The city council may grant a variance if it determines that compliance with this section will cause an unreasonable hardship, that reasonable measures have been taken to minimize the noise, and that the noise will not cause injury to the health and welfare of neighboring residents. 
(d)  When granting the variance, the city council may place conditions on the activity to minimize the noise's adverse effects. 
(e)  The city shall provide owners of neighboring properties with notice of the variance request and the date that the city council will consider the variance. 
(f)  The city council may withdraw the variance if the conditions are not met, the duration of the noise is longer than expected, or the intensity of the noise is more than expected. 
(Ord. No. 15-2062, § 1, 2-3-2015)  
Secs. 38-52—38-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - JUNKED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, adopted May 18, 2015, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 38-71—38-78, pertained to junked motor vehicles, and Ord. No. 07-1835, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 2007. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-71. - Authority. 
This division is adopted pursuant to the authority provided in Ch. 683 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-72. - Definitions. 
All terms used in this chapter, unless specifically defined otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the Texas Transportation Code. The following terms are specifically defined. 
Antique vehicle means a passenger car, truck, or motorcycle that: 
(a)  Is at least twenty-five (25) years old; 
(b)  Is a collector's item; 
(c)  Is used exclusively for exhibitions, club activities, parades, and other functions of public interest; 
(d)  Is not used for regular transportation; and 
(e)  Does not carry advertising. 
Classic vehicle means a motor vehicle that is at least twenty-five (25) years old and that has not been changed from the original manufacturer's specifications. 
Custom vehicle means a vehicle: 
(a)  That is: 
1.  At least twenty-five (25) years old and of a model year after 1948; or 
2.  Manufactured to resemble a vehicle that is at least twenty-five (25) years old and of a model year after 1948; and 
(b)  That: 
1.  Has been altered from the manufacturer's original design; or 
2.  Has a body constructed from materials not original to the vehicle. 
Enforcement authority means any full-time, regularly salaried peace officer or code enforcement officer employed by the City of Lake Jackson. 
Junked vehicle means a vehicle that: 
(a)  Displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate if the vehicle is required to be registered under Ch. 502 of the Texas Transportation Code; or 
(b)  Is: 
1.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
2.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
i.  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
ii.  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Special interest vehicle means a classic vehicle, a custom vehicle, or a street rod. 
Street rod means a vehicle: 
(a)  That was manufactured: 
1.  Before 1949; or 
2.  After 1948 to resemble a vehicle manufactured before 1949; and 
(b)  That: 
1.  Has been altered from the manufacture's original design; or 
2.  Has a body constructed from materials not original to the vehicle. 
Vehicle means 
(a)  A device in or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a public highway; 
(b)  A watercraft; or 
(c)  An outboard motor. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-73. - Junked vehicles declared to be a public nuisance. 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, is hereby declared a public nuisance because it: 
(a)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(b)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(c)  Invites vandalism; 
(d)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(e)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; and 
(f)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-74. - Nuisance prohibited. 
It is unlawful for a person to maintain, possess, or locate a public nuisance described in section 38-73 of this division within the City of Lake Jackson. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-75. - Authority to enforce. 
(a)  Any full-time, regularly salaried peace officer or code enforcement officer employed by the City of Lake Jackson may enforce this division, except that any duly authorized person may remove the junked vehicles or parts of junked vehicles. 
(b)  A person authorized to enforce this division may enter private property to examine the junked vehicle or parts of a junked vehicle, to obtain information to identify the junked vehicle or parts of a junked vehicle, and to remove or direct the removal of the junked vehicle or parts of a junked vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-76. - Notice. 
(a)  Once a determination has been made that a public nuisance under this division exists, the enforcement authority shall give not less than ten (10) days written notice to: 
a.  The last known registered owner of the public nuisance; 
b.  Each lienholder of record; and 
c.  The owner or occupant of: 
i.  The property on which the public nuisance is located; or 
ii.  If the public nuisance is located on the public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)  The notice must be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested. If the address of the last known registered owner is unknown, notice may be placed on the public nuisance. If the notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the public nuisance shall not be taken until the 11th day after the date of return. 
(c)  The notice must state that: 
a.  The public nuisance must be removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered, mailed, or placed on the public nuisance; and 
b.  A request for a hearing must be made not later than the tenth day after the notice was personally delivered, mailed, or placed on the public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-77. - Hearing. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall conduct a public hearing if timely requested by a person who received notice under section 38-76. 
(b)  The hearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh day after the service of notice in section 38-76. 
(c)  At the hearing, the junked vehicle is presumed to be inoperable, unless demonstrated otherwise. 
(d)  An order requiring the removal of the public nuisance must contain a description, license plate number, and identification number of the public nuisance, if available. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-78. - Abatement. 
(a)  Once abatement proceedings have been commenced, the relocation of the public nuisance to another location in the city has no effect on the proceedings. 
(b)  Once the public nuisance is removed, it may not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(c)  If the public nuisance is not removed by the tenth day after proper notice, the enforcement authority may remove it or cause it to be removed. 
(d)  No later than the fifth day after removal, the enforcement authority shall give notice to the Texas Department of Motor Vehicles of the removal. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-79. - Inapplicability of division. 
This division does not apply to a vehicle, or parts of a vehicle, that: 
(a)  Is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(b)  Is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or 
(c)  Is an antique or special interest vehicle if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are: 
1.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
2.  Not a health hazard; and 
3.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 38-80. - Affect on other laws. 
Nothing in this division shall affect laws that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property that is obstructing traffic or laws that establish procedures for taking possession of abandoned vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 15-2065, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Secs. 38-81—38-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OIL, GAS, SULPHUR MINING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, adopted March 21, 2016, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 38-101—38-104, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 15-2073, § 1, adopted July 20, 2015. 
State Law reference— Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 81 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-101. - Purpose. 
The exploration, development and production of oil and gas in the city are activities which necessitate reasonable regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and regulations for operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing of oil and gas and other substances produced in association with oil and gas within the city to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public, minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral, and oil and gas resources. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-102. - Definitions. 
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of oil and gas wells not specifically defined in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable oil and gas industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment: means "abandonment" as defined by the Texas Railroad Commission and includes the plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this article. 
All-weather hard surface: means a permanent surface that as a minimum is a base course constructed such that is meets the requirements of the International Fire Code, be at least twenty (20) feet wide, have an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet, drains appropriately, remains water resistant, is free of litter, debris, weeds, grass or other objectionable materials or objects and is visibly dust free. 
Berm: means a mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to obstruct a view. 
Blowout preventer: means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected there with, which can be closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts. 
Building: means any primary structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portions thereof." 
Commission: means the Texas Railroad Commission. 
Completion: means the date the work is completed for the drilling, re-drilling or re-working of a well and the crew is released by completing its work or contract or by its employer. 
Day: means a calendar day. 
Derrick: means any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which is required or used in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the production of oil and gas. 
Drilling: means digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil and gas or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
Drilling equipment: means the derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling. 
Drill site: means the immediate area used during the drilling, re-drilling or re-working of a well. 
Emergency response plan: means a plan put in place to deal with emergency situations that may occur at the site during all stages of the drilling and production process. 
Exploration: means geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for oil and gas or other subsurface hydrocarbons. 
Fire department: means the Lake Jackson Volunteer Fire Department. 
Gas: means any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. 
Landfarming or landfarm: means the deposit, spreading or mixing of drill cuttings, drilling fluids, drilling mud, produced water or other drilling waste generated by the oil and natural gas well drilling process on to the surface of land located within the territorial limits of the city. 
Oil: means crude petroleum and other hydrocarbons regardless of gravity which are produced at the wellhead in liquid form and the liquid hydrocarbons known as distillate or condensate recovered or extracted from gas, other than gas produced in association with oil and commonly known as casinghead gas. 
Oil and gas well: means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas, oil and other hydrocarbons. 
Operation site: means the area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with oil and gas after drilling activities are complete. 
Operator: means, for each well, the person listed on the railroad commission's Form W-1 or Form P-4 for a well that is, or will be actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under an oil and gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of the article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no oil and gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator. 
Person: means both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind. 
Production: means the period between completion of drilling and the abandonment of the well. 
Public building: means all buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants, and hospitals. 
Re-drill: means re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing well bore. 
Religious institution: means any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Residence: means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or other building designed for dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for an oil and gas well permit is filed and accepted by the city. 
Re-working: means re-completion or re-entry of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners or casings. 
Right-of-way: means any area of land within the city that is acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the city in fee simple, by easement, by prescriptive right or other interest and that is expressly or impliedly accepted or used in fact or by operation of law as public roadway, sidewalk, alley, utility, drainage, or public access easement or used for the provision of governmental services or functions. The term includes the area on, below, and above the surface of the public right-of-way. The term applies regardless of whether the public right-of-way is paved or unpaved. 
Road damage remediation fee: means a fee assessed to repair damage to public roadways that is based on the projected damage and decreased life expectancy of roadways in the city caused by the operator's use of the roadways. 
Road repair agreement: means a written agreement obligating the operator to repair damage to public streets and bridges caused by the performance of any drilling of wells or the production of any gas wells. 
School: means any public and private, primary, secondary, and higher educational facilities providing education up through and including college level classes and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the State of Texas or by the City of Lake Jackson that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six (6) children under fourteen (14) years of age, and for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
State water: means the waters identified by Section 11.021 of the Texas Water Code. 
Street: means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way. 
Well: means any single hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata, for the purpose of producing gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. For each separate new hole an oil and gas well permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-103. - City oversight. 
Agents of the city shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the city or state. Failure of any person to permit access to any city agent shall constitute a violation of this article. Additionally, city officials shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry the intent and purpose of this article and its provisions. City officials shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any records sent to the commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to establish and determine compliance with the applicable permit. Failure of any person to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-104. - Operator's agent. 
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the State of Texas, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator designating such agent shall within ten (10) days notify the city in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-105. - Seismic survey permit requirements. 
A permit shall be required for seismic surveys. All seismic survey permit applications shall be submitted to city council for approval. The seismic survey shall not begin prior to the issuance of a seismic survey permit from the city. A permit shall include, but is not limited to, the following information: 
(a)  Operator/applicant name, phone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, email address; if the operator is a corporation, the state of the incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners shall be provided. 
(b)  Detailed mapping of location and extent of seismic survey. 
(c)  Date and time the seismic survey will be conducted. 
(d)  Detailed explanation of the seismic survey method to be used on site. 
(e)  Date and time the seismic survey will be completed. 
(f)  If the seismic survey is conducted in any right-of-way then the operator must reimburse all costs to the city for any damages associated with the seismic survey. 
(g)  The permit fee for a seismic survey on public property shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25) per linear foot, plus the costs of barricade rental and personnel required to direct and divert traffic if city forces and materials are used. 
(h)  An operator must submit a traffic safety and management plan as required by the city with all seismic surveys that are conducted within the right-of-way. 
(i)  Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including, but not limited to, the use of dynamite, be used in any way related to the preparation and/or operation of conducting a seismic survey. 
(j)  Operator/applicant shall purchase and maintain the following insurance coverage: 
(1)  Worker's compensation insurance meeting applicable statutory requirements and employer's liability insurance with minimum limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each accident. 
(2)  Commercial general liability insurance, or any combination of general liability and umbrella or excess insurance, with minimum limits of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) as the combined single limit for each occurrence of bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. The policy shall provide blanket contractual liability insurance for all written contracts and shall include coverage for products and completed operations liability, and independent contractor's liability; coverage for property damage. The insurance coverage must be written by a company or companies approved to conduct business in the State of Texas. The city, its officers and employees, must be named as an additional insured on the policy. 
(3)  Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles in use by operator/applicant, its employees and agents, with personal protection insurance and property protection insurance to comply with the provision of state law with a minimum limits of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) as the combined single limit for each occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
(4)  The city will accept certificates of self-insurance which provide the same coverage as required herein, so long as the operator/applicant demonstrates by written information to the city manager that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity. 
(5)  All policies other than those for Worker's Compensation shall be written on an occurrence and not on a claims-made basis and shall name the city, its officers and employees as additional insureds. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
(6)  Insurance policies must provide that the issuing company waives all right to recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-106. - Oil and gas well permit requirements. 
(a)  A person wanting to engage in and/or operate in oil and gas production activities shall apply for and obtain an oil and gas well permit under this article and shall indicate what type of well permit is requested. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, re-working, or operation of any such well or to conduct any activity related to the production of oil and gas without first obtaining an oil and gas well permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to, re-working, initial site preparation, drilling, operation, and construction of rigs or tank batteries. 
(b)  The operator must apply for and obtain an oil and gas well permit for the drilling of each well. The operator shall neither apply for nor obtain a "blanket" permit for more than one (1) well if multiple wells are located on the same tract of land. Each new well established at the ground surface will be considered a new oil and gas well permit. 
(c)  An existing oil and gas well permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned well. An operator shall obtain a new well permit in accordance with the provisions of this article if the operator is re-entering and drilling an abandoned well. 
(d)  When an oil and gas well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, re-entering, activating or converting of a well, such oil and gas well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, re-working, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well. An amended oil and gas well permit shall be obtained before such well may be modified for purposes of re-drilling, deepening or converting such well to a depth or use other than that set forth in the then current permit for such well. 
(e)  Any person who intends to re-work a permitted well using a drilling rig after initial completion shall give written notice to the city no less than ten (10) days before the activities begin. The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail, including, but not limited to, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be conducted. The use of explosive charges shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The notice must also provide the address and twenty-four (24) hour telephone number of the person conducting the activities. The person conducting the activities shall post a sign on the property giving the public notice forty eight (48) hours in advance of the re-working activities. The sign shall comply with the requirements of section 38-113, "On site and technical regulations," [subsection] (w) Signs, (1). 
(f)  Well setbacks for oil and gas well permits. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to drill, re-drill, deepen, re-enter, activate or convert any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located: 
a.  Within six hundred (600) feet from any residence, religious institution, public building, school, retail or commercial building, city park, state water or hospital building for which a building permit has been issued on the date of the application for an oil and gas well permit is filed with the city; 
b.  Within fifty (50) feet of any public street, road, highway, or right-of-way line; 
c.  Within one hundred (100) feet of any existing potable water well. 
d.  Within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any property line. 
e.  The measurement of all distances shall be calculated from the proposed well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the object listed in items a. through d., above. The above calculations shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor. 
(2)  Tank batteries, including storage tanks, separators and compressors shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any playground, competition athletic field, picnic area, residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or schools, or any other building used or designed and intended to be used for human occupancy for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for an oil and gas well permit is filed. The distance shall be calculated from the closest tank batteries, separators or compressors, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest part of the playground, competition athletic field, picnic area, residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or schools, or any other building used or designed and intended to be used for human occupancy. 
(3)  The distances set out in subsection 38-106(f)(1)a. above may be reduced at the discretion of the city council, but never less than three hundred (300) feet except as provided by subsection (4) below. All distance reductions shall be documented as exceptions to the requested permit prior to issuance. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, wells may be drilled no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from an existing residence constructed on a lot or tract that is at least one-half (½) acre in size and that is occupied by persons who in writing consent to the request to drill the well if approved by a majority vote of the city council. Said written consent is required from all residences occupied by persons within three hundred (300) feet of a proposed well bore prior to an application for a well permit being processed by city staff. Wells may be re-drilled, deepened, re-entered, activated or converted if no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any residence constructed after the well was originally drilled without such consent. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, new residences may be built no closer than three hundred (300) feet from an existing well. 
(g)  An oil and gas well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of the issuance of the permit. A well permit may be extended by the city for an additional ninety (90) days upon written request by the operator and proof that the regulatory standards of the requested permit for such location have not changed. 
(h)  Permits required by this article are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit which may be required by any other provision of the City Code or by any other governmental agency. 
(i)  No oil and gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within the floodway identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on the most current Federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or by the City of Lake Jackson, whichever is more restrictive. Oil and gas wells proposed in the floodplain outside of the floodway shall comply with the requirements for development in the city's Standard General Conditions Manual. 
(j)  No oil and gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled that is not in compliance with any standard, provision, procedure, and/or recommendation as described in the Standard General Conditions Manual. 
(k)  By acceptance of any permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in any permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was set forth verbatim in such permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-107. - Oil and gas well permit application and filing fees. 
(a)  Every application for an oil and gas well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the city. 
(b)  Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), provided, however, that in the event the city incurs additional costs to administer a permit application, the applicant shall pay for all such additional cost as part of the permit fee. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date of the application and type of permit requested. 
(2)  An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the operation site, the parcel and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property recorded by plat shall reference subdivision, block and lot numbers. 
(3)  Map showing proposed transportation route and road(s) for equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by the oil and gas operation. 
(4)  Proposed well name and well depth. 
(5)  Surface owner names(s), telephone number(s), fax number(s), physical address(es), and, if possible, e-mail addresses, of the lease property. 
(6)  Mineral lessee name, telephone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, e-mail address. 
(7)  Operator/applicant name, telephone number, fax number, physical address, and if possible, e-mail address and if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners. 
(8)  Name, telephone number, fax number physical address of individual designated to receive notice, and, if possible, e-mail address. 
(9)  Names and address of representatives or operator's agent with supervisory authority over all oil and gas operation site activities and an emergency 24-hour telephone number. 
(10)  Location and description of all improvements and structures within eight hundred (800) feet of the well. Such locations and descriptions shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor. 
(11)  A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities including, but not limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage tanks or storage sheds. Upon completion of the construction of the drill site, the operator shall furnish the city with a post-construction site plan. The operator shall furnish the city with a new site plan whenever a change is made to the existing conditions of a drill site, fracturing pit, or access road. All site plans must include the following criteria: 
a.  Property boundaries with dimensions and setback lines. 
b.  Location of proposed buildings and structures indicating sizes in square feet. 
c.  The location and intensity of exterior lighting fixtures. 
d.  The location of mechanical equipment. 
e.  Outside storage areas. 
f.  Curb cut locations. 
g.  Parking, loading, and maneuvering areas. 
h.  The location, materials and dimensions of screening improvements as required by section 38-114. 
i.  A separate plan sheet showing the location, materials and dimensions of all screening improvements as required by section 38-114. 
j.  Waste disposal locations with screening. 
k.  Adjacent property lines, streets, easements immediately adjacent to the operation site. 
l.  Names of owners of property immediately adjacent to the operation site. 
m.  Names of subdivisions immediately adjacent to the operation. 
n.  Site plans shall be submitted on a sheet size of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches minimum with a scale of 100:1 inch. Digital versions of the plans may be submitted in addition to the hard copy. 
o.  City boundaries where applicable. 
p.  Date the drawing was prepared with name, address, and phone number of preparer. 
q.  Location, width, purpose of all existing easements. 
r.  North arrow, at a maximum scale of 1:50 immediately adjacent to the operation site. 
s.  All existing street names immediately adjacent to the operation site. 
t.  Dimensions of all existing rights-of-way. 
u.  Title Block identifying oil and gas well site location. 
v.  Vicinity location map at one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet. 
w.  Zoning classifications of all properties shown on the Site Plan. 
x.  Location of 100-year flood limits where applicable. 
y.  Texas NAD83 State Plane Coordinates for at least two (2) corners. 
z.  As a minimum, a preliminary drainage study as identified in the Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual. 
(12)  Copies of all reports required by the commission, specifically including a copy of the approved Railroad Commission Form W-1 and/or P-4. 
(13)  A description of public utilities required during drilling and site operations. 
(14)  A description of the water source to be used during drilling. 
(15)  A copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as required by the Commission, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and/or the city. A copy of the notice of intent (NOI) shall be submitted to the city at least three (3) days prior to the commencement of any onsite activity. 
(16)  A copy of the determination by the commission of the depth of useable quality ground water. 
(17)  Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article. 
(18)  A statement, under oath, signed by the operator or designated representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true and correct. 
(19)  All required application and permit fees. 
(20)  A copy of a Hazardous Materials Management Plan and additionally, all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported and/or temporarily used on the drilling site shall be provided to the city and the fire marshal. 
(c)  Building permit required. 
(1)  No building or structure regulated by the current technical codes adopted by the city shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the city. No subdivision plat will be required. 
(2)  Appropriate temporary or permanent restroom facilities shall be provided during the course of any work subject to regulation by the current technical codes adopted by the city. 
(d)  A road repair agreement and road damage remediation fee shall be submitted in conjunction with the application for a well permit. The agreement must be signed by the operator and the city manager. A road damage remediation fee shall be charged for each well included in a well permit in the amount determined by a technical advisor hired by the city in accordance with section 38-115.4. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-108. - Permitting procedure. 
(a)  All oil and gas well permits will be filed through the city manager's office. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the city to review and approve or disapprove all applications for oil and gas well drilling permits based on the criteria established by this article. 
(c)  The city, within sixty (60) days after the filing of a completed application and remittance of all fees, insurance, and security per the requirements of this article for an oil and gas well permit, shall determine whether the permit application shall be approved or denied. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any dwellings or buildings for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on the date the application for an oil and gas well permit is filed with the city. 
(1)  All new and/or proposed construction of any buildings, structures, streets, roads, and/or applicable improvements to the property upon which any oil or gas well is located must be in compliance with all applicable setback requirements enumerated in this article. 
(2)  If all the requirements of this article are met, the city shall issue a permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities for which the permit application was made. 
(3)  If the city denies a permit application for cause as set out in this article for the requested oil and gas well permit, the city shall notify the operator in writing of such denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within sixty (60) days of the date of the written decision of the city to deny the permit, the operator may cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the city for approval and issuance of the permit. Additionally, the operator may file an appeal to the city council pursuant to section 38-115.3 of this article. 
(4)  The failure of the city to review and issue a permit within the time limits specified above shall not cause the application to be deemed approved. The failure of the city to act within the time limit shall be deemed a disapproval. The operator may file an appeal to the city council pursuant to section 38-115.3 of this article. 
(e)  If an application for a permit is denied by the city, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new permit application from being submitted to the city for the same well. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-109. - Amended oil and gas well permits. 
(a)  An amended permit may be issued for, but not limited to, the following changes in drill and/or operational site activities: 
(1)  Re-drilling; 
(2)  Deepening beyond one hundred fifty (150) feet of the permitted depth; 
(3)  Site access; 
(4)  Locations and/or quantities of equipment as determined by the city; 
(5)  Locations and/or number of drilling fluid or other types of pits; and 
(6)  Locations and/or number of buildings and structures. 
(b)  Applications for amended permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include the following: 
(1)  An application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
(2)  A description of the proposed amendments; 
(3)  Any changes to the information submitted with the application for existing permit (if such information has not previously been provided to the city); 
(4)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the city to demonstrate compliance with the applicable permit; 
(5)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the city to prevent imminent destruction of property or injury to persons; and 
(6)  An amended site plan will be required. 
(c)  All applications for amended permits shall be filed with the city. Incomplete applications may be returned to the applicant, in which case the city shall provide a written explanation of the deficiencies; however, the city shall retain the application fee. The city may return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the commission regarding the determination of the operator. 
(d)  If the activities proposed by the amendment are not materially different from the activities covered by the existing permit then the city shall approve or disapprove the amendment within thirty (30) days after the application is filed. 
(e)  If the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different from the activities covered by the existing permit, and do not create a risk of destruction of property or injury to persons, then the city shall approve or disapprove the amendment within sixty (60) days after the application is filed. If, however, the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different and, in the judgment of the city, might create a risk of destruction of property or injury to persons that were not associated with the activities covered by the existing permit or that were not otherwise taken into consideration by the existing permit, the city may require the amendment to be processed as a new permit application. 
(f)  The failure of the city to review and issue an amended permit within the time limits specified above shall not cause the application for the amended permit to be deemed approved. Further, the decision of the city to deny an amendment to a permit shall be provided to the operator in writing within the time period indicated in (d) and (e) above, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. The operator may appeal any such denial to the city council pursuant to section 38-118 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-110. - Suspension or revocation of oil and gas well permits. 
(a)  If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of a permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the permit), the city shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than ten (10) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent danger of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. 
(b)  If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance, the city may suspend or revoke the permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the permit issued under this article during any period of any permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of the city in suspending or revoking the permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the commission. 
(d)  If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the city, upon written notice to the operator, may notify the commission and request that the commission take any appropriate action. 
(e)  An operator may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision of the city in writing to suspend or revoke a permit, file an appeal to the city council pursuant to section 38-115.3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-111. - Periodic reports. 
(a)  The operator shall notify the city of any changes to the following information within ten (10) days after the change occurs: 
(1)  The name, physical address, telephone number, and fax number, of the operator; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person designated to receive notices from the city (which person must be a resident of Texas that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail); and 
(3)  The operator's emergency action response plan (including "drive-to-maps" from public rights-of-way to each drill site). 
(b)  The operator shall notify in writing the city of any change to the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one (1) business day. 
(c)  The operator shall provide a copy of any "incident reports" or written complaints submitted to the commission and a copy to the city within ten (10) days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints. 
(d)  Beginning on December 31st after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31st thereafter until the operator notifies the city that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the city identifying any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable permit that have not been previously reported to the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-112. - Bond, letters of credit, indemnity, insurance. 
(a)  General requirements. The operator shall be required to: 
(1)  Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the permit issued hereunder. 
(2)  Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations as determined by the city. 
(3)  Indemnification and express negligence provisions. Operators shall sign each permit and the city shall retain a signed original. Each such permit issued by the city shall include the following language: Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have, against the City of Lake Jackson, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a permit. The operator shall fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against each and every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations, judgments, losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in defense of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a permit. 
(4)  Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any terms of the permit. 
(5)  Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the oil and gas operation. 
(b)  Bond, irrevocable letter of credit. Prior to the issuance of an oil and gas well permit the operator shall provide the city with a security instrument in the form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit as follows: 
(1)  Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the oil and gas well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs last. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the city. The original bond shall be submitted to the city. 
(2)  Letter of credit. A letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in Texas and shall become effective on or before the date the permit is issued. The letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs last. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines or penalties or costs to remedy assessed under this article. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the city by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking institution, with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary. 
(3)  The principal amount of any security instrument shall be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any single well. If, after completion of a well, the applicant/operator, who initially posted a fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) bond, has complied with all of the provisions of this article and whose well in the producing stage and all drilling operations have ceased, may submit a request to the city to reduce the existing bond to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond or letter of credit shall be maintained at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). If at any time after no less than a fifteen (15) day written notice to the operator and a public hearing, the city council shall deem any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, it may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter of credit up to a maximum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per well. 
(4)  Whenever the city finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the city to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than thirty (30) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. The city shall be authorized to draw against any irrevocable letter of credit or bond to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, such additional money may be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(5)  In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter of credit or bond the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both such methods. 
(6)  When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled. 
(c)  Insurance. In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in Texas. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(1)  General requirements applicable to all policies. 
a.  The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an "additional insured" to all policies except employer's liability coverage under the operator's workers compensation policy. 
b.  All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a claims-made basis. 
c.  All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most current version of the A.M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the city. 
d.  Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a "per occurrence" basis unless otherwise stipulated herein. 
e.  Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City Secretary, City of Lake Jackson, 25 Oak Drive, Lake Jackson, Texas 77566, evidencing all the required coverages, including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a permit. 
f.  All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the city. 
g.  Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein. 
h.  Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum 30-day notice of cancellation, non-renewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten (10) days notice shall be acceptable in the event of non-payment of premium. 
i.  During the term of the permit, the operator shall report in no more than ten (10) days to the city any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss. 
j.  Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city. 
(2)  Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operation, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage, independent contractors protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence location for bodily injury and property damage. 
(3)  Excess or umbrella liability. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) excess, if the operator has a stand-alone environmental pollution liability (EPL) policy. Ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) excess, if the operator does not have a stand-alone EPL policy. Coverage must include an endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If seepage and pollution coverage is written on a "claims-made" basis, the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. 
(4)  Environmental pollution liability coverage. Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per loss, with an annual aggregate of at least ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00.) 
a.  Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. 
b.  The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the city. 
(5)  Control of well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of residents. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00). Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control. 
(6)  Workers compensation and employers liability insurance. Workers compensation benefits shall be Texas statutory limits. Employers' liability shall be a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident. Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal laws. 
(7)  Automobile liability insurance. Combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. Coverage must include all owned, hired and not-owned automobiles. 
(8)  Certificates of insurance. The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the State of Texas, unless the coverage is written by a Surplus Lines insurer. The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved by the Texas State Board of Insurance or ISO (Insurance Services Office), or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage. Sets forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained herein. Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read "THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NON-RENEWED WITHOUT THIRTY (30) DAYS ADVANCED WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE TEN (10) DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED." Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the certificates of insurance. 
(9)  Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of Texas upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator shall within ten (10) days notify the city in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued and abandonment is complete. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-113. - On site and technical regulations. 
(a)  Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the Railroad Commission; however, all well casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten (10) feet below the surface unless the surface owner submits a written agreement otherwise. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well. 
(b)  Blowout prevention. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during oil and gas operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute (API). The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the commission. The operator must conduct daily testing of the operation and pressure providing a copy to the city weekly. 
(c)  Chemical and materials storage. All chemicals and/or hazardous materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent, contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and cleanup of any accidental spill, leak, or discharge of a hazardous material. Operator shall have all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials on site. All applicable federal and state regulatory requirements for the proper labeling of containers shall be followed. Appropriate pollution prevention actions shall be required and include, but are not limited to, chemical and materials raised from the ground (e.g., wooden pallets), bulk storage, installation and maintenance of secondary containment systems, and protection from stormwater and weather elements. 
(d)  Compliance. Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements. 
(e)  Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any oil and gas operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any oil and gas operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or any body of water or any private or public property in the city. 
(f)  Drilling fluids. Low toxicity glycols, synthetic hydrocarbons, polymers, and esters shall be substituted for conventional oil-based drilling fluids. 
(g)  Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(h)  Drip pans and other containment devices. Drip pans and other containment devices shall be placed or installed underneath all tanks, containers, pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system valves, connections, and any other areas or structures that could potential[ly] leak, discharge, or spill hazardous liquids, semi-liquids, or solid waste materials. 
(i)  Dust, vibration, odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of oil and gas and other hydrocarbon substances. Best accepted practices for ensuring dust suppression shall include designating an operator representative responsible for ensuring that dust is controlled on site, ensuring that a clean water source is available at the site for dust mitigation purposes, and applying fresh water to roads and around the well site to reduce dust. Brine water, sulphur water, or water in mixture with any type of hydrocarbon may not be used for dust suppression. A mud shaker for truck traffic shall be installed with the construction of any access road. All equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that, vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in this area may be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor. 
(j)  Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision. 
(k)  Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the city's ordinances and the appropriate national codes. 
(l)  Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of any oil and gas or other hydrocarbons production activities, operator shall submit to the city and fire marshal an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of oil and gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission, TCEQ, Texas Department of Transportation and/or the USEPA. The emergency response plan shall be kept current with any additions, modifications, and/or amendments concerning all construction-related activities, operations and production. Updated plans shall be submitted to the city and fire marshal within two (2) business days. A copy of the emergency response plan shall be kept on site. 
(m)  Explosive charges. Under no circumstances shall explosives of any type be used during any phase of drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating, converting, or completing an oil and gas well without the prior consent of the city council. The operator shall provide notice to the city and fire marshal at least ten (10) days prior to such activities. The notice shall identify the date that the explosive charges will be used, the date and means of transporting the explosive charges, and the transportation route to and from the drill and/or operation site that will be used for the delivery of the explosive charges. 
(n)  Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire marshal and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line. 
(o)  Gas emission or burning restricted. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or as permitted by the commission, then such vent or open flame shall not be located closer than five hundred (500) feet from any building not used in operations on the drilling site and such vent or open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners. 
(p)  Grass, weeds, trash. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and trash, combustible or otherwise. 
(q)  Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the operation site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and shielded so as to both prevent direct illumination of and minimize glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within six hundred (600) feet. 
(r)  Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
(s)  Organic solvents. Organic solvents, such as trichloroethylene and carbon tetrachloride, shall not be used for cleaning any element, structure, or component of the drilling rig, platform, and/or associated equipment, tools, or pipes. To the maximum extent practicable, high flash point Varsol shall be used. 
(t)  Pipe dope. Lead-free, biodegradable pipe dope shall be substituted for API specified pipe dope. 
(u)  Pits. All reserve pits, completion/workover pits, drilling fluid disposal pits, fresh makeup water pits, gas plant evaporation/retention pits, mud circulation pits, or water condensate pits shall be lined with plastic or stored above ground in tanks. The water surface elevation of the pit may not exceed twelve (12) inches above the existing ground elevation prior to any on-site construction of the pit. One (1) foot of freeboard is required between the surface elevation and on top of berm. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within forty (40) days after completion of the well, unless otherwise authorized by the city. No washout pits shall be located within the city, unless all fluid, sludge, solid waste materials, drilling fluids, waste oil, spent completion fluids, all other liquids, semi-liquids, mud, including hazardous waste inseparable by simple mechanical removal processes, and is made up primarily of natural material is immediately captured within a fully enclosed, above ground containment tank. 
(v)  Private roads and drill sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the operation site itself shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide, have an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet and shall be an all-weather hard surface and maintained to prevent dust, mud and rutting. In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the city after consideration of all circumstances including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation; the purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind. 
(w)  Signs. 
(1)  A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to this article. Such sign shall be durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a surface area of not less than sixteen (16) square feet with contrasting lettering not less than four (4) inches tall and shall be lettered with the following: 
a.  Well name and number; 
b.  Name of operator; 
c.  The emergency 911 number; and 
d.  24-hour telephone numbers of two (2) persons responsible for the well who may be contacted in case of emergency. 
(2)  Permanent weatherproof signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED" in both English and Spanish shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other location approved or designated by the fire marshal. Sign lettering shall be four (4) inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency 9-1-1 number and the operator, well and lease designations required by the commission. 
(x)  Storage of equipment. On-site storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being conducted on the site. No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any driveway, alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment which is necessary for drilling or production operations on the site. The fire marshal shall be the entity that determines whether equipment on the site shall constitute a fire hazard. No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. This shall not be deemed to exclude a conventional gas separator or dehydrator. 
(y)  Storage tanks. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the API specifications unless other or additional specifications are approved by the fire marshal. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondary containment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height and one and one-half (1½) times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the Fire Code, and buried at least one (1) foot below the surface. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to contain the liquids from the storage tank. All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire Protection Association. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank. No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground facilities, other than the well head and flow lines, shall be placed in a floodway identified by FEMA on the most current FIRM. Meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other above ground facilities proposed in the floodplain shall be outside of the floodway and shall comply with the requirements for development in the city Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual. 
(z)  Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system. 
(aa)  Surface casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the commission. 
(bb)  Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall have access to the well site to enable it to close the shut-off the valve in an emergency. 
(cc)  Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the following: Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet the API standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit classification. Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting form or connected with the drilling, re-working or deepening of any well shall be discharged into an above-ground self-contained tank, or, if authorized by the city council, a lined pit. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency. Unless otherwise directed by the commission and approved by the city, waste materials shall be removed from the site and transported to an off-site disposal facility not less often than every thirty (30) days. Water stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary. All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city. 
(dd)  Watchperson. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on site during the drilling or re-working of a well when other workmen are not on the premises. 
(ee)  Installation of pipelines on, under or across public property. The operator shall notify the city in accordance with Ch. 95 of the Code of Ordinances and apply to the city for a right-of-way use agreement in order to operate on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city property for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines. Operator shall: 
(1)  Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities located on, under or across the course of such rights-of way. 
(2)  Furnish to the city a site plan showing the location of such pipelines. 
(3)  Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations, including, but not limited to, the Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual. 
(4)  Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable, as existed prior to the laying of the pipeline. 
(ff)  Public streets. No permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of the city and/or projected streets or alleys shown by the current Comprehensive Plan of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless prior consent is obtained from city council. Any consent from city council shall be temporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or days that any street or alley may be blocked, encumbered or closed. 
(gg)  Vehicle routes for oil and gas well permits. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of one (1) ton shall be subject to the limitations set forth in section 98-84 of this Code. 
(hh)  Work hours for oil and gas well permits. Site development, other than drilling shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to between the above same work hour restrictions except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions, and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling or production. The operator may request an exception from the city council pursuant to section 38-118 of this article. 
(ii)  Tank specifications for oil and gas well permit. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the API specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire marshal. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than twelve (12) feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. 
(jj)  Landfarming. Landfarming shall be prohibited within the city. Except where the temporary containment of drilling mud into appropriate pits is specifically authorized pursuant to this article, it shall be an offense to landfarm within the city or for any land owner to allow landfarming on any property within the city. 
(kk)  Raw soil. The raw soil in disturbed areas or embankments around each drill site, operation site, line compressor facility, fracturing pit or open reserve pit, where permitted, shall be seeded or covered with grass to be maintained in a healthy and live-growing condition. 
(ll)  Cleaning of area. Within sixty (60) days of well completion or reworking a well, the area around the well shall be cleaned and cleared of all material and equipment; holes and excavations shall be filled; and the land shall be graded and returned to its original condition including replanting of vegetation to match the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-114. - Compressors. 
(a)  Lift compressors. 
(1)  Lift compressors shall meet the noise standards in section 38-115.1. 
(2)  A lift compressor installed on a site for less than six consecutive months shall be classified as a temporary lift compressor and may employ sound blankets or barriers to meet the noise standards. 
(3)  A lift compressor installed on a site for more than six (6) months shall be classified as a permanent lift compressor. If located within six hundred (600) feet of a playground, competition athletic field, picnic area, residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or schools, or any other building used or designed and intended to be used for human occupancy or a preliminary or final platted residential subdivision, a permanent lift compressor shall be enclosed in an acoustical structure constructed of metal, masonry or other materials as approved by the city. The structure must completely screen the equipment from view, be painted in a non-contrasting neutral earth tone color to match the nearby surroundings as nearly as possible, and meet all applicable building and fire codes. 
(4)  If permanent screening has not been installed around a site, all compressors, associated equipment and buildings shall be enclosed within a landscaped enclosure in accordance with section 38-115 of this article immediately upon installation of the compressor and associated equipment. 
(5)  Secondary containment shall be required around all lift compressors. All secondary containment shall meet the same screening requirements for storage tank facilities in 38-115 of this chapter. 
(6)  All facilities shall be inspected by the fire marshal for compliance with the Fire Code and the gas well inspector prior to operation of the compressor. 
(b)  Line compressors. 
(1)  Line compressors shall be required to meet all the noise standards in section 38-116. 
(2)  All line compressors and associated equipment exceeding ten (10) feet in height shall be fully enclosed within a building or structure that complies with the architectural and community design standards of the zoning district in which the facility is located and designed in context with surrounding land uses. 
(3)  A bufferyard with a minimum width of three hundred (300) feet shall be established and maintained around all line compressors, buildings or structures housing line compressors, and associated equipment. A drill site or operation site shall be permitted within the bufferyard when such site abuts a compressor facility. 
(4)  All facilities shall be inspected by the fire marshal for compliance with the Fire Code and the gas well inspector prior to operation of the compressor. 
(5)  Line compressors and associated equipment shall be landscaped and screened in the same manner as prescribed for a drill site according to 38-115. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-115. - Screening. 
(a)  Throughout the entire exploration, drilling, and production process there shall be screening improvements (fences, walls, berms and landscaping) required during each phase of the process. 
(1)  Exploration through completion (drilling phase). A temporary chain link fence with all weather screening fabric at least six (6) feet in height shall be established around the entire operation site to obscure view of the oil and gas drilling activities. A secured entrance gate shall be required. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or his or her employees are not within the enclosure. The site must have a key override switch and a radio operated controller to allow emergency vehicles access to the well site, which shall be used only in case of an emergency. 
(2)  Completion through abandonment (production phase). Prior to commencing the completion phase, the operator shall prepare a site plan detailing the screening proposed at the site. The site plan shall be submitted to the city in accordance with the provisions of section 90-34 et seq. of this Code and the proposed screening shall conform to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  A masonry wall with landscaping shall be required to enclose and visually screen the well and all associated equipment. The masonry wall material and design shall be generally compatible with the design of similar facilities, buildings and structures on and/or adjacent to the site. 
b.  Masonry walls shall be at least eight (8) feet in height. 
c.  Masonry walls shall be placed upon earthen berms in order to prevent viewing of the well and associated equipment from a public street, existing residences and residentially zoned undeveloped property contiguous to the well site where practicable as determined by the city. However, berms shall not be required unless needed to augment the height of an eight-foot masonry wall in order to screen the viewing of the well or any associated equipment from the above items. 
d.  All landscape improvements shall be maintained in an attractive and healthy state by the applicant and/or operator as to ensure the effective visual screening of the site throughout its use for oil and gas production and associated activities. 
e.  Screening shrubs and trees shall be evergreen species and shall be installed in conjunction with the required masonry walls and or berms in order to supplement both the visual screening and noise mitigation of the well site and associated equipment. Screening shrubs shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in height at planting, having the potential to grow to a mature height of at least eight (8) feet, be planted on four-foot centers and must have an irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials. Screening trees shall be planted on twenty-foot centers. Trees must be a minimum of three-inch caliper at time of planting and be irrigated as above. Plans for landscape and irrigation shall be submitted to the city for approval. 
(b)  Gate specifications. All temporary fences and masonry walls shall be equipped with at least one (1) gate. The gate shall meet the following specifications: 
(1)  Each gate shall be not less than twelve (12) feet wide and be composed of two (2) gates, each of which is not less than six (6) feet wide, or one (1) sliding gate not less than twelve (12) feet wide. If two (2) gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span; 
(2)  The gates shall be of chain link construction, with all-weather screening fabric, that meets the applicable specifications, or of other approved material that, for safety reasons, shall be at least as secure as a chain link fence; 
(3)  The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site; and 
(4)  Operator must provide emergency vehicle access by using a key override switch and a radio operated controller to access the well site, which shall be used only in case of an emergency. 
(c)  Cameras. After permanent screening is in place, a minimum of one (1) security camera shall be mounted inside the enclosure. Signs shall be posted on the fence or wall of the site to indicate that activity on the site may be recorded. The operator shall maintain the video data for at least seventy-two (72) hours. Upon request by the city manager, his designee, or law enforcement official, [shall] provide the city with access to the video. The camera system shall be designed to meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Capture clear video images of all traffic entering and exiting the gate; 
(2)  Capture clear video images of all production equipment located on the site; 
(3)  Be able to pan to any motion detected on site; 
(4)  Show the date and time of all activity on the video footage; and 
(5)  Be capable of being viewed on site. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 38-115.1. - Noise. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the operator shall request a sound level measurement from the city. The city shall hire a technical advisor under section 38-115.4 to take ambient noise readings taken over a seventy-two-hour period, including at least one (1) twenty-four-hour reading during a Saturday or Sunday. During the seventy-two-hour period, readings shall be taken from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. to establish the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise level for daytime operations and from the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. to establish the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise level for any nighttime operations. 
(b)  The exterior noise level generated by any operations (including, but not limited to, drilling, re-drilling, production, hydraulic fracturing, and flowback) or any compressor facility shall not exceed the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise level by more than five (5) decibels for daytime operations and shall not exceed the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise level by more than three (3) decibels for nighttime operations at three hundred (300) feet or at the nearest residence, religious institution, public building, school, retail or commercial building, city park, state water or hospital building whichever is closest to the source. 
(c)  An operator shall not drill or re-drill a well or operate any equipment in such a manner so as to create pure tones where one-third (?) octave band sound-pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure levels of two (2) contiguous one-third octave bands by five (5) dB for center frequencies of five hundred (500) Hertz and above, and by eight (8) dB for center frequencies between one hundred sixty (160) and four hundred (400) Hertz, and by fifteen (15) dB for center frequencies less than or equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) Hertz. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit and the commencement of operations, the operator shall submit a noise management plan, approved by the city, detailing how the equipment used in the drilling, completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible noise levels of this section. The operator shall be responsible for verifying compliance with this section and the noise management plan after the installation of any noise generating equipment. 
(e)  A citation may be issued immediately for failure to comply with the provisions of this section. However, if the operator is in compliance with the approved noise management plan, and a violation still occurs, the operator will be given twenty-four (24) hours from notice of non-compliance to correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the twenty-four-hour period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator. 
(f)  Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open unless equipped with a hospital grade exhaust muffler or mufflers. 
(1)  Air, gas, or pneumatic drilling is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1(38-116), 3-21-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1, adopted March 21, 2016, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 38-116—38-121. In order to maintain the current numbering system of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 38-115.1—38-115.6 to read as set out herein.  
Sec. 38-115.2. - Cleanup and maintenance. 
(a)  Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations within sixty (60) days. 
(b)  Clean-up after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the fire marshal and the city all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Clean-up operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site clean-up within twenty-four (24) hours, the city shall have the right to contact the commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. 
(c)  Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the city shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the city manager. 
(d)  Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the city manager and fire marshal as soon as practicable. If the city manager, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the city may then employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the city deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to city action taken to gain control of said well. 
(e)  Right-of-way. The operator shall immediately notify the city of any accumulations of dirt, dust, mud, or other debris deposited on public rights-of-way by vehicles involved in the well drilling or pipeline installation. If the city elects to clean the rights-of-way, the cost of the removal shall be paid by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1(38-117), 3-21-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-115.1.  
Sec. 38-115.3. - Plugged and abandoned wells. 
(a)  Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(b)  [Restoration of drill and/or operation site.] Abandonment shall be approved by the city after restoration of the drill and/or operation site has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the city: 
(1)  The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the site; 
(2)  All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the site; 
(3)  All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the commission; 
(4)  If any soil was contaminated, it shall be removed from the site in accordance with city, state and federal regulations; 
(5)  All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil; 
(6)  All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the site; and 
(7)  During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article. 
(c)  Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following to the city: 
(1)  A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under the state law; and 
(2)  A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the dates so stated. 
(d)  Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well. 
(e)  [City review and approval.] The operator can only abandon a well if the city has reviewed and approved the abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1(38-118), 3-21-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-115.1.  
Sec. 38-115.4. - Technical advisor. 
The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the oil and gas industry or the law as it pertains to oil and gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the city on such matters relating to oil and gas operations within the city as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the city. In the event such technical advisor(s) is (are) employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article, then the cost for such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed against and paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article. Prior to the employment of a technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1(38-119), 3-21-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-115.1.  
Sec. 38-115.5. - Appeals. 
(a)  In accordance with sections 38-108, 38-109 and 38-110 of this article, the city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the issuance of an oil and gas well permit or the revocation or suspension of any oil and gas well permit issued hereunder. Any person or entity whose application is denied, suspended or revoked may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the city, file an appeal to the city council in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city secretary. The grounds for appeal must be set forth specifically and the error described by the appellant. 
(2)  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the records the city secretary shall transmit all papers involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city council agenda for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. 
(3)  Written notice of an appeal before the city council shall be sent to owners of real property lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the appeal is proposed, such notice to be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for the appeal hearing to all such owners who have rendered their property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. 
(b)  In accordance with sections 38-106, 38-113 and 38-118 of this article, the city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals for deviations from well setback, hours of operation, waste disposal, landscaping and screening requirements. An appeal under this subsection (b) may be filed by the applicant at any time. 
(c)  In order to grant the relief requested under subsection (a) or (b) a simple majority vote of the city council is required; provided, however, that a finding of error or abuse of discretion is additionally required to grant relief under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1(38-120), 3-21-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-115.1.  
Sec. 38-115.6. - Penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following: 
(1)  Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of an oil and gas well permit issued under this article. 
(2)  Fail to comply with any condition set forth in an oil and gas well permit issued under this article; or 
(3)  Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine as set out in section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law, including but not limited to, the recovery of civil penalties under Subchapter B, Chapter 54, of the Texas Local Government Code. The city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of this article. The power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed. 
(Ord. No. 16-2095, § 1(38-121), 3-21-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-115.1.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER RUNOFF AND DISCHARGE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-116. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To maintain and improve the quality of surface water within the city; 
(2)  To prevent or reduce the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from construction and residential sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and surface waters within the city; 
(3)  To facilitate compliance with federal and state rules and regulations by owners, operators, contractors, and subcontractors of construction sites and commercial facilities within the city; 
(4)  To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-117. - Administration. 
The director of public works and the director's authorized representatives are authorized to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-118. - Submission of documents. 
All persons required by federal or state regulations or this chapter to submit documents, pertaining to discharges of stormwater or accidental discharges into the local MS4, shall submit all applicable documents to the following mailing address: 
City of Lake Jackson 
City Manager 
25 Oak Drive 
Lake Jackson, Texas 77566 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-119. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Agricultural stormwater runoff. Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR § 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic production facilities as defined in 40 CFR § 122.24. 
Best management practice or BMP. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, structural controls, and other management practices to prevent the pollution of the MS4 and waters in the state. Best management practices also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage areas. 
City. The City of Lake Jackson, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
Commencement of construction activities. The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading or excavation activities, as well as other construction-related activities (e.g. stockpiling of fill material, demolition). 
Common plan of development or sale. A construction activity that is completed in separate stages, separate phases, or in combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development or sale is identified by the documentation for the construction project that identifies the scope of the project, and may include plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or other similar documentation and activities. 
Construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in land disturbances of equal to or greater than one (1) acre. Construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than one (1) acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one (1) acre of land. Construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of the site (e.g., the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing rights-of-way, and similar maintenance activities). 
Contamination. The presence of or entry into a public water supply system, the MS4 or water in the state, any substance which may be detrimental to the public health and/or the quality of water. 
Contractor. For the purposes of this chapter, the contractor is the person or persons that have day-to-day operational control of those activities at a construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with local pollution prevention requirements, although they do not qualify as an operator under the construction permit. 
Conveyance. Curbs, gutters, manmade channels and ditches, drains, pipes, and other constructed features designed or used for flood control or to otherwise transport stormwater runoff. 
Discharge. To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of any substance, or to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Domestic sewage. Waterborne human waste and waste from domestic activities, including the use of toilet facilities, washing, bathing, and food preparation. 
Erosion. The process of land being diminished or worn away due to wind or water. Erosion occurs naturally, but can be intensified by land disturbing activities such as development, farming, road building, timber harvesting, etc. 
Facility. Any building, structure, installation, process or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
Final stabilization. A construction site status where any of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All soil disturbing activities at the construction site have been completed and a uniform (e.g. evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy (70) percent of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as riprap, geotextiles, or gabions) have been employed; 
(2)  For individual lots in a residential construction site, the homebuilder has completed final stabilization on the individual lot(s) as specified in condition (1) above; 
(3)  For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g. pipelines across crop or rangeland), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface water and areas, which are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use, shall meet the final stabilization conditions of condition (1) above. 
Hazardous substance or materials. Any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR part 302. 
Hazardous waste. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR part 261. 
Illicit connection. Any manmade conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to a municipal separate storm sewer. 
Illicit discharge. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not entirely composed of stormwater, except discharges authorized under an NPDES or TPDES permit and discharges resulting from emergency firefighting activities. 
Large construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in land disturbances of equal to or greater than five (5) acres of land. Large construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than five (5) acres of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than five (5) acres of land. Large construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of a ditch, channel, or other similar stormwater conveyance. Large construction activity does not include the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays or existing roads, the routine clearing of existing right-of-ways, and similar maintenance activities. 
Maximum extent practicable or MEP. The technology-based discharge standard for municipal separate storm sewer systems to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges that was established by CWA § 402(p). 
MS4 operator. The public entity, and/or the entity contracted by the public entity, responsible for management and operation of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4. A separate storm sewer system owned or operated by the United States, a state, city, town, county, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over the disposal of sewage, wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, that discharges to surface water in the state. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system or NPDES. The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing requirements of certain sections of the federal Clean Water Act. 
Nonpoint source. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a "point source". 
Notice of intent or NOI. A written submission to TCEQ, from an applicant, requesting coverage under a general permit. 
NPDES permit. A permit issued by the EPA that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general basis. In the State of Texas, the EPA retains authority for permitting oil and gas exploration activities and Indian Country land. 
Oil. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. 
Outfall. A point source at the point where a municipal separate storm sewer discharges to water in the state and does not include open conveyances connecting two (2) municipal separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels, or other conveyances that connect segments of the same stream or other waters of the U.S. and are used to convey waters of the U.S. 
Owner. For the purposes of this chapter, the owner is the person or persons that have operational control over construction plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications, although they do not qualify as an operator under the construction permit. 
Permit. Either an NPDES or TPDES permit, whichever is applicable. 
Permittee. An MS4 operator authorized under an NPDES or TPDES permit. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
Point source. (from 40 CFR § 122.22) Any discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, garbage, sewage, sewage sludge, filter backwash, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term "pollutant" does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pastureland, and farmland. 
Pollution (from Texas Water Code § 26.001(14)). The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or water in the state. 
Responsible party. The owner, occupant, developer, builder, or general contractor who has operational control over the site, including the ability to make modifications in specifications, or who has operational control over day-to-day activities at the site and is able to ensure compliance with plan requirements and permit conditions (e.g., a person who is authorized to direct the conduct of workers at the site). Any person who has filed an notice of intent (NOI) or completed a construction site notice is presumed to be a responsible party. 
Riparian. Any area relating to or located on the bank of a natural watercourse. 
Runoff. Drainage or flood discharge that leaves an area as surface flow or as pipeline flow. 
Sediment. Soil, sand, and minerals washed from land into water, usually after rain. 
Separate storm sewer system. A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, outfalls, or storm drains), designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; which is not a combined sewer, and which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2. 
Small construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and less than five (5) acres of land. Small construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than one (1) acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one (1) and less than five (5) acres of land. Small construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of a ditch, channel, or other similar stormwater conveyance. Small construction activity does not include the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing right-of-ways, and similar maintenance activities. 
Storm drain. An opening leading to an underground pipe or an open ditch for carrying surface runoff. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or after any form of natural precipitation, including rainfall runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater associated with construction activity. Stormwater runoff from a construction activity where soil disturbing activities (including clearing, grading, and excavating) result in the disturbance of one (1) or more acres of total land area, or are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will ultimately result in the disturbance of one (1) or more acres of total land area. 
Stormwater permit. Authorization issued by the city to conduct construction activities. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWP3. A plan required by a construction general permit to discharge stormwater associated with construction and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction at the facility. 
Stormwater quality plan. A plan describing how construction is to be performed and how the site closure is to be accomplished, including post-construction control measures, at a construction site. 
Structural control (or practice). A pollution prevention practice that requires the construction of a device, or the use of a device, to capture or prevent pollution in stormwater runoff. Structural controls and practices may include but are not limited to: wet ponds, infiltration basins, stormwater wetlands, silt fences, earthen dikes, drainage swales, sediment traps, check dams, stabilized construction entrances, subsurface drains, storm drain inlet protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent sediment basins. 
Temporary stabilization. A condition where exposed soils or disturbed areas are provided a protective cover or other structural control to prevent the migration of pollutants. Temporary stabilization may include temporary seeding, geotextiles, mulches, perimeter controls, and other techniques to reduce or eliminate erosion until either final stabilization can be achieved or until further construction activities take place. 
Texas pollutant discharge elimination system or TPDES. The state program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing requirements of certain sections of the federal Clean Water Act. 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The permitting authority for stormwater discharges. 
TPDES permit. A permit issued by the state that authorizes discharges of pollutants to water in the state and waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general basis. 
Water in the state. Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "waters of the United States" at 40 CFR § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-120. - Citizen reporting. 
(a)  All citizens are encouraged to report any spills, releases, illicit connections, other instances of anyone discharging pollutants into the MS4 or waters of the United States, and any other violation of this article of which they become aware, to the city manager. 
(b)  Such citizen reports may be made by telephone, in writing, or in person. A written record of each citizen report to the city will be prepared and kept on file for a period of three (3) years, and a copy of the city's record of the report will be furnished to the reporting citizen upon request. Also upon request, the city manager will inform the reporting citizen of any action undertaken by the city in response to the citizen's report. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-121. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city manager no later than the next working day. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the action taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Secs. 38-122—38-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 38-126. - Illicit discharge. 
No person shall introduce, cause to be introduced, or allow to be introduced an illicit discharge into the MS4, except those discharges listed in section 2-2. Illicit discharge may result in the termination of the MS4 access by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-127. - Allowable nonstormwater discharges. 
(a)  The following nonstormwater discharges may be discharged to the MS4, provided that subsection (b) below does not apply: 
(1)  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, a TPDES or NPDES permit; 
(2)  Water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect aquatic life); 
(3)  Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing uncontaminated sources of potable water, groundwater, or surface water; 
(4)  Discharges from a potable water source; 
(5)  Diverted stream flows; 
(6)  Rising ground waters and springs; 
(7)  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration; 
(8)  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
(9)  A discharge from a foundation drain or a footing drain; 
(10)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(11)  Water from a crawl space pump; 
(12)  A discharge from residential car washing and non-commercial car washing events; 
(13)  Flows from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
(14)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(15)  Street wash water; 
(16)  Dye testing if verbal notification to the city is given prior to the time of the test; 
(17)  A discharge or flow from emergency fire fighting activities; and 
(18)  Other similar occasional non-stormwater discharges, unless the TCEQ develops permits or regulations addressing these discharges. 
(b)  The city may, on a case-by-case basis, prohibit any of the above listed allowable nonstormwater discharges in subsection (a) provided: 
(1)  The discharge or flow in question has been determined by the TCEQ or city manager to be a significant contributor of a pollutant or pollutants to water in the state or the MS4; and 
(2)  Written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger. 
(c)  Specific prohibitions of construction related illicit discharges. It is unlawful for a person to, create, cause, introduce, or contribute to creating, causing or introducing any discharge that causes and/or contributes to a violation of applicable water quality standards, including, but not limited to, a discharge or flow composed of one (1) or more of the following from a construction site: 
(1)  Pollutants from equipment, vehicle and/or other wash waters; 
(2)  Pollutants from exposed building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste or other similar materials; 
(3)  Pollutants from spills and/or leaks; 
(4)  Pollutants from washout wastewater, fuels, oils, soaps, solvents, and dewatering activities. 
(5)  Sediment, silt, earth, soil, dirt, sand and gravel; lime, liquids, solids, and semi-solids used for soil treatment, preparation, or amendment; 
(6)  Concrete, slurries, grout, tar, and asphalt; 
(7)  Construction vehicle maintenance fluids such as hydraulic fluids, lubricants, fuels, brake fluids, and coolants; 
(8)  Hazardous or extremely hazardous materials; 
(9)  Materials resulting from repair, renovation, or demolition such as concrete, reinforcing bar, steel, wire, tar paper, roofing materials, sheet rock, plaster, wood, cellar dirt and carpeting; 
(10)  Residual and surplus construction materials; and 
(11)  Paint thinner, paint equipment cleaner and wastewater from the cleaning of painting equipment and supplies. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010; Ord. No. 15-2081, § 1, 10-5-2015)  
Sec. 38-128. - Illicit connections prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to construct, use, maintain, or continue the existence of an illicit connection. Illicit connections may be terminated by order of the city manager without prior notice. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-129. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  The city manager may, without prior notice, issue an emergency order suspending MS4 discharge access when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. If the person who receives the suspension order fails to comply, the city manager may take steps to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to the public. 
(b)  Access may not be reinstated without written approval from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Secs. 38-130—38-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 38-136. - Construction site. 
(a)  A construction site includes all areas where construction activity, which is all or part of a common development or project, are occurring, proposed to occur, or have occurred, irrespective of whether that construction is in compliance with this chapter, irrespective of whether that construction activity is ongoing or temporarily suspended for any purpose, and irrespective of whether the city manager has granted authorization to undertake the construction activity. A construction site shall encompass: 
(1)  All land and surface water areas where construction activities of any type, including all areas of land surface disturbed by or as a consequence of the construction activities or other activities in support of the construction activities, are undertaken as part of a common plan of development or project; 
(2)  All areas of land to be disturbed by construction of a common plan of development or project, irrespective of whether such construction is undertaken or planned to be undertaken in one (1) phase or stage or different phases or stages and irrespective of whether such construction is undertaken or planned to be undertaken at different, separate, or simultaneous times; 
(3)  All areas of land where the land is to be disturbed by construction of a common plan of development or project, irrespective of whether undertaken at contiguous or separate locations within the general area encompassed by the common plan of development or project, provided such boundary lies on or is within the boundary of property collectively owned or leased by one (1) or more parties undertaking any or all of the construction activities; and 
(4)  All areas of ongoing, temporarily suspended, yet-to-be undertaken, and completed construction encompassing the totality of the construction activities, irrespective of whether any or all the construction activities are within compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the right to redefine, for purposes of compliance with this chapter, the limits of a construction site in extent and amount necessary and sufficient in the judgment of the city manager to prevent the actual or potential discharge of pollutants from the construction site to the MS4 or waters of the U.S., provided the limits lie on or within the boundary of property collectively owned or leased by one (1) or more operators undertaking any or all of the construction activities at the site. 
(c)  A construction site shall cease to be a construction site only at such time that all requirements for closure of the construction site as specified by this chapter and in the stormwater permit have been met, at which time the stormwater permit will automatically terminate. 
(d)  The stormwater permit coverage will automatically terminate two (2) years after the permit issuance date. If a permit is needed beyond the termination or expiration date, a new permit must be issued. 
(e)  A construction site for which active and ongoing on-site construction activities have halted for a period of twenty-one (21) continuous calendar days and for which proper closure actions as required by this chapter have not been conducted, shall be considered in violation of this chapter, unless the construction site owner and/or operator has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that: 
(1)  Such lack of active and ongoing on-site construction activity is a result of only temporary suspension of activities; and 
(2)  Temporary stabilization practices were initiated no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the site becoming inactive. 
(f)  Any and all responsible parties shall use best management practices to control, reduce, and prevent, to the maximum extent practicable, illicit discharges to the MS4 and/or waters of the U.S. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010; Ord. No. 15-2081, § 2, 10-5-2015)  
Sec. 38-137. - Adoption of the stormwater management guidance document. 
The Brazoria County Stormwater Quality Coalition MS4 Construction Guidance Document is adopted to ensure stormwater entering the navigable waters of the United States from the city's municipal separate storm sewer system does not violate the terms of the city's stormwater national pollution discharge elimination system permit. The guidance document contains suggested best management practices that owners, developers, and contractors should consider adopting to help control and reduce pollutants that are transported by stormwaters and technical guidance related to erosion and sediment controls and other measures to reduce pollutants from new construction projects. The manual can be found at http://www.lakejackson-tx.gov/pages. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-138. - Stormwater permit. 
(a)  The owner and/or operator of a construction site must apply for a stormwater permit at least ten (10) days prior to the start of any construction activity. Construction must be started no later than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the date the stormwater permit is issued. Failure to begin within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days shall render the stormwater permit void. 
(b)  The stormwater permit must be posted at the construction site. 
(c)  The owner and/or operator of a construction site may apply for a change in the date of commencement of construction or the date of termination of construction specified in the stormwater permit, this application must be made at least two (2) working days prior to: (1) the date of the proposed change for commencement; and/or (2) the date of the termination date. 
(d)  If for any reason the stormwater permit is suspended, revoked, terminated, or voided, construction activity at the site shall immediately cease. 
(e)  Application for amendment to a stormwater permit can be made at any time ten (10) or more working days prior to the time identified in the stormwater permit for completion of construction activities, provided the person(s) making application is not in violation of this article. An appropriately modified stormwater quality plan shall also be provided at the time of application for amendment to the city manager. Construction undertaken in accordance with the amended stormwater permit shall not commence until the amendment is approved by the city manager. Approval of such amendment does not relieve the applicant or owner and/or operator from any or all administrative enforcement remedies, judicial enforcement remedies, enforcement actions, or other remedies allowed by law. 
(f)  In the event that the operator of the construction site changes within ten (10) working days of the change, any and all stormwater permits, and stormwater quality plans, permits, plans, or notices must be amended to reflect the name of the new operator. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-139. - Same—Contents. 
The stormwater permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  Stormwater quality plan; 
(2)  Address or other description of location of the construction site; 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of the construction site owner and/or operator and the operator's on-site representative, either the property owner or lessee, and name and address of general construction contractor, if different from property owner or lessee; 
(4)  Earliest date of commencement of construction activity; 
(5)  Proposed dates of termination of construction activity, completion of final stabilization activities, and closure of the site; 
(6)  Any other information the city manager may deem necessary; and 
(7)  Certification by the applicant for the stormwater permit that the information provided on the stormwater permit application is true and accurate. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-140. - Same—Exemptions. 
Exemptions from the requirements for a stormwater permit and stormwater quality plan shall apply for the following situations or conditions: 
(1)  The construction activity is undertaken at a single- or multiple-family residential property site for the sole purpose of maintenance of the residential property site; and 
(2)  The construction is necessary on an emergency basis because of imminent harm or endangerment to the public or environment, in which case the construction may by continued only so long as such imminent harm or endangerment or threat of harm or endangerment exists. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-141. - Same—Waiver. 
The city manager may provide a waiver to the requirement for a stormwater permit upon the written request of the owner and/or operator seeking such waiver. The waiver is to be provided only if the construction for which waiver is sought is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager to meet all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The waiver will not contribute to a violation of this chapter or any permit or license the city may hold to discharge stormwater; 
(2)  The construction activity is of such size, extent, magnitude, or location as to neither allow, cause, or have potential to cause a significant discharge of sediments or other pollutants to the city's MS4 or waters of the U.S.; 
(3)  There is a compelling public interest for issuance of a waiver; 
(4)  It is in the general interest of the health and safety of people in the city or protection of the environment that such waiver be provided, such interest not to be based upon cost or economic considerations; and 
(5)  Other such conditions the city manager may deem necessary to ensure that significant discharge of sediment and other pollutants does not occur. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-142. - Stormwater quality plan. 
(a)  The stormwater quality plan shall be prepared in accordance with the Brazoria County Stormwater Quality Coalition MS4 Construction Guidance Document and Best Management Practices (BMPs). The objective of the plan is to identify potential sources of pollution, including sediment, which will affect the quality of stormwater discharges associated with construction and development. The plan must describe the implementation of BMPs that will be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction and post-development runoff. Stormwater quality plans shall be retained on site during the course of construction and shall be available for inspection by the city upon request. 
(b)  Contents of stormwater quality plan. 
(1)  Site description. 
a.  Total area of the site, and total disturbed area, including off-site staging/storage areas; 
b.  A description of the existing vegetation at the site, including coverage; 
c.  The location of other sources of pollution, such as vehicle fueling, storage of chemicals, concrete washout areas, etc.; and 
d.  The name of the receiving water(s) and description of any outfalls (size, type, and location), if the discharge is to a MS4, the name of the system, the location of the storm sewer discharge, and the ultimate receiving water(s). 
(2)  Construction documents. 
a.  A description of the construction activity; 
b.  A copy of the development plans; and 
c.  Construction schedule. 
(3)  Best management practices (BMPs). 
a.  The BMPs must include locations and descriptions of control measure for each phase of development, including before clearing and grading activities begin; during all phases of construction; and post-construction/post development. 
(4)  Control measures. 
a.  Construction phase control measures should include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Temporary sediment control measures. 
a)  silt fence 
b)  sand bag berms 
c)  hay bales 
d)  check dams 
e)  interceptor swales/dikes 
2.  Temporary stabilization measures. 
a)  temporary seeding 
b)  erosion control blankets/matting 
c)  mulch/compost 
d)  temporary sodding 
3.  Final stabilization measures. 
a)  permanent seeding 
b)  permanent sodding 
c)  impervious surfaces 
(c)  Post-construction phase control measures must be incorporated into the stormwater quality plan to preserve pre-development hydrologic regimes. These control measures do not apply to residential home construction. Post-construction phase control measures should include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Velocity dissipation measures. 
a.  On-site. 
i)  vegetated swales 
ii)  check dams 
iii)  vegetated filter strips 
iv)  level spreaders 
v)  velocity dissipation structures 
b.  Off-site. 
i)  surrounding local topography 
ii)  concrete-lined drainage channels 
iii)  low velocity drainage channels 
(2)  Pre-development peak flow preservation. 
a.  On-site. 
i)  detention basins/ponds 
ii)  constructed wetlands 
iii)  bio-retention 
iv)  wet basins 
b.  Off-site. 
i)  in-line detention 
ii)  outfall pump systems 
iii)  off-site (regional) detention 
iv)  low velocity drainage channels 
(3)  Nonstructural controls. 
i)  adequate litter and trash services/receptacles 
ii)  sweeping and cleaning of streets and parking lots 
(d)  Long term maintenance of on-site post-construction control measures. 
(1)  For new and significant redevelopment projects that are determined by the city to require on-site control post-construction control measures such as detention ponds, constructed wetlands, bio-retention systems, the developer or the person or persons who will be responsible for the maintenance of the control measures shall execute an affidavit that states that post-construction control measures shall be in place and maintained for as long as required. 
(2)  The affidavit must be submitted to the city manager no later than ten (10) calendar days before the commencement of construction activities and will serve as a legal commitment to the city. 
(3)  The city manager may also require that a maintenance bond be issued to ensure the maintenance is performed according to the said legal commitment. 
(e)  Inspections. 
(1)  The plan shall provide that qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or exit the site, at least once every seven (7) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a storm that is 0.5 inches or greater. All erosion and sediment control measures and other identified best management practices shall be observed in order to ensure that they are operating correctly and are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the MS4. Based on the results of the inspection, best management practices shall be modified as appropriate, and as soon as is practicable. 
(f)  Revisions to stormwater quality plan. 
(1)  The stormwater quality plan shall accurately reflect site conditions and the construction activities proposed to be undertaken. Revisions necessary to maintain an accurate and up-to-date stormwater quality plan shall be made in a timely fashion but in no case later than two (2) working days after the occurrence of conditions or activities requiring such revisions. 
(2)  If the conditions or activities described by a stormwater quality plan revision could be reasonably expected to result in an increase in the actual or potential discharge of pollutants from the site, such revision must be approved by the city manager prior to implementation of the proposed revision. 
(3)  If the city manager does not approve or reject of the revision within ten (10) working days, the revision(s) shall be assumed to be approved. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010; Ord. No. 15-2081, § 3, 10-5-2015)  
Sec. 38-143. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3). 
(a)  For a construction site that is one (1) or more acres but less than five (5) acres or is five (5) or more acres and that is required by state or federal regulation to have a SWP3, the SWP3 shall be prepared in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(b)  Any SWP3 required by federal or state regulation shall be retained on site during all phases of construction and a copy must be submitted to the city/county. Failure to produce such required SWP3s shall be grounds for issuance of a stop work order. 
(c)  The city manager may require additional information, plans, or specifications in a SWP3 for a construction site if the city manager determines such additional information, plans, or specifications are necessary to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of the U.S. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Secs. 38-144, 38-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CIVIL ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 38-146. - Responsibility of other entities. 
(a)  Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and individually responsible for compliance with the requirements in this section. 
(b)  Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract, for implementing a best management practices control measure, is jointly and individually responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement that control measure. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-147. - Right of entry. 
The city manager and/or appointed representative may, where reasonable cause exists, with or without a warrant, enter upon any property for examination of the same to ascertain whether a violation of the requirements of this chapter exists and shall be exempt from any legal action or liability on account thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-148. - Stop work order. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager determines that there is a violation on a construction site of any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the city manager may issue a stop work order (SWO) for that construction site. 
(b)  Unless express written exception is made by the city manager, the SWO shall prohibit any and all further construction activity at the site, and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city of any work associated with a building permit, stormwater permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence construction or to assume occupancy at the site. 
(c)  Issuance of a SWO shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the construction site owner and/or operator. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-149. - Notification of violation (NOV). 
(a)  When the city manager finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written NOV. Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of recurrence thereof, including specific required actions, shall be submitted by the alleged violator to the city manager. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred, or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the city manager within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice. 
(b)  Submission of an explanation or plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations of this chapter or any state or federal regulation occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city manager to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a NOV. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-150. - Consent orders. 
The city manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other written agreements with the owner and/or operator for noncompliance with any provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such agreements may include specific action to be taken to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the agreement. Such agreements shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-151. - Compliance order. 
(a)  When the city manager finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city manager may issue a compliance order to the violator directing that the violator come into compliance with this article within a specified time limit. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including self-monitoring and implementation of best management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 and waters of the U.S. 
(b)  A compliance order does not relieve a person of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. 
(c)  Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other action against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-152. - Remediation, abatement and restoration orders. 
(a)  When the city manager finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, and the city manager has reasonable evidence to suspect that such a violation has adversely affected the MS4 or waters of the U.S., the city manager may issue a remediation, abatement and restoration order to the violator directing said violator to undertake and implement any appropriate action the city manager may designate to remediate or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4, and to restore any part of the MS4 within the city that has been harmed. Such remediation, abatement, and restoration actions may include but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, or restoration actions; 
(2)  Confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination. 
(3)  Prevention, minimization, or mitigation of any damage to the public health or the environment that may result from the violation; and 
(4)  Restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. 
(b)  The remediation, abatement, and restoration order may direct that the remediation, abatement, or restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and be completed within a specified period of time. 
(c)  The cost for preparation, implementation, construction, and maintenance of any remediation, abatement, or restoration as may be ordered by the city manager shall be borne by the person to whom the city manager has issued such order. 
(d)  An order issued under this subsection does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. 
(e)  Issuance of an order under this subsection shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against any responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-153. - Emergency cease and desist orders. 
(a)  When the city manager finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the violation(s) has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the U.S. which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the city manager may issue an emergency cease and desist order to the violator directing said violator to immediately cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all article requirements; 
(2)  Terminate any discharges which the city manager determines to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to persons or to the environment; and 
(3)  Take such appropriate preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations, terminating the discharge or both. 
(b)  Any person to which an emergency cease and desist order has been directed, shall, upon receipt of such order, immediately take action to stop or eliminate the endangering discharge. In the event of said person's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with said order, the city manager may take such action(s) as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the U.S. or endangerment to persons or to the environment. Such actions may include, but are not limited to, immediate termination of water supply, sewer connection or other municipal utility service provided to said person; to any facility owned, leased or operated all or in part by said person; or to any site for which said person is all or in part an owner or lessee. 
(c)  The city manager shall allow the person to whom an emergency cease and desist order has been issued to recommence discharges when the city manager determines that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the person to whom the order was issued. 
(d)  A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a written statement, in a form as may be acceptable to the city manager, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and measures taken or to be taken within a timely fashion to prevent any future occurrence, to the city manager within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the emergency order. 
(e)  Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-154. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person adversely affected by a decision under this chapter, with the exception of a citation, may appeal the decision to the city manager or the city manager's designee within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the adverse decision. The appeal must be in writing and set forth specifically why the decision should be considered for relief. 
(b)  The effect of any order, except for an emergency cease and desist order, shall be stayed pending the appeal unless the city manager makes a written determination to the contrary. An emergency cease and desist order shall not be stayed pending appeal. 
(c)  Within fourteen (14) calendar days of the appeal, the city manager or his designee shall either (1) grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order; (2) deny the petition if there is no material issue of fact; or (3) schedule a hearing on the petition. Written notice of the hearing shall be sent to the appellant. At the hearing, any interested party may present evidence and testify. 
(d)  After the hearing, the city manager shall grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order or deny the petition. 
(e)  The city manager's ruling shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CRIMINAL PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 38-156. - Violations of chapter. 
Any person who violates a provision of this article or any order issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 1-5 of the City of Lake Jackson Code of Ordinances. No culpable mental state is required. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-157. - Public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisances may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 5, 3-15-2010)  
Sec. 38-158. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Secs. 38-159, 38-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - FEES 
 
Sec. 38-161. - Fees. 
(a)  The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of implementing this chapter, which costs may include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collecting and analyzing discharges and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by dischargers; 
(2)  Fees for issuance of permits; 
(3)  Fees for review of notices and plans for construction, termination of construction, and stormwater pollution prevention control, irrespective of any acceptance or rejection of such notices or plans by the city manager; 
(4)  Fees for conduct of site inspections by the city when requested by an operator of a site or facility, irrespective of whether such inspection is required by this article; 
(5)  Fees for site inspection by the city pursuant to determination of compliance to conditions of a conditional notice of termination of construction; 
(6)  Fees for responding to spills and releases of oil, hazardous and extremely hazardous substances, and other pollutants; and 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. 
(b)  The fee schedule is attached [to Ordinance No. 10-1933] as Exhibit A, and is hereby incorporated into this article as if set out in full. 
(c)  The stormwater permit fees and the fees for spills relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-1933, § 1, 3-15-2010)  
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire prevention powers, § 307.1. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; amendments to building code, § 14-33; electrical code generally, § 14-56 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 22; emergency services, ch. 34; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 50; law enforcement, ch. 54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; arson, reward for information, § 62-31 et seq.; solid waste, condition and use of premises, ch. 82; burning garbage, trash, rubbish and other materials, § 82-34; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Constitution reference— Payment of assistance to survivors of firefighters, art. III, § 51-d. 
State Law reference— Automobile liability coverage for firefighters, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 999e, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 142.006; hazardous substances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 501.001 et seq.; flammable liquids, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 753.001 et seq.; fire escapes, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq.; commission on fire protection, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 419.001 et seq.; fire detection and alarm devices, V.A.T.S., Insurance Code art. 5.43-2; fire protection sprinkler systems, V.A.T.S., Insurance Code art. 5.43-3; fireworks, V.A.T.S., Insurance Code art. 5.43-4; municipal fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.001 et seq.; liquefied petroleum gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 113.001 et seq.; arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02; county fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 352.001 et seq.; smoke detectors in hotels, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 792.001 et seq.; disabling fire exit alarms, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 793.001 et seq.; smoke detectors in residential tenancies, V.T.C.A., Property Code §§ 92.006, 92.251 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ceremonial fire means a fire that is part of a ceremony or ritual that is prescribed by custom, ritual, protocol, or convention. 
Fire department means the Lake Jackson Volunteer Fire Department. 
Garbage means solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
Hazardous materials means any substance or material in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief or his authorized representative, poses a risk to persons, property or the environment, including, but not limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products, poisons, compressed or liquefied gases, etiologic (biologic) agents, oxidizers, corrosives, carcinogens, cryogens and organic peroxides. 
Outdoor burning means any fire or smoke-producing process that is not conducted in a combustion unit. 
Practical alternative means an economically, technologically, ecologically, and logistically viable alternative to air curtain incinerators. 
Recreational fire means an outdoor fire that burns materials other than garbage and rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of three (3) feet or less in diameter and two (2) feet or less in height and such fire is intended to be for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials. Combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials. Noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and like materials that will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
Tree and shrubbery trimmings means a waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery, or other trimmings usually created as refuse in the case of trees and bushes. 
Vegetative debris means tree and shrubbery trimmings and yard trash. 
Yard trash means waste accumulation of lawn, grass, shrubbery cuttings or clippings and dry leaf rakings, free of dirt, rocks, large branches and bulky or noncombustible material. 
(Ord. No. 09-1914, § 1, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 10-1941, § 1, 6-21-2010)  
Secs. 42-2—42-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.001 et seq.; warrants for fire, health and code inspections, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-26. - Creation of office, requirements thereof. 
The office of fire marshal, created by Ordinance No. 136, is hereby transferred from the supervision and control of the city council to the supervision and control of the city manager. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. The compensation for services shall be set by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 1, 2-9-53; Code 1958, § 9-2; Ord. No. 03-1719, § 1, 6-2-2003)  
Sec. 42-27. - Qualifications. 
The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of the office as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 03-1719, § 1, 6-2-2003)  
Secs. 42-28—42-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTION OF PREMISES; PROHIBITED CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 42-36. - Right of entry—Authority granted. 
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 7, 2-9-53; Code 1958, § 9-8) 
State Law reference— Right of entry of state fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.008; warrants for fire, health and code inspections, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05.  
Sec. 42-37. - Same—Examination of premises required; abatement, report to state fire marshal. 
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city. It shall be his duty, annually or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and commercial buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto, and make semiannual inspections of school and day care facilities. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or is occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. If the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within fifteen (15) days, appeal to the board of adjustment and appeals under the provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by its authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report all existing hazardous conditions, together with separate reports on each fire in the city during the month. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 8, 2-9-53; Ord. No. 83-899, § 2, 8-1-83; Code 1958, § 9-9; Ord. No. 95-1352, § 1, 10-2-95)  
Sec. 42-38. - Same—Penalty of allowing unsafe conditions generally. 
Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day for each day the violation exists or continues. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 9, 2-9-53; Ord. No. 83-907, § 4, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 88-1060, § 4, 1-18-88; Code 1958, § 9-10)  
Sec. 42-39. - Same—Enumeration of unsafe conditions, penalty for maintaining. 
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day for each day the violation exists or continues. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 10, 2-9-53; Ord. No. 83-907, § 5, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 88-1060, § 5, 1-18-88; Code 1958, § 9-11)  
Sec. 42-40. - No prosecution until refusal to comply with order. 
No prosecution shall be brought under sections 42-38 and 42-39 until the order provided for in section 42-37 is given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 11, 2-9-53; Code 1958, § 9-12)  
Sec. 42-41. - Separate offenses. 
Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in this division shall be a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 13, 2-9-53; Code 1958, § 9-13)  
Secs. 42-42—42-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - INVESTIGATION OF FIRES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Investigation of fires by state fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.007. 
 
Sec. 42-51. - Arson investigation unit; records. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged. The fire marshal shall appoint an arson investigation unit to aid and assist him in the investigation of every fire occurring within this city and to make investigation as to whether the fire was the result of carelessness or design. The arson investigation unit shall have all the powers of fire investigators under state law and shall have all of the investigative powers provided the fire marshal under this article. 
(b)  All investigations of fires shall begin immediately when practicable, otherwise within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a bound book containing a record of all fires together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 2, 2-9-53; Ord. No. 80-738, § 1, 5-19-80; Code 1958, § 9-3) 
State Law reference— Investigation of fires by county fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 352.013 et seq.; investigation of fire by state fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.007.  
Sec. 42-52. - Taking testimony, prosecution of arsonists. 
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. If he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with any such offense, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 3, 2-9-53; Code 1958, § 9-4)  
Sec. 42-53. - Summoning witnesses, administering oath. 
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this division a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any person appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 5, 2-9-53; Code 1958, § 9-5)  
Sec. 42-54. - Contemptuous witnesses, prosecuting. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 5, 2-9-53; Code 1958, § 9-6) 
State Law reference— Witness fined and attached, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 24.22.  
Sec. 42-55. - Closing to public, separating witnesses. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private and persons other than those required to be present, may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 6, 2-9-53; Code 1958, § 9-7)  
Secs. 42-56—42-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE GENERALLY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-76. - Fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, keep, use, convey, possess, shoot or discharge within the city limits, any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, Roman candles or any other kind of container or other device made for discharging or firing of firecrackers and fireworks. 
(b)  Additionally, due to the danger to the public welfare and tranquility from fire, explosion and alarm caused by such instruments, the presence of firecrackers and fireworks in the city shall constitute a nuisance and a violation of this Code. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized fireworks displays when such displays are approved in advance by the city council, and the provisions of this section shall not apply to cap pistols and the caps used therein. 
(Ord. No. 176, §§ 1, 2, 5-3-55; Ord. No. 77-632, § 1, 8-1-77; Code 1958, § 14-9) 
State Law reference— Authority of the city to regulate fireworks, V.A.T.S., Insurance Code art. 5.43-4, § 3.  
Sec. 42-77. - Outdoor burning. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn outdoors, or allow to be burned outdoors, within the city, any garbage, animal carcasses, rubbish, vegetative debris, except as is stated in subsections (e) and (f). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying, or being in charge and control of, any premises within the city, to burn or cause to be burned uncut grass, weeds, shrubbery, or trees growing on such premises. 
(c)  Firefighting personnel shall be exempt from this section if the outdoor burning is solely for firefighting training and if approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(d)  City personnel shall be exempt if the outdoor burning is limited to brush, trees, and other plant growth that are causing a detrimental public health and safety condition and the burning takes place at a site owned by the city and the city has received approval from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(e)  Recreational fires shall be allowed, but are subject to the following: 
(1)  Recreational fires may not contain electrical insulation, garbage, treated lumber, animal carcasses, rubbish, plastics, construction or demolition materials not made of wood, heavy oils, asphalt materials, potentially explosive materials, chemical waste, or items containing natural or synthetic rubber. 
(2)  Recreational fires may not burn on the ground. Instead, all recreational fires must be held in a container such as a cast iron fire pit, chiminea, cement block fire pit, or other similar container. All containers for recreational fires shall have a spark arrestor 
(3)  Recreational fires shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet from any structure. 
(4)  Recreational fires shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. At least one (1) portable fire extinguisher or other on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, or garden hose, shall be available for immediate use. 
(5)  No recreational fires shall occur during a time in which a county burn ban is in effect for Brazoria County. 
(f)  Recreational fires that do not comply with the regulations in subsection (e) shall only be allowed upon written approval by the fire marshal. 
(g)  Cooking fires contained in barbeque grills, barbeque pits, and other open flame cooking devices shall be allowed, but are subject to the following: 
(1)  In multi-family dwellings, barbeque grills, barbeque pits, and other open flame cooking devices shall not be operated on balconies or within ten (10) feet of combustible construction unless the buildings, balconies, and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
(2)  The fires shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. At least one (1) portable fire extinguisher or other on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, or garden hose, shall be available for immediate use. 
(h)  Air curtain incinerators may be allowed on property that is at least twenty (20) acres. 
(1)  The air curtain incinerators shall only be used to burn vegetative debris from land clearing operations or from an event that caused the mayor to proclaim a local state of disaster. If the burning is necessitated due to a local disaster, the ability to use the air curtain incinerator expires one (1) year after the local state of disaster is terminated. This deadline may be extended by city council due to extenuating circumstances. 
(2)  To apply for permission to use an air curtain incinerator, the applicant must first obtain initial approval from the state. Once the applicant receives permission from the state, the applicant must submit a written request to the fire marshal. The fire marshal or the fire marshal's qualified designee shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days, make a recommendation to the city council to approve or deny the request. If the fire marshal has not made a recommendation within this time period, the applicant may submit the request directly to the city council. 
(3)  The city council shall review the recommendation or review the request at their next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4)  No air curtain incinerator burning shall occur during a time in which a county burn ban is in effect for Brazoria County, regardless of whether the fire marshal or city council has granted permission for the air curtain incinerator. 
(i)  The authority to burn under this article does not relieve the persons conducting the outdoor burning from responsibility for the consequences, damage, or injuries resulting from the burning and does not exempt such persons from complying with all other applicable laws and ordinances, regulations or orders of governmental entities having jurisdiction. 
(j)  The fire marshal or his designee, fire chief or his designee, any code enforcement officer, or any peace officer may prohibit any and all fires or order the immediate extinguishment of any and all fires when atmospheric conditions or other circumstances make such fires an immediate threat to public safety or the smoke or ash from such fires becomes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 09-1914, § 2, 10-5-2009)  
Secs. 42-78—42-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GASOLINE AND OTHER VOLATILES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Motor carrier safety standards, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 139. 
 
Sec. 42-86. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, keep, store or handle gasoline or other volatiles in this city, except upon compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 1(a), 9-15-53; Code 1958, § 9-14)  
Sec. 42-87. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In case this division is violated by a business which is a corporation, the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation, shall be also severally liable for the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 83-907, § 6, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 88-1060, § 6, 1-18-88; Code 1958, § 9-21.2)  
Sec. 42-88. - Certain transport trucks prohibited parking in residential zones. 
Any truck that is designed for or used for the purpose of transporting toxics, corrosives, gasoline, flammable liquids or other hazardous materials shall not be parked, stopped or left standing on any private or public property that is located in a residential use zone within the city, unless for the purpose of making a delivery. Any operator, driver or owner of such vehicle who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-5. 
(Ord. No. 79-694, § 1, 4-16-79; Code 1958, § 9-14.1)  
Sec. 42-89. - Truck and filling station tanks. 
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 753 is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this section, as it relates to truck and filling station tanks. The size of gasoline tanks shall be increased to meet the size requirements specified by law. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 1(b)—(h), 9-15-53; Ord. No. 76-588, § 1, 4-19-76; Code 1958, § 9-15)  
Sec. 42-90. - Vent pipe, tank and pump connection pipe. 
(a)  Vent pipe. Tanks located in or within ten (10) feet of any building shall be provided with a one-inch diameter, or larger, galvanized iron vent pipe to be connected to the top of such tank. Connection at the tank shall be provided with a brass wire screen of at least thirty (30) mesh. The vent pipe must be carried up to at least four (4) feet above the roof of such building and terminate in a double goose-neck spark protector, both openings of which must be covered with a brass wire screen of at least thirty (30) mesh. 
(b)  Tank and pump connection pipe. All pipes connecting the tank with the pump must be of galvanized iron and must enter top of tank. Such pipe must be buried at least eighteen (18) inches below the surface; any exposed portions thereof must be thoroughly and properly protected. This connection pipe must not be lower at any point than the place where same leaves tank. 
(Code 1958, § 9-16)  
Sec. 42-91. - Pumping of gasoline—Suction pump, cutoff valve, return of waste. 
All gasoline must be drawn from tank by means of an improved suction pump or pumps which shall have a cutoff valve between the pump and the nozzle. In no case shall there be a return of waste pipe to the tank. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 3, 9-15-53; Code 1958, § 9-17)  
Sec. 42-92. - Same—Inside building, lighting fixtures. 
Where gasoline is pumped inside the building, lighting shall be done by incandescent electric lights, with all electric switches and cutoffs permanently located at least twelve (12) inches above the floor. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 4, 9-15-53; Code 1958, § 9-18)  
Sec. 42-93. - Storage. 
(a)  Types of containers. Gasoline shall be kept, stored or handled only in metal containers with secure lids, or in selfclosing safety containers or in portable metal filling tanks or in such other containers as are approved by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Storage up to five (5) gallons. No person, business, partnership, firm, association, organization, membership or corporation shall keep or store in any building or location more than five (5) gallons of gasoline or other volatiles without the approval of the fire marshal. 
(c)  Storage in excess of five (5) gallons. Any storage of gasoline or other volatiles in excess of five (5) gallons must be in locations and containers approved by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 5, 9-15-53; Ord. No. 79-707, § 1, 8-20-79; Code 1958, § 9-19)  
Sec. 42-94. - Sand for absorbing oil and extinguishing fires. 
There shall be constantly kept and maintained convenient receptacles filled with sand to be used in absorbing waste oil on the floor. In addition to this, sand shall be kept in boxes provided with handscoop to be used for fire extinguishing purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 6, 9-15-53; Code 1958, § 9-20)  
Sec. 42-95. - Wholesale distribution tanks of large capacity. 
(a)  Construction. Tanks of four thousand (4,000) gallons capacity or greater, used for wholesale distribution exclusively, shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  Tanks shall be constructed of one-fourth-inch black open hearth tank steel, carefully riveted and caulked, or welded shall be not less than eight (8) feet from the ground and shall rest upon metal, brick or concrete piers of sufficient strength to carry the load. 
(2)  Such tanks shall be surrounded by a levee of sufficient depth and size to prevent any waste or leakage from running over and upon adjoining ground. All grounds adjacent to such levee shall be kept clean of all weeds, trash or rubbish. 
(3)  Tanks shall be provided with vent pipe not less than two (2) inches in diameter, which shall extend not less than eight (8) feet above the tank, such vent pipe shall be covered with a vent cap. 
(b)  Permit. No person shall build or set up any tank either at a filling station in or at wholesale station for storage or sale of gasoline or other volatiles, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city council upon the approval of the fire marshal and building inspector as to the place and manner of construction. 
(c)  Smoking. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any room in which gasoline or other volatiles are kept and for the manager or other person in charge of any building in which gasoline or other volatiles are kept to allow smoking therein, and notices to that effect shall be prominently displayed. 
(d)  Delivery from truck. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, or cause to be delivered from any truck or vehicle of any kind or character, gasoline in quantities of more than five (5) gallons to any residence or building, or within the city limits, except same be transferred from the truck or vehicle in which same is transported to an underground tank or to tanks regularly placed on motor vehicles as regular equipment on such motor vehicle to be used for the operation of such motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 7, 9-15-53; Code 1958, § 9-21)  
Sec. 42-96. - Mobile service units. 
The use and operation of mobile service units within the city limits is prohibited. As used in this section, "mobile service unit" is defined as being any vehicle, tank truck, or other mobile device from which flammable liquids used as motor fuels may, as an act of retail sale, be dispensed into the fuel tank of a motor vehicle parked on an off-street parking facility. 
(Ord. No. 71-446, § 1, 8-16-71; Code 1958, § 9-21.1)  
Secs. 42-97—42-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No.17-2132, § 1, adopted April 17, 2017, deleted Div. 3, §§ 42-106—42-112, which pertained to manufactured or liquefied petroleum gas and derived from Code 1958, §§ 9-22—9-28; and Ord. No. 83, §§ 1—7, adopted July 1, 1948. 
 
Secs. 42-106—42-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 42-116—42-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ELECTRONIC GATES 
 
Sec. 42-121. - Electronic gates. 
(a)  The owner of a commercial or multifamily building designed for human occupancy in which employees or residents are located behind electronic gates shall provide for emergency vehicle access using a key override switch and a radio operated controller. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall inspect all gates to ensure emergency vehicles have access prior to gate activation or use. 
(c)  All such buildings in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division derives shall have twelve (12) months from the effective date of said ordinance to install the key override switch and radio operated controller. 
(d)  The owner of the property shall be responsible for all costs associated with the purchase, installation, and maintenance of the system. 
(e)  If the key override switch or radio operated controller become inoperable, the owner of the property shall ensure that the gates are left unlocked until the override switch or radio operated controller are repaired. 
(Ord. No. 10-1940, § 1, 6-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-1940, § 1, adopted June 7, 2010, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as § 42-101. In order to maintain the numbering system of this Code and the ease of codification, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as § 42-121 to read as set out herein.  
Secs. 42-122—42-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SERVICE FEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-1941, § 2, adopted June 21, 2010, supplied provisions to be added this Code as §§ 42-106 and 42-107. In order to maintain the numbering system of this Code and the ease of codification, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 42-156 and 42-157 to read as set out herein. 
 
Sec. 42-156. - Fire and rescue service fees. 
(a)  The city or its authorized agent shall assess and collect reimbursement fees for equipment and/or supplies used while the fire department is responding to: 
(1)  Hazardous material spills or leaks; 
(2)  Traffic accidents where hazardous material mitigation is needed; 
(3)  Commercial property fires that are caused by arson or other illegal activity of the owner or occupant; and 
(4)  Residential property fires that are caused by arson or other illegal activity of the owner or occupant. 
(b)  The invoices shall be sent to the responsible party's insurance representative. If the responsible party is uninsured, then the invoices shall be sent directly to the responsible party. 
(c)  The city may contract with a third party to assess and collect the fees. 
(d)  Fees shall be collected for services provided inside the city limits as well as outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 10-1941, § 2, 6-21-2010)  
Sec. 42-157. - Hazardous material fees. 
In addition to the abovementioned fees, any person responsible for a hazardous material spill shall be charged costs that other city departments incur while acting to abate the spill and costs, including for any specialists or experts hired by the city to assist with the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 10-1941, § 2, 6-21-2010)  
Chapter 46 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Municipal water control, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 401.001 et seq.; municipal drainage utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.041 et seq.; city-county water control, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 411.002, 411.003; Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; contracts with conservation districts for flood control and drainage, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 201.152; disaster prevention, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.121 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-26. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designed AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO. V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) see Flood elevation study. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term described such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changed, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway see Regulatory floodway. 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Habitable floor means any floor usable for the following purposes; which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only is not a "habitable floor." 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed areas (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistance enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land dividing into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevation shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, an either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brooks, etc. 
Special flood hazard area see Area of special flood hazard. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act {Pub. L. 97-348}, includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading an filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of sate or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the [National Flood Insurance Program] regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 71-458, § 1, 12-20-71; Ord. No. 74-543, § 1, 11-4-74; Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.1(a); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006; Ord. No. 14-2042, § 1, 5-19-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions pertaining to Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.313.  
Sec. 46-27. - Prerequisites for subdivisions and buildings within identified flood hazard areas. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies: This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for The City of Lake Jackson," dated July 3, 1985 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer or liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such area will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on this part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 71-458, § 1, 12-20-71; Ord. No. 74-543, § 1, 11-4-74; Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.1(b)—(h); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Sec. 46-28. - Permit procedures. 
The city manager is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state of local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33, U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the appropriate state agency prior to an alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 46-27(b) the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 46-41 thru 46-46. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.3(a), (b); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Sec. 46-29. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of sections 46-41 thru 46-46. 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 46-28. 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that material may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing government services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.3(c); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Sec. 46-30. - Designation of the floodplain administrator; duties. 
(a)  The appeal board, established by the city, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in (b) of this section, have been fully considered. As the lot size increase beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(h)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the costs of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(i)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 78-663, § 1, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.2; Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 46-31. - Flood insurance rate map. 
The city hereby adopts and accepts for use the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for Brazoria County, Texas and incorporated areas as revised on February 10, 1988, including specifically panels: 
595 of 850 
605 of 850 
610 of 850 
615 of 850 
620 of 850 
755 of 850 
760 of 850 
(Ord. No. 88-1086, § 1, 9-19-88; Code 1958, § 4-2.5; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Secs. 46-32—46-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 46-41. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.4(a); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Sec. 46-42. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in subsection 46-27(b), subsection 46-28(7); or sections 46-41 thru 46-46, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 46-29(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction: New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eight (180) consecutive days or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of section 46-29, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.4(b); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Sec. 46-43. - Subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with division 1 and division 2 of this article. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of subsection 46-27(c) and section 46-29 and the provisions of sections 46-41 thru 46-46. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured homes parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to subsection 46-27(b) or subsection 46-28(7). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.4(c); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Sec. 46-44. - Areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 46-27(b), are areas designed as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (the Lake Jackson AO has been set at one (1) foot). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures; 
i.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (the Lake Jackson AO has been set at one (1) foot), or 
ii.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certificate to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section as proposed in section 46-29, are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.4(d); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Sec. 46-45. - Floodways. 
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 46-27(b), are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If section 46-43 above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 46-41 thru 46-47. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 85-978, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 87-1028, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 87-1033, § 5, 4-20-87; Code 1958, § 4-2.4(e); Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Sec. 46-46. - Floodway fringe. 
Land within the depth criterion portion of the identified 100-year floodplain which is at or above the base flood elevation (BFE) minus the specified depth criterion, as shown on the effective flood insurance rate map in selected reaches of the floodplain(s), are hereby designated as the floodway fringe. For example, base flood elevation equals two (2) feet NGVD and the depth criterion equals three (3) feet, then the floodway fringe property would be that which is at or above (20' - 3' = 17' NGVD). These fringe areas may be developed, or otherwise filled, above the base flood elevation, without performing an analysis of impact on flood levels. However, levee systems or other continuous fills in the floodway fringe exceeding five hundred (500) feet in any dimension or forming a potential barrier to the movement of waters during the occurrence of the base flood are not permitted unless hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, certified by a registered professional engineer demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
No development, including fill, may be placed within designated floodways, natural stream channels or other floodplain areas not designated as floodway fringe unless a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, certified by a registered professional engineer, demonstrates that no increase in base flood elevations throughout the watershed will occur. Since AO and AH zones do not have floodways this would not apply. 
Prior to granting a permit for the construction of a structure designed for purposes of human occupancy, the floodplain administrator or another responsible community official must conduct an on site visit and review where the depth of flooding would equal or exceed one and one-half (1.5) feet or where access roads would be inundated by depths greater than one and one-half (1.5) feet. The purpose of the visit and review is to assess the availability of suitable evacuation routes and emergency services capability during the occurrence of the discharge of the 100-year flood. Where there would be a danger to health and/or safety with regard to evacuation and emergency services, the development permit request should be denied. 
(Ord. No. 88-1088, § 1, 11-7-88; Code 1958, § 4-2.6; Ord. No. 05-1800, § 5, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1809, § 5, 6-3-2006)  
Chapter 50 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to make and enforce health and sanitary regulations, § 2.01; department of health and sanitation, § 4.06. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; solid waste, condition and use of premises, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Local Public Health Reorganization Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq.; Texas Controlled Substances Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.001 et seq.; community services for mental health and mental retardation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 534.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE SANITATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 50-31—50-44, 50-46—50-53, 50-56—50-60, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 14-2014, § 1, adopted June 6, 2014. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-31. - Adoption of Department of State Health Services Rules. 
(a)  The current rules or rules as amended, commonly known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER), that are found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 228 are hereby adopted as the food establishment rules of the city, save and except those sections added, deleted or amended in this chapter. 
(b)  If there is a conflict between a rule adopted in this section and any other section of this article, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-32. - Interference. 
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to interfere with the duties and actions of the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-33. - Definitions. 
All terms defined in this chapter, unless specifically defined otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the Texas Food Establishment Rules. The following terms are specifically defined: 
Caterer means any person or entity that transports complete meals from an approved establishment to another location for consumption, but shall not include persons operating restaurants that routinely deliver food on order or persons that deliver a product or distribute a product to vending machines. 
Commissary or central preparation facility means a facility that mobile food service establishments use to dispose of waste and to obtain supplies. 
Food establishment or food service establishment means an establishment engaged in production, service, and/or sales of non-residential food and/or drink for immediate consumption on or in the vicinity of the premises; called for or taken out by customers; or prepared prior to being delivered to another location for consumption. 
Person in charge means the individual present in a food service establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the food service establishment at the time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employee present is the person in charge. 
Regulatory authority means the City of Lake Jackson Health Officer, Building Official or other person designated by the city manager. 
Temporary food establishment means a food service establishment which operates at the same location for a period of time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event, such as a fair, carnival, circus, exhibition or similar temporary gathering. 
Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food (TCS)—(formerly Potentially Hazardous Food (PHF)) means a food that requires time/temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-34. - Inspection placard to be displayed. 
Every non-temporary food service establishment shall display, in public view of the front door and immediately upon receipt, the regulatory authority's inspection placard stating the rating received at the time of the most recent inspection of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-35. - Correction of violations. 
(a)  Corrections of the violations found during inspection shall be accomplished within the period specified on the regulatory authority's inspection report. 
(1)  If an imminent health hazard exists, such as the complete lack of refrigeration, loss of power, loss of hot water or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory agency. 
(b)  When the rating score of the establishment is less than seventy (70), the establishment shall immediately initiate corrective action on all violations specified by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  For temporary food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected immediately and the establishment shall cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-36. - Grease interceptors. 
(a)  Servicing of grease interceptors. Food service establishments must service grease interceptors quarterly and in accordance with section 102-159. The regulatory authority may require that the food service establishment service the grease interceptors more frequently. 
(b)  Report of service. Each establishment must provide the regulatory authority with a copy of the grease interceptors servicing manifest or invoice immediately after the grease interceptor has been serviced. The invoice shall contain the name and address of the food service establishment; the name and address of the licensed waste carrier; the name and address of the licensed disposal site; the signature of the operator of the establishment, the waste carrier and the disposal site; and the quantity and date of grease removal and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-37. - Power failure. 
(a)  Power failure greater than thirty (30) minutes and less than four (4) hours. If there is a power failure, mechanical failure, or other condition that results in an internal machine thermometer that cannot maintain food temperatures, and such condition continues for a length of time greater than thirty (30) minutes but less than four (4) hours, the following steps must be taken: 
(1)  The food establishment must be closed during the power failure; 
(2)  A log must be kept of the time that the power failure initially occurred, the temperature of the food at that time, and the time and temperature of the TCS food at one (1) hour intervals until the power is restored; 
(3)  The regulatory authority must be notified immediately of the power failure; and 
(4)  The documentation must be provided to the regulatory authority immediately upon request. 
(b)  Power failure greater than four (4) hours. If there is a power failure, mechanical failure, or other condition that results in an internal machine thermometer that cannot maintain food temperatures, and such condition continues for a length of time greater than four (4) hours, the following steps must be taken: 
(1)  The food establishment must be closed during the power failure; 
(2)  The food establishment must not re-open until an inspection has been conducted by the regulatory authority; 
(3)  A log must be kept of the time that the power failure initially occurred, the temperature of the food at that time, and the time and temperature of the TCS food at one (1) hour intervals until the power is restored; 
(4)  The regulatory authority must be notified immediately of the power failure; and 
(5)  The documentation must be provided to the regulatory authority immediately upon request. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-38. - Detention and destruction of food. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may examine and collect samples of food as often as necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The regulatory authority shall, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge specifying the reason, place any food under detention which it has probable cause to believe is adulterated, misbranded, or a hazard to public health. No food subject to a detention order shall be used, served or moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall allow storage of the detained food under conditions specified in the detention order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The detention order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten (10) days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested and, on the basis of evidence produced at the hearing, the detention order may be vacated or the person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Time temperature control for safety foods (TCS). Immediate destruction of TCS food shall be ordered and accomplished if: 
(1)  The TCS food is in a container or package that does not bear a date or day, and is not properly labeled to show evidence that the TCS food is less than seven (7) days old; or 
(2)  The TCS food is at a temperature of greater than five (5) degrees Celsius (forty-one (41) degrees Fahrenheit) and less than a temperature of fifty-seven (57) degrees Celsius (one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees Fahrenheit); or 
(3)  When using time as a public health control, the TCS food exceeds the time that is four (4) hours past the point in time when the food is removed from temperature control. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-39. - Food service employee illness. 
When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food service establishment employee, the regulatory authority require may any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service establishments. 
(2)  The immediate closing of the food service establishment until the regulatory authority determines no further danger of disease outbreak exists. 
(3)  Restriction of the employee's services to areas of the establishment where there is no danger of transmitting disease. 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the food service establishment employees. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-40. - Temporary food service establishment. 
(a)  All TCS food shall be prepared in a licensed food establishment or on the temporary food service establishment's premises. No TCS food or beverages stored or prepared in a private home may be offered for sale, sold or given away from a temporary food facility. 
(b)  Non-TCS food, such as baked items, prepared in a kitchen in a private home may be sold at a function, such as a religious or charitable organization bake sale. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-41. - Mobile food establishments. 
(a)  Mobile food service establishments that serve TCS foods shall operate from a central preparation facility, commissary, or other fixed food service establishment that is permitted and regularly inspected by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Central preparation facility authorization. A signed letter of authorization is required, to verify facility use, if the central preparation facility is not owned by the mobile unit operator. 
(c)  Central preparation facility inspection report. A copy of the most current health inspection of the central preparation facility must be maintained on the mobile unit at all times. 
(d)  Central preparation facility. 
(1)  Protection. 
a.  A mobile food unit servicing area shall include at least overhead protection for any supplying, cleaning, or servicing operations. Those areas used only for the loading of water and/or the discharge of sewage and other liquid waste, through the use of a closed system of hoses, need not be provided with overhead protection. 
b.  Within the servicing area, the location provided for the flushing and drainage of liquid wastes shall be separate from the location provided for potable water servicing and for the loading and unloading of food and related supplies. 
c.  A servicing area will not be required where only packaged food is placed on the mobile food unit or where mobile food units do not contain waste retention tanks. 
d.  The surface of the servicing area shall be constructed of a smooth nonabsorbent material, such as concrete or machine-laid asphalt and shall be maintained in good repair, kept clean, and be graded to drain. 
e.  Potable water servicing equipment shall be installed in the servicing area according to the Plumbing Code and shall be stored and handled in a way that protects the water and equipment from contamination. 
(e)  Pushcarts shall be limited to pre-packaged ice cream or pre-packaged non-TCS food as approved by the regulatory authority. Pushcarts must have a central preparation facility to receive supplies and for cleaning the cart. 
(f)  Food prepared in a private home may not be used or offered for human consumption from a mobile food service establishment. 
(g)  Mobile food service establishments must comply with all state and local laws pertaining to vehicle registration. 
(h)  Mobile food service establishments must have a certified food manager on site when preparing or selling food. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-42. - Caterer. 
(a)  License. Any entity that operates as a caterer must obtain either a yearly license or a temporary license issued for the duration of a single event. The license shall be posted at the caterer's commissary location and at the location of the event. 
(b)  Additional requirements—Notification to the city. Prior to catering an event, a caterer shall provide the city with written notification of the location, time, date, number of persons to be served and menu items, as well as the phone number, license number and name of the person certified in food protection management who will be the person in charge of catering the event. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-43. - Food manager certification. 
(a)  By October 1, 2014, all food service establishments that have six (6) or more food handlers on duty at any time are required to have at least one (1) certified food manager on duty during all hours of operation. 
(b)  By October 1, 2014, food service establishments that have five (5) or less food handlers on duty at any time are required to have at least one (1) certified food manager employed in a managerial capacity and shall have at least one (1) certified food handler on duty during all hours of operation. 
(c)  Temporary food establishments and establishments that serve, sell, or distribute only prepackaged non-TCS foods are exempt from this section. 
(d)  Except for a temporary food establishment, all food employees shall successfully complete at least an accredited food handler training course within thirty (30) days of employment. The employee does not need to re-take the course if the employee changes employers. 
(e)  The food establishment shall maintain a certificate of completion of the food handler training course for each food employee on the food establishment's premises. 
(f)  The requirement to complete a food handler training course shall be effective September 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-44. - Violations. 
(a)  A violation of this article shall be a Class C misdemeanor and the penalty for violating this article shall be as provided for in section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake Jackson. 
(b)  The regulatory authority shall issue the citation to the person in charge or to such other person that the regulatory authority has probable cause to believe is the person responsible for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 50-46. - Required; general conditions. 
(a)  Any operation that is engaged in business as a food service establishment is required to have a city issued license. This may be either a yearly license to operate or a temporary license issued for the duration of a single event. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may not issue a license or conduct a plans review until all requisite fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-47. - Application. 
(a)  Contents. Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall make written application and pay the non-refundable fee as required in section 50-48 of this article. Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, post office address and street address; 
(2)  Whether such applicant is an individual, firm or corporation and, if a partnership, the name of each partner and his address; 
(3)  The location and type of the proposed food service establishment; 
(4)  Dates of event for temporary food service establishments; 
(5)  The signature of the applicant; and 
(6)  All other information deemed necessary by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Food manager certificate. A copy of the certified food manager certificate must be submitted with the license application or renewal. 
(c)  [Exemption.] Temporary food establishments and establishments that serve, sell, or distribute only prepackaged non-TCS foods are exempt from this section. 
(d)  Inspection. After the application has been submitted and all fees paid, the regulatory authority shall inspect the food service establishment for compliance with this chapter. If the establishment complies with this chapter, the regulatory authority shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-48. - Fees. 
The following fee schedule shall be applicable to licenses issued under this article: 
Description 	Fee 
Large food service establishments over 10,000 square feet, per year 	$500.00 
Medium risk surcharge 	25% 
High risk surcharge 	50% 
Small food service establishments less than 10,000 square feet and greater than 1,000 square feet, per year 	250.00 
Medium risk surcharge 	25% 
High risk surcharge 	50% 
Very small food service establishments 1,000 square feet or less, per year 	125.00 
Medium risk surcharge 	25% 
High risk surcharge 	50% 
Mobile food service establishments, per year 	125.00 
Caterer's license, per year 	125.00 
Nonprofit organizations 	-0- 
Sidewalk café, per year 	50.00 
Temporary food service establishments 	50.00 
License for mobile food service establishment additional vehicles 	75.00 
Renewal fee following closure of more than 30 days plus inspection fee 	75.00 
Re-inspection fee (minimum one hour), per hour 	25.00 
Adult/child care facility: Thirteen or more clients, per year 	100.00 
Adult/child care facility: Twelve to eight clients, per year 	50.00 
Adult/child care facility: Seven or less clients (registration fees only) 	25.00 
Public swimming pools 	125.00 
 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-49. - Two or more non-mobile establishments. 
If a person or entity owns or operates two (2) or more establishments, the person shall complete separate applications and pay separate fees for each establishment. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-50. - Posting of license. 
Permanent food service establishments must post the license in a place that is seen from the front door. Temporary and mobile food service establishments must post the license within immediate view of customers. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-51. - Transferability of license. 
A license is valid only for the location specified on the license and it may not be transferred from place to place or from establishment to establishment. Mobile food service establishments may retain the same license when moving from place to place as long as the vehicle remains the same. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-52. - Renewals. 
Each food service establishment shall apply to renew its license and pay its renewal fees no later than March 31 of each year. A ten (10) percent late fee will be assessed during the period within one (1) to thirty (30) days following the renewal date. A fifty dollar ($50.00) late fee will be assessed if the application and/or payment are thirty one (31) to sixty (60) days late. Any establishment that is more than sixty (60) days late with the application for payment, shall meet all building and application requirements for new food service establishments. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-53. - Denial of issuance. 
If the application for a license does not conform to the requirements of this article or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the regulatory authority shall return the application and documents to the applicant and give a written reason for the license denial. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Secs. 50-54, 50-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION 
 
Sec. 50-56. - Suspension. 
(a)  Whenever a food service establishment is required under the provisions of this article to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until such time as the regulatory authority determines that conditions responsible for the requirement to cease operations no longer exist. 
(b)  The city may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any license to operate a food service establishment if the holder of the license does not comply with the requirements of this article, if the operation of the food service establishment constitutes a substantial hazard to public health, or if the person in charge refuses to allow the regulatory authority to inspect the establishment. 
(c)  Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by section 50-59. The holder of the license may request a hearing within ten (10) days of notice of suspension. The city shall hold the hearing within twenty (20) days of the request. If no written request for a hearing is filed within the ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. 
(d)  The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-57. - Revocation. 
The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a license for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the city shall notify the holder of the license, or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the license is subject to revocation and that the license shall be revoked at the end of such ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the city within the ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the license becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-58. - Reapplication after revocation. 
The holder of a revoked license may apply for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-59. - Service of notices. 
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the license or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the license. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-60. - Hearings. 
The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by a committee appointed by the city manager at a time and place designated by the committee. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the city shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the license. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Secs. 50-61—50-79. - Reserved.  
Chapter 51 - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 51-1. - Adopted. 
The Texas Administrative Code, Title 25 Health Services, Part I Texas Department of Health, Chapter 265 General Sanitation, Subchapter K Standards for Public Pools and Spas is hereby adopted, and shall be attached to, and made a part of, this Code for all purposes. A copy of the standards shall be available in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-2. - Scope and purpose of these rules. 
The rules outlined in this chapter address minimum standards for design and construction of pools and spas. These rules also establish minimum operating standards for pools and spas to assure proper filtration, chemical, and general maintenance of water and safety to users. These standards are based in part on the American National Standards Institute and the National Spa and Pool Institute "Standards for Public Swimming Pools" (ANSI/NSPI-1, 1991) and the American National Standards Institute and National Spa and Pool Institute "Standards for Public Spas" (ANSI/NSPI-2, 1992). These rules are in addition to any municipal or federal laws applicable to pools and spas. These rules implement V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code, Title 5, Subtit. A, § 341.064(g) and are considered good public health engineering and safety practices. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-3. - Definitions. 
Definitions shall be as defined in the Texas Administrative Code 265.182, Texas Department of Health Standards for Public Swimming Pool and Spa. Any terms not defined herein, the definition shall be determined by the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, unless another agency or unit of government is specified. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-4. - Construction, remodeling or conversion of public pool or spa. 
(a)  Submission of plans. Whenever a public pool or spa is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a public pool or spa, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the city for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The city shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of this article. No public pool or spa shall be constructed, extensively remodeled or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city. 
(b)  Preoperational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by subsection (a) above to be submitted to the city, the city shall inspect the public pool or spa prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this article and other pertinent laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-5. - Inspections of public pools and spas. 
(a)  Inspection frequency. An inspection of a public swimming pool or spa shall be performed at least two (2) times per year. Additional inspections of the pool or spa shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Access to public pools or spas. Agents of the city, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any public pool or spa at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article. This shall include any areas used for the storage of equipment or supplies used in the operation or maintenance of the pool or spa. The agent shall be permitted to examine the records of the public pool or spa to obtain information pertaining to supplies purchased, received or used, maintenance required or performed, or persons employed. 
(c)  Report of inspection. Whenever an inspection of a public swimming pool or spa is made the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report on file with the city. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this article. Inspection remarks shall refer to the violation of this article and shall state the correction to be made. A copy of the inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the public pool or spa at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. 
(d)  Correction of violations. 
(1)  The inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found, and corrections of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  If an imminent health hazard exists, the public pool or spa shall immediately cease operation. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority. 
b.  All other violations shall be given a period of time for correction of not less than twenty-four (24) hours nor greater than ninety (90) days. The regulatory authority to confirm correction shall conduct a follow-up inspection. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-6. - Certified operator required. 
Every public pool or spa must have at least one (1) person who has a valid and current registered pool operator certification, available at all times as may be reasonably necessary to maintain and operate the pool or spa in accordance with this article. Such operator shall be in full charge of the operation, maintenance and sanitation and shall have authority to enforce all rules of safety in the absence of a lifeguard. 
(1)  Valid license. No person shall operate a public swimming pool or spa who does not have a valid license, issued to him or her by the regulatory authority. 
(2)  Application. Any person desiring a public pool operator's license shall make written application on forms provided by the regulatory authority. All applications for a public pool operator's license shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in section 51-24 of this article. 
(3)  Training course required. All persons desiring a public pool operator's license shall provide proof of completion of a course of training in pool management, operations and maintenance as approved by the regulatory authority, within the previous three (3) years. 
(4)  Issuance of license. The city shall issue a public pool operator's license to any person who satisfactorily completes the requirements set forth in this article. 
(5)  Renewal of license. The registered pool operator certification license expires one (1) year from the date of issuance. It shall be the responsibility of the operator to renew his license prior to the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-7. - Licensed operator variance. 
Pools operated by off premise management companies may utilize pool maintenance companies whose field employees are certified registered pool operators, by requesting in writing and being granted a variance by the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-8. - Penalties for article violations. 
All persons, companies, corporations or other entities that are not in compliance with this article shall be subject to the penalties provided herein, in addition to any state or federal penalties that are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Secs. 51-9—51-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS, LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES 
 
Sec. 51-21. - Required; general conditions. 
No person, company or corporation shall operate a public pool or spa who does not have a separate valid permit license or certificate issued to him or her by the city for each and every pool or spa. Only a person, company or corporation who complies with the requirements of this section shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license or certificate. Permits, licenses or certificates are not transferable. A valid permit, license or certificate shall be posted in each and every public pool or spa. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-22. - Application. 
(a)  Contents. Any person, company or corporation desiring to operate a public pool or spa shall make written application for a permit, license or certificate on forms provided by the city. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location and the type of proposed public pool or spa, the signature of each applicant and any other information as deemed necessary by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Pool operator certification. A photocopy of the pool operator's certification must be submitted with the permit application or renewal. Operator's certification must be verified through department records. 
(c)  Inspection of pool or spa. Prior to the approval of an application for a permit, license or certificate, the city shall inspect the proposed pool or spa to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-23. - Issuance. 
The city shall issue a permit, license or certificate to the applicant if the inspection reveals that the proposed public pool or spa complies with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-24. - Fees. 
(a)  The following fee schedule shall be applicable to permits, licenses and certificates issued under this article. 
Description 	Fee 
Public swimming pool 	$125.00 
Public spa 	$125.00 
 
(b)  No fee shall be charged to any swimming pool or spa operated by a governmental agency, independent school district, church or an institute of purely public charity (i.e., Red Cross, Salvation Army). However, such establishments shall comply with all other requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 19-2179, § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 51-25. - Two or more pools and/or spas. 
If a person, company or corporation owns or operates two (2) or more public pools and/or spas, each pool and/or spa shall be permitted separately by listing the name and address of each pool and/or spa on separate application forms. Separate permits are required for each and every pool and/or spa even if they are located upon the same property. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-26. - Posting of permit. 
The permit shall be posted conspicuously at the property on which the public pool or spa is located. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-27. - Transferability of permit. 
A permit is not transferable upon change of ownership of the pool or spa. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-28. - Renewals. 
Each public pool and/or spa issued a permit, license or certificate shall renew said permit, license or certificate annually, no later than May 31 of that calendar year. A renewal shall be issued provided the public pool or spa has paid all renewal fees and has maintained compliance with the provisions of this article. A ten (10) percent late fee will be assessed during a grace period within one (1) to thirty (30) days following the renewal date. In case of failure to renew a permit, license or certificate within the grace period of one (1) to thirty (30) days following the renewal date, the holder will be subject to all the requirements of obtaining a new permit, license or certificate. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-29. - Refusal 
of issuance. 
If the application for a permit, license or certificate and the accompanying contract documents describing the work or operations do not conform to the requirements of this article or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the city shall not issue a permit, license or certificate but shall return the application and documents to the applicant with a refusal to issue the permit, license or certificate. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-30. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city may without warning, notice or hearing suspend any permit, license or certificate to operate a public pool or spa if the holder of the permit, license or certificate does not comply with the requirements of this article, or if the operation of the pool or spa does not comply with the requirements of this article, or if the operation of the pool or spa does not comply with the requirements of this article, or if the operation of the pool or spa does not comply with the requirements of this article, or if the operation of the pool or spa constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by section 51-33. When a permit, license or certificate is suspended, the pool or spa shall be secured to prevent access by the public and a notice of the closure placed in a conspicuous location. Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license or certificate shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the city manager within twenty (20) days of a receipt for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge, shall be notified in writing that the permit, license or certificate is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within ten (10) days. If no written request for a hearing is filed within the ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The city may end the suspension at any time if the reasons for the suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-31. - Revocation. 
The city may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit, license or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the city in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the city shall notify the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit, license or certificate is subject to revocation and that the permit, license or certificate shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within such ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit, license or certificate becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-32. - Reapplication after revocation. 
Whenever a revocation of a permit, license or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked permit, license or certificate may make written application for a new permit, license or certificate. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-33. - Service of notices. 
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-34. - Hearings. 
A committee appointed by the city manager at a time and place designated by the committee shall conduct the hearings provided for in this article. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the city shall make a final finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license or certificate by the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Secs. 51-35—51-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POOL YARD ENCLOSURES 
 
Sec. 51-46. - Adopted. 
The V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code, Ch. 757, Pool Yard Enclosures is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Secs. 51-47—51-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING 
 
Sec. 51-67. - International Building Code for Swimming Pools adopted. 
The International Building Code for Swimming Pools are hereby adopted as the single family swimming pool code of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, for regulating the design, construction, management and operation of a swimming pool or spa of a single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-68. - Definitions. 
Definitions shall be as defined in the International Building Code for Swimming Pools. For any terms not defined herein, the definition shall be as determined by the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, unless another agency or unit of government is specified. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-69. - Building permit required. 
Whenever a swimming pool or spa for a single-family dwelling is constructed or extensively remodeled, a building permit must be obtained from the city prior to any construction or remodeling taking place. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 51-70. - Maintained in a safe and sanitary manner. 
All single-family dwelling swimming pools and/or spas must be maintained in such a manner as to not create a health or safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 02-1694, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Chapter 54 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of police, § 4.02. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 22; courts, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; authority of police to direct traffic, § 98-3. 
State Law reference— Municipal civil service, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 143; police force of home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003; law enforcement services provided through cooperation of local governments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq.; commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 415.001 et seq.; "police officer" defined, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 11; procedure upon arrest for traffic violation, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 147 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Appointment, term, powers, duties of chief of police. 
The office of chief of police is hereby made an appointive office and the chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager and shall hold his office at the pleasure of the city manager. The chief of police to have all of the powers and duties set forth in Section 4.02 of the Home Rule Charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 1, 8-20-62; Code 1958, § 16-6) 
State Law reference— Police department generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003.  
Sec. 54-2. - Arrests without warrant by city police. 
(a)  Those duly commissioned police officers of the city shall have the authority to arrest without warrant, in order to be detained to answer for their actions: 
(1)  Persons found in suspicious places and under circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten, or are about to commit some offense against the laws; 
(2)  Persons who the police officer has probable cause to believe have committed an assault resulting in bodily injury to another person and the police officer has probable cause to believe that there is danger of further bodily injury to that person; 
(3)  Persons who the police officer has probable cause to believe have committed the offense defined by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 25.08 (violation of protective order), if the offense is not committed in the presence of the police officer; or 
(4)  Persons who the police officer has probable cause to believe have committed an assault resulting in bodily injury to a member of the person's family or household. 
(b)  As used in this section, "probable cause" means facts and circumstances, sufficiently strong in themselves, that would warrant a cautious man in his belief that the suspect is actually guilty of the offense, or is about to commit a violation of a state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 66-340, § 1, 9-19-66; Code 1958, § 16-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 14.03.  
Secs. 54-3—54-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Special police, § 4.02(d). 
State Law reference— Police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012. 
 
Sec. 54-26. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established a police reserve force for the City of Lake Jackson. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 10-18-55; Ord. No. 71-451, § 1, 10-11-71; Code 1958, § 16-1; Ord. No. 16-2090, § 1, 2-1-2016)  
Sec. 54-27. - Membership. 
The police reserve force shall consist of a maximum of twelve (12) members. The members shall be appointed by the chief of police and shall serve under his direction and supervision, or that of his designee. The chief of police shall have the right to remove the reserve police officers from office, and he shall appoint new members to the reserve force as vacancies occur. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 2, 10-18-55; Ord. No. 71-451, § 2, 10-11-71; Ord. No. 83-910, § 1, 12-19-83; Code 1958, § 16-2; Ord. No. 16-2090, § 1, 2-1-2016)  
Sec. 54-28. - Qualifications. 
All persons appointed to the police reserve force must: 
(1)  Be over the age of twenty-one (21); 
(2)  Live within a thirty (30) minute response radius of the City of Lake Jackson Police Department; and 
(3)  Be licensed by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 71-451, § 3, 10-11-71; Code 1958, § 16-2.1; Ord. No. 16-2090, § 1, 2-1-2016) 
State Law reference— Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 415.  
Sec. 54-29. - Uniforms. 
The city shall issue uniforms to each member of the police reserve force. The uniforms shall be returned to the chief of police when the person ceases to be a member of the police reserve force. The uniforms shall be worn at all times when on duty unless otherwise directed by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 3, 10-18-55; Ord. No. 71-451, § 4, 10-11-71; Code 1958, § 16-3; Ord. No. 16-2090, § 1, 2-1-2016)  
Sec. 54-30. - Powers and duties. 
Police reserve officers shall act only upon the request of the chief of police or his designee. When on duty, the members shall have all powers of a City of Lake Jackson Police Officer, including the power to make arrests. After city council approval of the appointment, a member may carry a weapon when discharging official duties as a peace officer or when authorized by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 4, 10-18-55; Ord. No. 71-451, § 5, 10-11-71; Code 1958, § 16-4; Ord. No. 16-2090, § 1, 2-1-2016)  
Sec. 54-31. - Remuneration. 
Members of the police reserve force serve without compensation. However, members of the police reserve force who actively participate for at least sixteen (16) hours per month and whose job performance gains the approval of the city manager and the chief of police, shall be recognized for their service in an amount equal to the annual payment of the basic garbage, water and sewer bill for residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 5, 10-18-55; Ord. No. 71-451, § 6, 10-11-71; Ord. No. 73-514, § 1, 11-5-73; Code 1958, § 16-5; Ord. No. 16-2090, § 1, 2-1-2016)  
Chapter 56 - LEASING AND CONTRACTING CITY-OWNED FACILITIES FOR COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES OR CONVENIENCE 
 
Sec. 56-1. - City leases and contracts. 
With the approval of the city council as reflected in its minutes, the city may enter into leases and contracts by which city facilities are leased for commercial enterprises or for the convenience of public entities. 
(Ord. No. 01-1652, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 56-2. - Criteria. 
All leases under this chapter shall be made under the following criteria: 
(1)  Control of the government facility shall be maintained by the city. 
(2)  The governmental use of the facility is not interfered with. 
(3)  No governmental powers are bartered away. 
(4)  There is a municipal or public purpose served. 
a.  Money received in exchange satisfies the public purpose requirement. 
(5)  The lease is for at least fair market value. 
(6)  The lease is not exclusive as long as space is available. 
(7)  The lease or contract is in writing. 
(8)  The lease must comply with all applicable city ordinances, including the telecommunications, zoning and building codes (including windstorm provisions). 
(9)  If there are antennas or other appurtenances mounted, there shall be an inspection report prepared by a registered professional engineer certifying the structural integrity of the mounted items. 
(10)  The term of the lease shall be for no more than twenty-five (25) years. 
(11)  The lease termination clause shall provide the city with the right to terminate the lease. 
(12)  There shall be no assignment or subletting without consent/approval by the city. 
(13)  Any improvements must be approved by the city. 
(14)  The lessee shall indemnify the city. 
(15)  There shall be no hazardous substances introduced to a city facility. 
(16)  Insurance shall be carried by lessee in amounts required by the city. 
(17)  Lessee shall maintain the leased facilities in a manner that meets city approval. 
(18)  In monitoring the premises, the lessee shall not in any manner injure or damage the facilities. 
(19)  The city council authorizes by minute order the proper official to enter into the contract. 
(Ord. No. 01-1652, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 56-3. - Lease facilities to other entities. 
(a)  The city shall be able to lease facilities to other entities for commercial enterprises as permitted under Texas law. 
(b)  Certain facilities such as park land, recreation area, scientific area, wildlife refuge or historic site cannot be leased for a different use or purpose without public notice and a public hearing under Chapter 26 of the Parks and Wildlife Code. 
(c)  Lease of a municipal hospital or swimming pool is subject to Section 253.006 of the Local Government Code and must. 
(1)  Be authorized by ordinance or resolution adopted by the governing body; 
(2)  Be executed on behalf of the municipality by the mayor and the municipal secretary or clerk; 
(3)  Be impressed with the municipal seal; and 
(4)  Cover a period of not more than fifty (50) years. 
(Ord. No. 01-1652, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 56-4. - Distribution of automated information systems software. 
The city shall be able to sell, lease, market or engage in other distribution of computer software that it develops. Any release of municipally developed automated information systems software must be under a contract that provides that the municipality will receive a royalty, license right, or other appropriate compensation for developing the software as specified under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 253.007. In this section "automated information systems software" means any procedure or software that is designed, operated, or maintained to collect, record, process, store, retrieve, display or transmit information. 
(Ord. No. 01-1652, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 56-5. - City able to purchase, acquire or lease property with the county. 
(a)  The city shall be able to purchase, acquire or lease property within the county as necessary, upon the approval of the city council, for any purpose listed in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 273.001 et seq. and for any other purpose not prohibited by law. 
(b)  The city may maintain, improve, sell and lease the property, and the improvements on the property. 
(c)  When necessity requires, the city, upon approval of the city council, may purchase, acquire, lease or use property as necessary to engage in proprietary or commercial enterprises as long as a governmental or public purpose is served and the use is not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 01-1652, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 56-6. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, company, corporation, nonprofit organization or any other entity to use a city facility for commercial purposes without obtaining the permission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-1652, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Chapter 58 - TEMPORARY HOUSING AND MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-2159, § 1, adopted June 4, 2018, changed the title of Ch. 58 from "Manufactured Homes and Trailers" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 50; signs, ch. 78; solid waste, condition and use of premises, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; taxation, ch. 94; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; utilities, ch. 102; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f; size and weight of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-11; sanitation and health protection, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq.; determination of situs of mobile homes for tax purposes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 21.21 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - TEMPORARY HOUSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, adopted June 4, 2018, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. I, §§ 58-1—58-6, pertained to temporary post-disaster housing, and derived from Ord. No. 17-2147, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 2017. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Purpose 
The purpose of this article is to allow people to live close to their homes during times of repair due to emergencies such as hurricanes or fires. This article shall be used only when no other housing options are available. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means an event that renders a house uninhabitable, such as a fire. 
State of disaster means a situation that causes the mayor or mayor pro tem to make an official declaration that activates the city's emergency management plans and authorizes the furnishing of aid and assistance. 
Temporary housing means a prefabricated structure mounted on a permanent chassis, including, but not limited to, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles and travel trailers. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-3. - Liability. 
The city and its officers, agents, and employees shall have no liability of any nature for any personal injury or injury to property on the site of the temporary housing. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Secs. 58-4, 58-5. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MULTI-FAMILY ZONES 
 
Sec. 58-6. - Location. 
For multi-family zones, temporary housing may only be placed on sites that have adequate water, sewer, and power for the number of people to be housed. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-7. - Request. 
(a)  The owner of the site must file a written request with the city manager for the installation of temporary housing. The request must contain the following: 
(1)  A site plan; 
(2)  Pictures of the site and the proposed housing; 
(3)  An explanation of why the temporary housing is needed; 
(4)  The length of time the temporary housing will be on the site; and 
(5)  An explanation of how the owner will take care of water, sewage, power, solid waste and security needs. 
(b)  If the request is complete, the city manager shall submit the request to the city council at the next regular meeting. The city manager or his designee may inspect the plans and the site before city council discusses the request. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-8. - Criteria for approval. 
(a)  City council may grant the request if the housing is needed due to recovery and relief efforts related to events during a state of disaster. 
(b)  If city council grants the request, the owner of the site must ensure that the following standards are met: 
(1)  The temporary housing is not rundown, dilapidated, or unsafe; 
(2)  The chassis for each unit of temporary housing is safe for travel; 
(3)  All solid waste is stored and disposed of in a manner that will not create a health or fire hazard; 
(4)  An adequate and safe sewer system is provided for storage and disposal of all sewage; and 
(5)  At least one (1) ADA compliant unit of temporary housing is available for every five (5) units installed. 
(c)  City council may impose other reasonable standards, such as a limited time period for the housing to be on the site. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-9. - Removal. 
After the initial time period has ended or upon an order by city council, the temporary housing shall be removed from the site. The site shall be cleaned and all solid waste removed. City council may order that the temporary housing be removed if any of the standards set forth in this article are not met. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-10. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SINGLE-FAMILY ZONES 
 
Sec. 58-11. - Location. 
In single-family zones, temporary housing may only be placed in the driveway or in the backyard of a lot that has an uninhabitable home that is undergoing repairs. The site must have adequate water, sewer, and power for the number of people to be housed. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-12. - Request. 
(a)  The owner of the property must file a written request with the city manager for the installation of temporary housing. The request must contain the following: 
(1)  Pictures of the property and the proposed housing; 
(2)  A site survey showing setbacks, easements, and planned location of the temporary housing; 
(3)  An explanation of why the temporary housing is needed; 
(4)  The length of time the temporary housing will be needed; 
(5)  A schedule of the repairs needed to make the home habitable; 
(6)  The reason that the owner or tenant cannot stay elsewhere; 
(7)  An explanation of how the owner will take care of water, sewage, power, solid waste and security needs; 
(8)  A letter of approval from the property owners or lessees that are next to and across the street from the uninhabitable home; and 
(9)  Other information that the city manager needs to evaluate the request. 
(b)  If the request is complete, the city manager shall grant or deny the request. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-13. - Criteria for approval; standards. 
(a)  The city manager may grant the request if: 
(1)  The housing is needed due to recovery and relief efforts related to events during a state of disaster or for an emergency that renders the home uninhabitable, such as a fire; and 
(2)  There are no other housing options available. 
(b)  If the city manager grants the request, the owner of the site must ensure that the following standards are met: 
(1)  The temporary housing is not rundown, dilapidated, or unsafe; 
(2)  The chassis for the temporary housing is safe for travel; 
(3)  All solid waste is stored and disposed of in a manner that will not create a health or fire hazard; and 
(4)  An adequate and safe sewer system is provided for storage and disposal of all sewage. 
(c)  The city manager may impose other reasonable standards, such as a limited time that the housing may be on the property. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 58-14. - Removal. 
(a)  After the initial time period has ended, the temporary housing shall be removed from the site. The site shall be cleaned and all solid waste removed. 
(b)  If the owner or tenant needs to remain in the temporary housing past the initial time period, the owner must request an extension of time from city council. 
(c)  The city manager may order that the temporary housing be removed if any of the standards set forth in this article are not met. 
(Ord. No. 18-2159, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Secs. 58-15—58-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Internal street means a common access route or private way which affords principal means of access to individual mobile home lots or auxiliary buildings. 
Licensee means an individual, firm, business association or corporation licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park. 
Mobile home means a moveable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chassis over state roads and highways under special permit, connected to utilities, and designed without a permanent foundation for yearround living. It may consist of one (1) or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity, or of two (2) or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit. 
Mobile home park means a unified development of mobile home spaces arranged on a tract of land under individual, firm, business association or corporate ownership, meeting all requirements for the construction and development of a mobile home park. 
Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home. This term shall also include the terms "lot" and "site." 
Natural barrier means an abutting lake or creek; a drainage area having a minimum width of fifty (50) feet in which no structures are located; an airport enclosed by a fence or wall; a densely wooded area having a minimum width of fifty (50) feet in which no structures are located; and vacant land having a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet. Property shall cease to be considered a natural barrier when the stated conditions change and the property is developed with structures. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 1, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-27. - Penalty. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or who shall build, alter, occupy or use any building or property in violation of any statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day such violation shall be continued or shall be allowed to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner of any building or property or part thereof where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, attorney or other person employed in connection therewith, and who has assisted in the commission of such violations, but is not primarily responsible therefor, shall be guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  In addition to the remedies provided for in this section the enforcing officer may, in case any buildings or structures are erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct of business or use in or about such premises. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 7, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-7)  
Sec. 58-28. - Permits. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for the construction or occupancy of a permanent residential structure in any mobile home park, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  One (1) existing residential structure may be retained or one (1) new residential structure may be constructed for the occupancy of the owner or operator of the park. 
(2)  An existing residence may be converted into a clubhouse, community center or service building of a mobile home park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the city without a valid permit therefor issued by the building inspector for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. 
(c)  The application for and issuance of a permit shall be governed by section 110-9. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 2, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-2)  
Sec. 58-29. - Mobile home park license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile home park within the city without a valid license therefor issued annually by the building official for the specific park. All applications for licenses shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the building official, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this article. The building official shall not issue a license unless the applicant is a valid holder of a certificate of occupancy. When a certificate of occupancy is revoked, the license is automatically void. 
(b)  Application for the original license shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the deposit of the required license fee, and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the park. 
(3)  A site or plot plan of the park showing applicable locations, dimensions and specifications for all mobile home spaces, streets, walkways, service buildings and facilities, utility easements and systems, and drains and drainage structures. 
(4)  Before the original license or renewal license is issued, the city building official shall obtain the approval of the fire chief on the firefighting appliances, water supply, accessways, or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements. 
(c)  Application for renewal of license shall be made in writing by the licensee on forms furnished by the building inspector, on or before December 20 of each year. Such application shall contain any change in the information occurring after the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. 
(d)  All original license applications or renewals thereof shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus one dollar ($1.00) for each mobile home space in a mobile home park. The original fee shall be prorated on the nearest quarterly basis between the date of the original license and January 1 of that calendar year. Renewal fees shall be due on January 1 of each year. 
(e)  An additional license fee of three dollars ($3.00) per month for each mobile home in a mobile home park shall be paid quarterly in advance within ten (10) days after the first day of January, April, July and October of each year and shall be based on the number of mobile homes in a park on the first day of each quarterly period. 
(f)  Every mobile home park licensee shall give notice in writing to the building official within seventy-two (72) hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of his interest in or control of a mobile home park. Upon application by the new prospective licensee, in writing, to the building official, for transfer of the license, the building official shall determine that the park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this article before transferring the license. Such application for transfer of license shall be made within seven (7) calendar days after notification of the change covered in sentence one of this subsection. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of such application, the city shall notify the applicant of the decision on his application for license transfer. 
(g)  All applications for license transfers shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(h)  Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the building official, after consultation with the city official he deems competent to judge, finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this article, he shall give notice in writing to the licensee that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in such notice, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the building official shall reinspect such park, requesting assistance from other city departments as may be required, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the licensee. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, the licensee shall cease operation of such park. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 4, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-4)  
Sec. 58-30. - Inspection of mobile home parks. 
(a)  Not less than once every three (3) months, the building official, health officer, fire chief, police chief and collector of taxes shall inspect every mobile home park within the city to determine compliance with this article and to assure that such park shall not become a menace to public health, morals, safety or welfare. 
(b)  The building official and other city officials shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  The building official and the collector of taxes shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the licensee, his agent, or authorized employee access to any part of such park at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repair or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 5, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-5)  
Sec. 58-31. - Notices, hearings and orders. 
(a)  Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, the building official shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or his agent. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the licensee or his agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article, by the building official may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council provided that such person shall file within ten (10) days after the day the notice was served in the office of the city manager, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension. Upon receipt of such petition, the city manager shall forward such petition to the city secretary who shall request the city council to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(c)  After such hearing, the building official shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice. Upon failure to comply with an order by the building official sustaining or modifying a notice, the occupancy permit and the license of the park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(d)  Whenever the building official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health and safety, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon written petition to the city manager shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of this subsection shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 6, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-6)  
Secs. 58-32—58-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MH-1, MOBILE HOME PARK ZONE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— MH-1, mobile home park zoning district, § 110-83. 
 
Sec. 58-41. - Established, compliance. 
There is hereby created a new residential zone to be known as MH-1, mobile home park. In a zone so designated and approved according to the provisions of this division, within the city, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city for subdivision purposes, a mobile home park may be developed, redeveloped, altered or expanded, provided it meets with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3)  
Sec. 58-42. - Location. 
A mobile home park shall be located only in areas having a zoning classification of MH-1, mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(A))  
Sec. 58-43. - Area requirements. 
(a)  The minimum area which may be developed or used for mobile home park purposes shall be ten (10) acres. 
(b)  Within a mobile home park, mobile home spaces shall be established to comply at any stage of park development with the following requirements: 
(1)  At least ten (10) percent of the total number of mobile home spaces shall have minimum front width of fifty (50) feet and provide a minimum area of five thousand (5,000) square feet, inclusive of public utility easements. 
(2)  At least forty (40) percent of the total number of mobile home spaces shall have a minimum front width of forty-five (45) feet and provide a minimum area of four thousand (4,000) square feet, inclusive of public utility easements. 
(3)  All other mobile home spaces shall have a minimum front width of forty (40) feet and provide a minimum area of three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet, inclusive of public utility easements. 
(c)  There shall be constructed and maintained a permanent screening device not less than six (6) feet in height, on all sides of a mobile home park, except where natural barriers exist to form all or part of such screen. A screening device may consist of a solid masonry or wooden wall or fence, a woven wire or chain-link fence with metal strips woven through the mesh to form a solid screen, a woven wire or chain-link fence with evergreen shrubs forming a sight screen, or a solid evergreen hedge forming a sight screen. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(B))  
Sec. 58-44. - Open space requirements. 
(a)  The minimum front yard setback shall be ten (10) feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space. 
(b)  No mobile home shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the property line of a mobile home park, nor closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the property line of a mobile home park adjoining a public street. 
(c)  For other structures on each space the minimum front yard setback shall be at least ten (10) feet. 
(d)  The minimum distance between mobile homes shall be twenty (20) feet on the side and twenty (20) feet at the rear. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(C))  
Sec. 58-45. - Height regulations. 
(a)  The height limit for any structure in the mobile home park shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation measured at ninety (90) degrees to the frame shall not exceed three (3) feet. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(D))  
Sec. 58-46. - Soil and ground cover. 
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, covered with stone, screening or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(E))  
Sec. 58-47. - Design and location of storage facilities. 
Unless provided in current mobile home models, storage facilities with a minimum capacity of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet per mobile home space shall be provided on the space, or in compounds located within one hundred (100) feet of each space. Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the park, shall be faced with masonry, baked enamel steel or other material equal in fire resistance, durability and appearance, and shall be securely affixed to the ground. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(F))  
Sec. 58-48. - Mobile home stands. 
(a)  The area of the mobile home space upon which the mobile home is located shall be improved to provide adequate support for the mobile home by either of the following methods: 
(1)  Two (2) reinforced concrete runners on which to place a mobile home may be constructed having a minimum width of eighteen (18) inches and having a minimum length of fifty (50) feet. Each runner shall be at least four (4) inches thick. 
(2)  Precast reinforced concrete blocks having minimum dimensions of two (2) feet square by four (4) inches thick may be utilized as blocking pads for a mobile home. Blocking pads shall be placed for support on each side of a mobile home and spaced at minimum intervals of ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Tiedowns shall be provided with each mobile home stand. Each tiedown shall be embedded to a depth of four (4) feet and shall be of auger type. Such tiedowns shall be spaced at a minimum of ten-foot intervals on each side of the home and shall have at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds test capacity each. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(G))  
Sec. 58-49. - Streets, parking and traffic circulation. 
(a)  Internal streets shall be privately owned, built and maintained, and shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of park residents. 
(b)  An internal street shall have a minimum width of twenty-seven (27) feet. On-street parking shall be permitted only on one side of an internal street. Internal streets shall be continuous and connect with other streets within the park or with public streets, or shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of ninety-five (95) feet. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed five hundred (500) feet in length. 
(c)  Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least two hundred (200) feet of any portion of each mobile home. 
(d)  Internal streets shall be constructed of concrete to standard specifications established by the city and shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards. All such streets shall be provided with concrete curb and gutter. 
(e)  Off-street parking shall be provided on each mobile home space in the ratio of two (2) parking spaces for each mobile home space. A parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length located within the boundary of the mobile home space. Each parking space shall be paved with concrete and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other mobile homes or for public parking within the park. 
(f)  Either a centralized parking area, or decentralized parking areas, shall be provided within a mobile home park for parking and storing trailers, visitor's vehicles and vehicles in excess of two (2) per mobile home space. Such parking area shall be hard-surfaced and shall contain a total minimum area of thirty (30) square feet per mobile home space. 
(g)  Within each mobile home park, all streets shall be named and mobile homes numbered to conform with block numbers on adjacent public streets. All street name signs shall be privately owned and maintained, shall be of reflective material, and shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. 
(h)  Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at ninety (90) degrees and at locations which eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public streets. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(H))  
Sec. 58-50. - Street lighting. 
Street lighting within the mobile home park shall be provided along all interior streets and shall conform to or exceed existing ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(I))  
Sec. 58-51. - Public telephone. 
All telephone lines shall be installed underground. The park licensee shall provide a public telephone in a well-lighted area, accessible twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(J))  
Sec. 58-52. - Fire safety standards. 
(a)  No liquefied petroleum gas nor flammable liquid may be stored, handled or dispensed within a mobile home park except as provided by applicable ordinances or regulations of the city or statutes of this state. 
(b)  Approaches to all mobile homes shall be kept clear for firefighting purposes. 
(c)  The mobile home park licensee or agent shall provide an adequate system for the collection of and safe disposal of garbage and rubbish. 
(d)  The mobile home park licensee or agent shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park in a neat and orderly condition, and free of dry brush, weeds and leaves. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(K))  
Sec. 58-53. - Recreation area. 
(a)  All mobile home parks shall have at least one (1) recreation area. 
(b)  Recreation areas and facilities such as playgrounds, swimming pools, and community buildings shall be provided which in the judgment of the park licensee will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele the park is designed to serve. 
(c)  Not less than five (5) percent of the gross site area of the mobile home park shall be devoted to recreational facilities. Recreation area includes space for community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation and child play areas, swimming pools, and drying yards, but not including vehicle parking areas. 
(d)  When playground space is provided it shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares and parking areas. Such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(L))  
Sec. 58-54. - Water supply and distribution system. 
(a)  An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in all mobile home parks. Connection shall be made to the public supply of water. 
(b)  The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be connected to all mobile homes, buildings and other facilities requiring water. 
(c)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, all water mains, service lines, connections, fixtures and appurtenances shall conform to and be designed, constructed, installed, tested, inspected and maintained in accordance with applicable ordinances or regulations of the city or statutes of this state. 
(d)  Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the outside perimeter walls of the mobile home at a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position. 
(e)  Water riser pipes shall extend at least four (4) inches above ground elevation. The pipe shall be at least three-quarters (¾) inches. The water outlet shall be capped when no mobile home occupies the lot. 
(f)  Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes, and to protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe. 
(g)  A shutoff valve below ground level shall be provided near the water riser pipe on each mobile home space. 
(h)  Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water service. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(M))  
Sec. 58-55. - Sewage disposal. 
(a)  An adequate and safe sewer system shall be provided in all mobile home parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Connection shall be made to the public sewer system. 
(b)  The use of septic tanks within a mobile home park shall not be permitted. 
(c)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, all sewer main lines or laterals, and all individual mobile home sewer lines, connections, fixtures and appurtenances shall conform to and be designed, constructed, installed, tested, inspected and maintained in accordance with applicable ordinances or regulations of the city or statutes of this state. 
(d)  Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position. 
(1)  The sewer connection from the mobile home to the sewer riser pipe shall have a nominal inside diameter of at least three (3) inches and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one-fourth (¼) inch per foot. The sewer connections shall consist of one (1) line only without any branch fittings. All joints shall be watertight. 
(2)  Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when no mobile home occupies the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least four (4) inches above ground elevation. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(N)) 
Cross reference— Plumbing code generally, § 14-156 et seq.; sewer service, § 102-131 et seq.  
Sec. 58-56. - Electrical distribution system. 
(a)  An adequate and safe electrical distribution system shall be provided in all mobile home parks. 
(b)  A mobile home space having one (1) side immediately adjacent to the perimeter of a mobile home park, except where such perimeter abuts a public road or street, may receive electrical service from an overhead distribution system. All other mobile home spaces within a mobile home park shall receive electrical service by means of an underground distribution system. Service buildings and other park facilities may receive electrical service by means of an overhead distribution system if such building or facility is located within fifty (50) feet from the perimeter of the mobile home park. The location of all underground distribution lines shall be clearly marked by surface signs. 
(c)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, all electrical systems, installations, wiring, connections, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances shall conform to and be designed, constructed, installed, tested, inspected and maintained in accordance with applicable ordinances or regulations of the city or statutes of this state. 
(d)  Individual electrical connections: 
(1)  Each mobile home space shall be provided with an approved disconnecting device and overcurrent protective equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, sixty (60) amperes. 
(2)  Outlets, receptacles or pressure connectors shall be housed in a weatherproof outlet box and shall be located not more than twenty-five (25) feet from the over-current protective device in the mobile home. A three-pole, four-wire grounding type shall be used. 
(3)  Connectors, if not substituted by more than one (1) receptacle, shall be provided where the calculated load of the mobile home is more than fifty (50) amperes. 
(4)  The mobile home shall be connected to the outlet box by an approved type of flexible supply cord with a male attachment plug or with pressure connectors. If the distance involved exceeds three (3) feet the cord shall be installed underground. 
(e)  All exposed noncurrent metal parts of mobile homes and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor with branch circuit conductors or other approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes or other equipment. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(O)) 
Cross reference— Electrical code generally, § 14-56 et seq.; electric service, § 102-196 et seq. 
State Law reference— Electric metering in mobile homes, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1446d.  
Sec. 58-57. - Service buildings and other park service facilities. 
(a)  The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other park service facilities such as: 
(1)  Management offices, repair shops and storage areas; 
(2)  Sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Laundry facilities; 
(4)  Indoor recreation areas; and 
(5)  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the benefit and convenience of park occupants. 
(b)  All portions of a service building, structure or facility shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather. 
(c)  All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall: 
(1)  Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with moisture resistant materials. 
(2)  Have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room shall be not less than ten (10) percent of the floor area served by them. 
(3)  Have at least one (1) window which can be opened easily, or mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room. 
(d)  Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors. Shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the interior when the exterior doors are open. 
(e)  Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  General seeing tasks, five (5) footcandles. 
(2)  Laundry room work area, forty (40) footcandles. 
(3)  Toilet room, in front of mirror, forty (40) footcandles. 
(f)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture; and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
(g)  Service buildings shall be maintained at a comfortable temperature by heating equipment permitted by city regulations, between October 1 and May 1. 
(h)  Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and woodburning stoves shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(P))  
Sec. 58-58. - Refuse and garbage handling. 
(a)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution. 
(b)  All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers which shall be located at each mobile home site. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to store properly all refuse. 
(c)  Centrally located refuse containers having a capacity of three (3) cubic yards or larger may be provided. If provided, such containers shall be so designed as to prevent spillage, container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. Refuse and garbage shall be removed from the park at least twice each week. 
(d)  The park licensee or agent shall insure that containers at mobile home spaces are emptied regularly and maintained in a usable, sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(Q)) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, condition and use of premises, ch. 82.  
Sec. 58-59. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insects and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the city health officer. 
(b)  Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(c)  The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious insects or other pests. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of noxious weeds detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(R))  
Sec. 58-60. - Fuel supply and storage. 
(a)  An adequate and safe underground natural gas distribution system shall be provided in all mobile home parks. 
(b)  Each mobile home space provided with natural gas shall have an approved manual shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use. 
(c)  All natural gas main lines, and all individual mobile home service lines, connections, fixtures and appurtenances shall conform to and be designed, constructed, installed, tested, inspected and maintained in accordance with applicable ordinances or regulations of the city or statutes of this state. 
(d)  No common liquefied petroleum gas system shall be installed in a mobile home park. 
(e)  Individual liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on an individual mobile home space to serve only that mobile home shall be securely, but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental overturning, and shall have a capacity of no more than sixty (60) U.S. gallons gross. All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of a mobile home shall be installed underground and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes. 
(f)  No liquefied petroleum gas container shall be stored or located outside of or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home, or any other structure, unless such installations are approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(S)) 
Cross reference— Gas service, § 102-241 et seq. 
State Law reference— Submetering for natural gas in mobile home parks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6053, § 1a; liquefied petroleum gas in mobile home park, exception from license requirement, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 113.081(c).  
Sec. 58-61. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  The management of each mobile home park shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article. 
(2)  The licensee or his agent shall operate the park in compliance with this and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  The licensee or agent shall, in the event of damage to or destruction of mobile homes or facilities within the park by any natural disaster, restore the park to a neat and orderly condition as soon as reasonably practicable after the occurrence of such disaster. 
(4)  The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article. 
(5)  The licensee or agent shall maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of park residents. 
b.  Mobile home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number. 
c.  Location of each mobile home within the park by space or lot number, and street address. 
d.  Date of arrival and departure. 
A new register shall be initiated on January 1 of each year, and the old register may thereafter be retired, but shall be retained on the premises for at least three (3) years following its retirement. Registers shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by any official of the city whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained therein. 
(6)  The licensee or agent shall furnish to the collector of taxes, within ten (10) days after January 1 of each year, a list of all mobile home residents in the park on January 1. The list shall contain the owner's name and address; make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number of the mobile home; and the address or location description of such mobile home within the park. Such lists shall be prepared using forms furnished by the collector of taxes. 
(7)  Within ten (10) days after the first day of April, July and October of each year, the licensee or agent shall furnish the collector of taxes the same data required in subsection (6) of this section on all residents who have moved into the park after January 1 or the previous quarterly report, whichever is later. 
(b)  Each occupant of a mobile home park shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article. 
(2)  The park occupant shall comply with all requirements of this article and shall maintain his mobile home space, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management. 
(4)  Fire resistant skirting shall be required around all mobile homes in mobile home parks and shall be installed by the park occupant within sixty (60) days after placement of the mobile homes. Such skirting shall be uniform throughout the mobile home park and shall be affixed in such manner as to prevent access beneath the mobile home by domestic and wild animals. 
(5)  Skirtings, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately underneath a mobile home for storage shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 
a.  The storage area shall have a base of impervious material. 
b.  Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 71-429, § 3, 5-3-71; Code 1958, § 12A-3(T))  
Secs. 58-62—58-64. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MH-2, MANUFACTURED HOME ZONE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— MH-2, manufactured home zoning district, § 110-84. 
 
Sec. 58-65. - Definitions. 
(a)  HUD code manufactured home means a structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designated to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by C.F.R. § 3282.8(g). 
(b)  Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
(c)  Additional terms. Other terms herein shall have the meaning defined in other ordinances of the city, except where the context clearly requires otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-66. - Prohibited locations; exceptions. 
(a)  No manufactured home used as a residence shall be located in the City of Lake Jackson outside of the following zones: MH-1 and MH-2. 
(b)  No manufactured home, regardless of use, shall be located in the city and outside of the following zones: MH-1 and MH-2. However, a manufactured home may be located in a planned unit development zone or a planned unit residential zone with the prior approval of the city council. 
(c)  However, the following exceptions are allowed: 
(1)  A manufactured home may be located temporarily in any zone for construction use as provided and regulated by this division. 
(2)  A manufactured home in transit may be located in the city in any zone for not more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  No manufactured home subdivision shall be located outside of an MH-2 zone. 
(e)  No manufactured home subdivision shall be developed, built, altered, expanded, redeveloped, or rebuilt, except according to this division. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-67. - Inspection. 
Officials of the city may enter the premises of any proposed or existing manufactured home subdivision or of any place where a manufactured home subdivision or of any place where a manufactured home is located, in order to inspect for compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-68. - Nonliability. 
The city and its officers, agents, and employees shall have no liability of any nature for any actions, omissions, or other matters in any way concerning the subject matter of this division. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-69. - Other ordinances and laws. 
All other ordinances of the city and all other laws shall apply according to the terms to the subject matter of this division, except as this division expressly and specifically contradicts said ordinances or laws. The fact that this division specifically invokes some other laws and other ordinances shall not mean that still other laws and ordinances not specifically invoked do not apply. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-70. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who commits any of the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00): 
(1)  Any violation of this division; or 
(2)  Providing false information to a city official concerning licensing under this division or compliance with this division. 
Each day or portion of a day during which any violation occurs or continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-71. - Site plan required. 
Any person, entity or association that desires to establish, maintain or operate a manufactured home subdivision within the limits of the City of Lake Jackson shall first file a site plan and obtain approval of a site plan from the city planning commission. Said site plan shall meet the requirements of chapter 110 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-72. - Building permits. 
No person shall install any manufactured home, or erect, construct, add to, enlarge, improve, alter, repair, convert, extend, improve, or demolish any manufactured home subdivision, manufactured home site, building, or structure, or any part thereof, or install any plumbing, electrical, or mechanical equipment as a part of such subdivision, site, building, or structure, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a building permit from the building inspection department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-73. - Regulations for all manufactured homes. 
These regulations apply to all manufactured homes, wherever located, except as expressly stated otherwise. The standards for construction and installation of manufactured housing within the city are governed by the Texas Manufactured Housing Code. Any standard for construction and installation contained in this division which is different from the standards for construction and installation contained in the Texas Manufactured Housing Code is null and void. All manufactured housing must be installed in compliance with the standards, rules, regulations or administrative orders of the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-74. - Site requirements. 
(a)  All manufactured homes shall comply with all parking, setback, area, spacing, location, and all other requirements of all other laws and ordinances, including the requirements for slab homes. 
(b)  All manufactured homes shall be elevated to two (2) feet above the center of the street and also above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to comply with the requirements of the designated FEMA flood zones and the Lake Jackson Flood Hazard Prevention Ordinance. 
(c)  The average height of the bottom of a manufactured home frame above the ground elevation shall not exceed three (3) feet. 
(d)  Manufactured homes shall be installed on a permanent foundation as defined by the Texas Manufactured Home Code, 16 TAC § 69.52, and shall be constructed of concrete. 
(e)  All manufactured homes and manufactured home components shall be installed in compliance with the Texas Manufactured Home Code. "Installation" means: 
(1)  The transporting of manufactured homes or manufactured home components to the place where they will be used by any person other than one registered with the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs as a manufactured home manufacturer, retailer, broker, salesperson, or installer; 
(2)  The construction of the foundation system; and 
(3)  The placement and erection of a manufactured home or manufactured home components on the foundation system, and includes supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, anchoring, and proper connection of multiple or expandable sections or components, the installation of air conditioning, and minor adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-75. - Fire safety hazards. 
(a)  No liquefied petroleum gas or flammable liquid may be stored, handled, or dispensed within a manufactured home subdivision or on the premises where a manufactured home is used as a residence, except as provided in this division. 
(b)  Approaches to manufactured homes shall be kept clear for fire fighting purposes, and shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition, free of dry brush, weeds and leaves. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-76. - Water supply and distribution system. 
(a)  All structures in a manufactured home subdivision, and all manufactured homes wherever located, requiring water shall be connected to the public water supply in conformity with the Lake Jackson Plumbing Code and all applicable law. 
(b)  All manufactured home subdivisions shall provide fire hydrants, hydrant locations and water mains in accordance with the Code, to provide fire protection. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-77. - Sewage disposal. 
(a)  Septic systems are prohibited in the city. 
(b)  An adequate and safe sewer system shall be provided for conveying and disposing of all sewage from manufactured homes and manufactured home subdivisions shall be connected to the public sewer system. 
(c)  Each manufactured home site and each manufactured home subdivision shall have and install plumbing, sewer service lines and water service lines that confirm to the plumbing code. 
(d)  Any sewer rise pipe shall be plugged when no manufactured home occupies the site. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-78. - Electrical. 
(a)  Each manufactured home shall be provided with an approved minimum electrical service of 100 amp 110/220 volts. However, under no circumstances shall electrical service be provided to a manufactured home that does not meet or exceed the requirements of the manufacturer's installation instructions for the manufactured home to which electrical services are to be provided. 
(b)  All exposed, noncurrent, metal parts of each manufactured home and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-79. - Refuse and garbage. 
Manufactured home subdivisions shall comply with the current city requirement to use plastic bags. Any and all refuse and garbage shall be stored and disposed of in a manner such that it will create no health hazard, rodent harborage, insect breeding, accident hazard, fire hazard, or air pollution and shall be flytight and watertight. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-80. - Fuel supply. 
(a)  Each manufactured home site in a manufactured home subdivision shall be provided with adequate natural gas. Each manufactured home or site with any natural gas supply shall have an approved manual shutoff valve installed upstream from the gas meter four inches above grade, and shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use. 
(b)  Any individual liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on an individual home site shall serve only that home and shall be securely fastened to prevent accidental overturning, and shall have a gross capacity of no more than sixty (60) WS gallons. All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of a manufactured home shall be installed underground and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in a manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-81. - Management and responsibility for compliance. 
(a)  The following applies to manufactured home subdivisions: 
(1)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the compliance of all aspects of the manufactured home subdivision with this division and all applicable laws and shall be subject to the penalties provided herein for any noncompliance in said manufactured home subdivision. If the subdivider in fact delegates this duty to any other person or persons, either in fact or by delegation on the license application, then both the subdivider and said person or persons shall bear said responsibility and be subject to said penalties. This paragraph is cumulative and in no way relieves any other person of any responsibility under this division. 
(2)  The manufactured home subdivision shall be composed of individual lots to be occupied by individual manufactured home owners, who shall form an association of home owners to implement the rules of this division and shall serve in the shoes of the original subdivider. 
(3)  In the event of damage or destruction of facilities within the subdivision, the association of home owners shall either close the subdivision or restore the subdivision to compliance with this division as soon as reasonable practicable after the occurrence of such damage or destruction. 
(b)  Each adult owner or occupant of each manufactured home in a manufactured home subdivision shall be responsible for maintaining skirting, porches, awnings, and other additions, when installed, in good repair. Storage items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of areas beneath the home. The following are acceptable types of skirting: 
(1)  Masonry; 
(2)  Vinyl to compliment the exterior of the manufactured home; 
(3)  Aluminum to compliment the exterior of the manufactured home; 
(4)  Wood to compliment the exterior of the manufactured home. 
(c)  Each adult owner or occupant of a manufactured home, whether located in a manufactured home subdivision or not, shall be responsible for compliance with this division concerning the home and its facilities and premises. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-82. - Site requirements for manufactured home subdivisions. 
(a)  The minimum area which may be developed or used for a manufactured home subdivision shall be five (5) acres. 
(b)  Within a manufactured home subdivision, manufactured home spaces or sites shall be established to comply at all stages of subdivision development with the following requirements: 
(1)  At least ten (10) percent of the total number of manufactured home spaces shall have a minimum front width of fifty (50) feet and provide a minimum area of five thousand (5,000) square feet, inclusive of public utility easements. 
(2)  At least forty (40) percent of the total number of manufactured home spaces shall have a minimum front width of forty-five (45) feet and provide a minimum area of four thousand (4,000) square feet, inclusive of public utility easements. 
(3)  All other manufactured home spaces shall have a minimum front width of forty (40) feet and provide a minimum area of three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet, inclusive of public utility easements. 
(c)  There shall be constructed and maintained a permanent screening device, not less than six (6) feet in height, on all sides of a manufactured home subdivision, except where natural barriers exist to form all or part of such a screen. A screening device shall consist of a solid masonry or wooden wall or fence, a woven wire or chainlink fence with evergreen shrubs forming a sight screen, or a solid evergreen hedge forming a sight screen. 
(d)  No manufactured home or other structure on a manufactured home site shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the front line of the space or site. 
(e)  No manufactured home shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the property line of the manufactured home subdivision, nor closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the right-of-way line of a public street. 
(f)  No manufactured home or other structure on a manufactured home space shall be located closer than seven (7) feet to the rear line of the space, or closer than five (5) feet to the side line of the space. 
(g)  In addition to all setback requirements, the minimum distance between manufactured homes shall be twenty (20) feet on the side and twenty (20) feet at the rear. 
(h)  The height limit of each structure in the manufactured home subdivision shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet above the ground. 
(i)  Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home subdivision shall be paved or covered with stone, screening, or other solid material capable of preventing soil erosion and of preventing dust. 
(j)  Storage facilities with a minimum capacity of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet per manufactured home space shall be provided on the space or in compounds located within one hundred (100) feet of each space. Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the subdivision, shall be faced with masonry, baked enamel, steel or other material equal in fire resistance, durability, and appearance, and shall be securely affixed to the ground. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-83. - Streets, parking and traffic circulation. 
(a)  Streets inside manufactured home subdivisions shall be privately owned, built and maintained, and shall provide safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of park residents. "Interior street" refers to any street in a manufactured home park. 
(b)  Each interior street shall have a minimum width of twenty-seven (27) feet. Interior streets shall be continuous and shall connect to other streets within the subdivision or with public streets, or shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of ninety-five (95) feet. No interior street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed five hundred (500) feet in length. 
(c)  Interior streets shall be constructed of concrete to the specifications established by the city and shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards. All such streets shall be provided with concrete curbs and gutters. 
(d)  Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided on each manufactured home space. A parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long, and shall be located within the boundary of the manufactured home space. Each parking space shall be paved with concrete and located to eliminate interference with access to parking spaces provided for other manufactured homes or parking. 
(e)  A centralized parking area or areas shall be provided within a manufactured home subdivision for parking and storing trailers, visitors' vehicles, and vehicles in excess of two (2) per space. Such parking area or areas shall be hard-surfaced and shall contain a total minimum area of thirty (30) square feet per manufactured home space. 
(f)  Within each manufactured home subdivision, all streets shall be named, and manufactured home spaces numbered to conform with the block numbers on adjacent public streets. Street signs shall be privately installed, owned and maintained, and shall be of reflective material, and of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. 
(g)  Streets that intersect adjoining public streets shall do so at ninety-degree angles and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on public streets. 
(h)  Street lighting within the manufactured home subdivision shall be provided along all the streets therein and shall conform to all applicable ordinances and laws. 
(i)  All telephone lines shall be installed underground. The subdivision licensee shall provide a public telephone in a well lighted area accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-84. - Recreation area. 
(a)  Each manufactured home subdivision shall have at least one (1) recreation area. Not less than five (5) percent of the gross site area of each manufactured home subdivision shall be devoted to recreational facilities. Recreation areas shall not include parking areas. 
(b)  Any playground space shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares and parking areas. Any such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-85. - Service buildings and other subdivision service facilities. 
(a)  All portions of each service building, structure, or facility shall be protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration by moisture or weather. 
(b)  All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall have sound resistant walls extending to the ceiling between the male and female facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories, and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with moisture resistant materials. 
(c)  Each room containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each such room shall not be less than ten (10) percent of the floor area of such room. 
(d)  Each room containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall have at least one (1) window which can be opened easily, or a mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room. 
(e)  Toilets in service buildings shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors. Shower and toilet stalls shall be of individual type and shall be screened to prevent visibility of the interior of the stall when the exterior doors of the room are open. 
(f)  The lighting level shall be at least: 
(1)  Forty (40) footcandles in front of any mirrors and in laundry room work areas; and 
(2)  Five (5) footcandles in other areas. 
(g)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
(h)  Service buildings shall be air conditioned and heated with equipment conforming to all applicable law. 
(i)  No fuel that emits smoke or objectionable odors shall be permitted. No open fire shall be permitted except in lawful facilities, as permitted by other law. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-86. - Records. 
(a)  The licensee shall maintain a register of subdivision occupancy, which shall contain the name and address of subdivision occupants, manufactured home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number, and location of each home within the subdivision by lot or street address. 
(b)  Registers shall be available for inspection at reasonable times by any official of the City of Lake Jackson who deems access to the information contained therein helpful in the performance of his or her official duties. 
(c)  The licensee shall furnish to the tax department for the City of Lake Jackson, within ten (10) days after the first day of January of each year, a list of all home occupants in the subdivision, together with all items contained in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-87. - Temporary construction use. 
Manufactured homes may be located temporarily in any zone during the construction of a permitted or otherwise authorized improvement, if the manufactured home is used in the construction of the improvement. This section includes a manufactured home used as sales offices of the property where such manufactured home is located, but only during construction. Manufactured homes in place under this provision shall not be used as residences or sleeping quarters. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 58-88. - Unoccupied and unsafe manufactured homes. 
A manufactured home that becomes rundown, dilapidated, unsafe, or a fire hazard shall be considered to be in violation of this Code. The city administrator, fire marshal, or building inspector may cite the operator of the mobile home subdivision or the owner or renter of a manufactured home that becomes rundown, dilapidated, unsafe, a fire hazard, or a nuisance to the welfare of the manufactured home subdivision or the city in general. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 3, 3-15-99)  
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to make and enforce police regulations, § 2.01. 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 22; emergency services, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Preemption of criminal offenses by Penal Code, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; homosexual conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.06; assault, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 22.01; aiding suicide, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 22.08; criminal mischief, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03; reckless damage or destruction, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.04; criminal trespass, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 30.05; theft, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 31.03; theft of service, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 31.04; presumption for theft by check, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 31.06; issuance of bad check, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 32.41; bail jumping and failure to appear, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.11; disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01; public intoxication, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.08; prostitution, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.02; obscene display or distribution, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.22; gambling, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 47.02. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Sale of alcoholic beverages near certain institutions. 
(a)  Under the terms and by the authority vested in cities in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33, it shall be unlawful for any dealer to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages when the sale is from a place of business located within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public school or public hospital. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from the front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public schools shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(Ord. No. 87-1051, § 1, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 00-1638, § 1, 10-2-2000; Code 1958, § 14-1.2)  
Sec. 62-2. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Cocaine spoon means a spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is to hold or administer cocaine, and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a spoon. A cocaine spoon may or may not be merchandised on a chain and may or may not be labeled as a "cocaine" spoon or "coke" spoon. 
(2)  Controlled substance means a substance, including a drug and an immediate precursor, listed in schedules I through V or penalty groups 1 through 4 of the Texas Controlled Substances Act (V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.001 et seq.). 
(3)  Marijuana or hashish pipe means a pipe characterized by a bowl which is so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than lawful smoking tobacco, and which may or may not be equipped with a screen. 
(4)  Paraphernalia means an empty gelatin capsule, hypodermic syringe or needle, cocaine spoon, marijuana pipe, hashish pipe or any other instrument, implement or device which is primarily adapted or designed for the administration or use of any controlled substance. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, display, furnish, supply or give away any empty gelatin capsule, hypodermic syringe or needle, cocaine spoon, marijuana pipe, hashish pipe, or any other instrument, implement or device which is primarily adapted or designed for the administration or use of any controlled substance. 
(c)  Exceptions. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists or embalmers in the normal lawful course of their respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers or warehousers or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia, nor to public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self injection. 
(Ord. No. 80-732, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 14-1.4) 
State Law reference— "Controlled substance" defined, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.002(5).  
Sec. 62-3. - Firearms, discharge in city—Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them in, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gun or air rifle means any gun that discharges a pellet, BB, or paintball by means of compressed air, gas propellant, or a spring. 
Archery means the art, practice, or skill of propelling arrows with the use of a bow. 
Arrow means a missile shot from a bow and usually having a slender shaft, a pointed head, and feathers at the butt. 
Bow means a weapon that is made of a strip of flexible material (as wood) with a cord connecting the two (2) ends and holding the strip bent and that is used to propel an arrow or a bolt and includes crossbows and compound bows. 
Crossbow means a weapon consisting of a bow fixed transversely on a stock having a trigger mechanism to release the bowstring, and often incorporating or accompanied by a mechanism for bending the bow. 
Firearm means any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use. Firearm includes, but is not limited to, guns, pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns and air guns. 
(Ord. No. 159, §§ 1, 3, 8-17-54; Code 1958, § 14-8; Ord. No. 07-1842, § 1, 4-16-2007; Ord. No. 14-2030, § 1, 1-21-2014) 
Cross reference— Shooting on, along or across public roads, § 62-11. 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm in public place, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01(a)(9), (11).  
Sec. 62-3.1. - Firearms, discharge in city prohibited, exceptions. 
(a)  With the exception of subsections (b), (c), and (d), it shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot, or discharge within the city, any gun, pistol, revolver, rifle, BB gun, air gun, air rifle or firearm of any description. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the discharge of any firearm by any peace officer in the performance of his official duties. 
(c)  A shotgun, air rifle or pistol, or BB gun may be discharged in an area annexed into the City of Lake Jackson after September 1, 1981, if: 
(1)  The tract of land on which the weapon is discharged is ten (10) acres or more; 
(2)  The discharge is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
(3)  The discharge is made in such a manner that it is not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract. 
(d)  A center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber may be discharged in an area annexed into the City of Lake Jackson after September 1, 1981, if: 
(1)  The tract of land on which the weapon is discharged is fifty (50) acres or more; 
(2)  The discharge is more than three hundred (300) feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
(3)  The discharge is made in such a manner that it is not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract. 
(e)  This section is not intended to apply to any act prohibited in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01. 
(Ord. No. 14-2030, § 2, 1-21-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2030, § 2, adopted Jan. 21, 2014, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as § 62-4. In so much as § 62-4 already exists in the Code, at the direction of the city, said provisions have redesignated as § 62-3.1 to read as set out.  
Sec. 62-3.2. - Arrows, discharge in city prohibited, exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot an arrow from a bow or crossbow within the city limits, unless: 
(1)  Shot during an archery class approved by the parks director; 
(2)  Shot in an area designated for archery purposes by the parks director; or 
(3)  The tract of land on which the arrow is shot is ten (10) acres or more, the arrow is shot more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property, and the arrow is shot in such a manner that it is not reasonably expected to cross the boundary of the tract. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution that the bow was a toy bow designed to be used by children. 
(Ord. No. 14-2030, § 3, 1-21-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2030, § 3, adopted Jan. 21, 2014, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as § 62-5. In so much as § 62-5 already exists in the Code, at the direction of the city, said provisions have redesignated as § 62-3.2 to read as set out.  
Sec. 62-4. - Ice boxes, refrigerators; abandoned, safety precautions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any warehouse, or storage room, or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building or any other structure, under such circumstances as to be accessible to children, any ice box, refrigerator or other airtight, or semiairtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or more, and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more, and which has a door or lid equipped with a latch, or other fastening device, capable of securing such door or lid shut, without first removing such door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from such ice box, refrigerator or container. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, §§ 10-5(g)(5), 14-11) 
Cross reference— Storage of solid waste, § 82-68. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.011 et seq.  
Sec. 62-5. - Personal property; use without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to, in any manner, interfere with, take up or use any personal property of any other person without the consent of the owner thereof, or other person in charge of such property. 
(Code 1958, § 14-16)  
Sec. 62-6. - Trespassing on city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon, enter into or upon any of the property owned or controlled by the city without the consent of the city or some authorized officer, agent or employee of the city; provided, that the word "property," as used in this section, shall not be construed to mean any public highway, street, park or public place in the city. 
(Code 1958, § 14-17) 
State Law reference— Trespass upon state-owned property, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 601b, § 4.12.  
Sec. 62-7. - Damage done by children—Parental responsibility. 
(a)  The parents, parent or legal guardian of a child or children who, in a disposition hearing under the Texas Family Code, is placed on probation or adjudicated a delinquent or who is found guilty in the municipal court arising out of involvement in the destruction, injury, disfigurement, loss, waste or defacement of any public or private property, real, mineral or personal, in the city, without the consent of the owner or person having custody of such property shall be financially liable and responsible for restitution in an amount not to exceed the dollar amount of the damage, as appraised at replacement cost, and to the same extent that said child would be civilly liable under and by virtue of the laws of the state were the child a fully competent adult; provided, that recovery for damage caused by wilful and malicious conduct is limited to actual damages, not to exceed $15,000.00 per act, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(b)  Involvement in such destruction shall include, but is not limited to, actions by cutting, tearing, breaking, burning, marking, painting, drawing, stamping, stomping, watering, soiling, unscrewing or detaching any object or with any object including, but not limited to, an automobile, any other vehicle or marker, tool, implement, or the human hand or foot when such actions are intended to have the effect of causing damage to property, or results in cost or expense to any person or the public, including water loss from fire hydrants. Any parent or legal guardian herein shall be subject to an order of the judge of the municipal court to make restitution for the damage and destruction caused by the child, herein, when the court, after a full hearing, determines that restitution should be made. Any parent or legal guardian who is ordered to make restitution and fails to comply with the order of the court shall be deemed to be in violation of this Code and shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-5 per day, for each day that he is in violation. 
(Ord. No. 78-650, § 1, 2-20-78; Ord. No. 78-660, § 1, 7-17-78; Code 1958, § 14-19.1) 
State Law reference— Liability of parents for conduct of child, V.T.C.A., Family Code § 33.01 et seq.  
Sec. 62-8. - Same—Written notice to parents. 
In the case of an unemancipated minor accused or involvement in destruction under section 62-7, the department of police shall within three (3) days notify the parent or legal guardian in writing, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, that such minor has been accused of involvement in destruction, and that said parent or legal guardian may be held financially responsible for restitution resulting from such involvement. 
(Ord. No. 78-650, § 1, 2-20-78; Code 1958, § 14-19.2)  
Sec. 62-9. - Failure to give proper name and address. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he intentionally refuses to report or gives a false report of his name and residence address to a peace officer who has lawfully stopped him and requested the information. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 74-520, § 18, 2-4-74; Code 1958, § 14-24)  
Sec. 62-10. - Vandalizing trees, flowers, shrubbery or other beautification projects; reward, appropriation for reward fund. 
(a)  There shall be paid a reward of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the arrest and conviction of anyone guilty of vandalizing trees, flowers, shrubbery or other beautification projects in the city. Such reward shall be payable to persons securing the apprehension or arrest of any such person and shall be payable upon final conviction. 
(b)  The money already collected from private donations shall be established as a separate municipal account. The funds in such account shall be invested for the maximum interest obtainable, and all that portion of the fund that now or in the future exceeds two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be subject to use by the beautification commission of the city for the purpose of purchasing new plants, trees, shrubbery or replacement of any vandalized object connected with a city beautification project. 
(Ord. No. 77-610, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-77; Code 1958, § 14-26) 
Cross reference— Beautification commission, § 2-206 et seq. 
State Law reference— Crime Stoppers Advisory Council, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 414.  
Sec. 62-11. - Shooting on, along or across public road. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly shoots or discharges any gun, pistol or firearm on, along or across a public road. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 74-520, § 6, 2-4-74; Code 1958, § 14-8.1) 
Cross reference— Discharging firearms in city, § 62-3.  
Sec. 62-12. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he enters or remains on property or in a building which is not the home of another without effective consent and he: 
(1)  Had notice that the entry was forbidden; or 
(2)  Received notice to depart but failed to do so. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Entry" means the intrusion of the entire body. 
(2)  "Notice" means: 
a.  Oral or written communication by the owner or someone with apparent authority to act for the owner; 
b.  Fencing or other enclosure obviously designed to exclude intruders; or 
c.  Signs posted to be reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders. 
(c)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 74-520, § 2, 2-4-74; Code 1958, § 14-18)  
Sec. 62-13. - Failure to appear. 
(a)  A person lawfully released from custody, with or without bail, on condition that he subsequently appear commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly fails to appear in accordance with the terms of his release. 
(b)  This section does not apply to appearances incident to probation or parole. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the actor has a reasonable excuse for his failure to appear in accordance with the terms of his release. 
(d)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor if the offense for which the actor's appearance was required is punishable by fine only. 
(Ord. No. 74-520, § 19, 2-4-74; Code 1958, § 14-25)  
Sec. 62-14. - Illegal smoking products and ingestion devices. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Illegal smoking product means: 
(1)  Any of the following substances or chemicals, or any plant or other substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice, or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one (1) or more of the following substances or chemicals: 
Compound 	Chemical Name 
JWH-018 	1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole JWH-073 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole 
JWH-200 	1- (N-morpholin-4-yl)ethyl-3-naphthoylindole JWH-250 1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole 
JWH-015 	(2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-naphthalenylmethanone 
JWH-081 	4-methoxynaphthalen- 1-yl- (1-pentylindol- 3-yl)methanone 
JWH-133 	(6aR,10aR)-3-(1,1-Dimethylbutyl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydro -6,6,9-trimethyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran 
JWH-147 	1-hexyl-2-phenyl-4-(1-naphthoyl)pyrrole 
JWH-171 	1-([(1E)-3-pentylinden-1-ylidine]methyl)naphthalene 
HU-308 	[(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol 
L-759,633 	(6aR,10aR)-1-methoxy-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromene 
WIN-55,212 	-2 (R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo[1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-napthalenylmethanone 
 
(2)  Any products sold, distributed or possessed in the form of incense or herbal smoking blends under the names such as "K-2," "K-2 Summit," "K-2 Sex," "Genie," "Spice," "Dascents," "Zohai," "Sage," "Pep Spice," "Solar Flare," "K-O Knockout 2," "Spice Gold," "Spice Diamond," "Spice Cannabinoid," "Yucatan Fire," or "Fire N Ice"; 
(3)  Salvinorin A; or 
(4)  Any synthetic cannabinoid. 
Ingestion device means any equipment, product, material or object used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(b)  Illegal smoking product. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, buy, sell, offer for sale, barter, give, publicly display, deliver, or transfer any illegal smoking product. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, inhale, ingest, or otherwise introduce into the human body any illegal smoking product. 
(3)  Any product containing any of the chemical compounds listed in the definition of "illegal smoking product" shall be subject to the provisions of this section, regardless of whether the product is marketed under names other than those listed in the definition of "illegal smoking product". 
(c)  Ingestion devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess an ingestion device with the intent to inject, inhale, ingest, or otherwise introduce into the human body any illegal smoking product. 
(d)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that an illegal smoking product or ingestion device was: 
a.  In the possession of a peace officer, or a person acting under the authority of a peace officer, acting in the performance of official duties; 
b.  In the possession of or being used by a governmental entity for a health, research, education, or similar program; 
c.  In the possession of or used by a person under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances in the State of Texas; or 
d.  In the possession of a person using the illegal smoking product or ingestion device for a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or a spiritual leader. 
(Ord. No. 10-1950, § 1, 10-18-2010)  
Sec. 62-15. - Garage sales. 
(a)  Garage sale means a sale of merchandise conducted on a residential property to the general public. This term includes yard sales, estate sales, neighborhood sales, or any other similar activity. 
(b)  A garage sale may be conducted from a residence twice a year. A garage sale may not last more than three (3) consecutive days. 
(c)  The merchandise may be exhibited or displayed on the private property where the residence is located, but not closer than five (5) feet to the front or side property lines. 
(d)  Garage sale signs must comply with chapter 78. 
(Ord. No. 16-2121, § 1, 11-21-2016)  
Secs. 62-16—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ARSON; REWARD FOR INFORMATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-1930, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 2010, amended Art. II to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 62-31—62-34, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 12, §§ 1—4, adopted June 30, 1944; and Code 1958, §§ 14-1—14-5 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Crime Stoppers Advisory Council, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 414; arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02. 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Arson reward. 
(a)  There shall be paid a reward of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the arrest and conviction of anyone guilty of arson committed in the city. Such reward shall be payable to persons securing the apprehension or arrest of any such person and shall be payable upon final conviction. 
(b)  The reward shall be paid out of the general fund. 
(c)  The city manager shall determine the amount of money rewarded. 
(Ord. No. 10-1930, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 62-32. - Notice of reward. 
(a)  The fire marshal is authorized to provide signs notifying the public of any reward authorized by this section. The signs shall be posted at various locations open to the public and all suspected arson locations. Notices may also be given using other modes of communication that the fire marshal may deem effective. 
(b)  The notice shall include, but is not limited to, the following wording: 
$1,000 REWARD 
A REWARD OF UP TO $1,000 IS HEREBY OFFERED BY THE CITY OF LAKE JACKSON FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO THE ARREST AND CONVICTION OF ANY PERSON OR PERSONS GUILTY OF THE CRIME OF ARSON WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF LAKE JACKSON. 
(Ord. No. 10-1930, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 62-33. - Persons excepted. 
No person employed by the city, the state or any county thereof whose duty is to detect violations of the law or make arrests for violations of the law shall be entitled to this reward. 
(Ord. No. 10-1930, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Secs. 62-34—62-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION 
 
Sec. 62-61. - Solicit on roadway. 
It is unlawful for a person to stand or sit in a roadway, roadway right-of-way, or roadway median, in order to solicit a ride, contribution, money or other items of value, employment, business or to distribute any material to the occupant of any motor vehicle. In this section, "roadway" means any public street that has a speed limit over thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 01-1675, § 1, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Chapter 66 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; public park and street use permits, § 86-61 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 90; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Municipal parks and recreation, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015c et seq.; public improvements, bonds, occupancy tax, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1269j-4.1; city parks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6081h et seq.; local parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 315, 331 et seq.; lease of land from state parks and wildlife department, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 13.006; recreational boating fees, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.092. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Curfew in certain parks. 
It is unlawful for any person to be in city parks during the following hours, except when scheduled and authorized by the city: 
(a)  Garland, Jasmine, A. A. MacLean, Suggs, and Madge Griffith Parks from midnight to 5:00 a.m. 
(b)  Wilderness Park trails from thirty (30) minutes after sunset to 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  Wilderness Park boat ramps from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(d)  All other city parks from thirty (30) minutes after sunset to 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 91-1178, § 1, 10-21-91; Code 1958, § 14-27.1; Ord. No. 93-1234, § 1, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 99-1592, § 1, 3-1-99; Ord. No. 07-1836, § 1, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 15-2076, § 1, 8-17-2015)  
Sec. 66-2. - Swimming restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful to swim in any city-owned water areas such as Shy Pond or any other city-owned ponds, lakes, reservoirs, or other waters with the exception of city-operated swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 81-790, § 1, 4-20-81; Code 1958, § 14-28; Ord. No. 07-1836, § 1, 2-19-2007)  
Sec. 66-3. - Possessing glass beverage containers in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, throw, use for littering, or dispose of a glass beverage container or containers in any city park. 
(Ord. No. 80-759, § 1, 10-20-80; Code 1958, § 14-27; Ord. No. 07-1836, § 1, 2-19-2007) 
State Law reference— Litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365.  
Sec. 66-4. - Skating under pavilions in certain parks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a skate, skates, or skateboard, scooter device, bicycle, tricycle or any other human powered device with wheels, as well as any battery, electric or motorized vehicle, skate, skateboard or scooter device under, on or in the pavilions located at MacLean and Dunbar Parks. However, any wheel chair or similar device when operated by a disabled person shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 01-1679, § 1, 12-3-2001)  
Sec. 66-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City park or municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity, including but not limited to the Hike and Bike Trail System and Greenway and Linear Parkways as designated in the Parks and Open Space Master Plan, as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 18-2155, § 1, 2-5-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-2155, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2018, set out provisions adding § 66-1. To preserve the existing § 66-1, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as § 66-5.  
Secs. 66-6—66-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OYSTER CREEK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— To facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 18-2155, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2018, as new § 66-5 in Art. I, former §§ 66-5 and 66-6 in Art. II have been renumbered herein as §§ 66-21 and 66-22, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 66-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Operate means to navigate or otherwise use a vessel. 
Vessel means any watercraft used or capable of being used for transportation on water. 
Wake means the track of waves created by a vessel moving through the water that causes a disturbance to other vessels or surrounding property. 
(Ord. No. 10-1938, § 1, 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 18-2155, § 1, 2-5-2018) 
Note— See editor's note at Art. 2.  
Sec. 66-22. - Slow, no wake zone. 
Oyster Creek is declared to be a "Slow, No Wake" zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vessel on Oyster Creek in such a manner that the vessel causes a wake. 
(Ord. No. 10-1938, § 1, 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 18-2155, § 1, 2-5-2018) 
Note— See editor's note at Art. 2.  
Chapter 70 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 2019, amended ch. 70 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 70, §§ 70-1—70-5, 70-11—70-14, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 203, §§ 1—10, adopted Feb. 19, 1957; Code 1958, §§ 12-1—12-9; Ord. No. 01-1672, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2003. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Municipal licensing of businesses and occupations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075; persons who may be regarded as retailers under the Limited Sales, Excise, and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 151.024; used oil field equipment dealers, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 112; home solicitation transactions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5069-13.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person going upon private residential property to sell or take orders for any goods, merchandise or services. 
Solicitor means any person going upon private residential property for the specific purpose of soliciting funds for a cause, including as political or religious causes. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 70-2. - Non-applicability. 
This chapter does not prohibit people from going uninvited on private residential property to: 
(1)  Distribute written materials; 
(2)  Discuss or disseminate beliefs or ideas such as religious or political views; and/or 
(3)  Circulate petitions. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 70-3. - Going uninvited upon private residential premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to go upon private residential property without a permit unless invited so to do by the owner or occupant of the private residence. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 70-4. - Permissible hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for a peddler or solicitor to go upon private residential property, except during the hours from 8:00 a.m. until thirty (30) minutes after sundown unless invited so to do by the owner or occupant of the private residence. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 70-5. - Prohibitions. 
No peddler or solicitor shall enter upon private residential property where the property has a sign that indicates peddlers and solicitors are not welcome. Phrases such as "no soliciting" or "no peddlers" are sufficient to notify both peddlers and solicitors that they are prohibited from being on the private property. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Secs. 70-6—70-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 70-11. - Application. 
(a)  A peddler or solicitor must apply to the police department for a permit to go uninvited upon private residential property. The application shall contain: 
(1)  The full name, address, and mobile phone number of applicant; 
(2)  The legal name, physical address, and phone number of the person or company he represents; 
(3)  The number of permits needed; 
(4)  The full name, address, and mobile phone number of any other person who will need a permit if that person is over the age of eighteen (18); 
(5)  The social media site that provides information on the organization or person for whom the peddler or solicitor is working; 
(6)  The type of goods, merchandise or services sought to be sold or the cause for which funds are sought to be solicited; 
(7)  Whether such payment shall be collected at the time of sale or solicitation; 
(8)  The period of time applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city; 
a.  The applicant's signature; and 
(9)  Any other relevant information that the chief of police requests. 
(b)  A permit shall be issued within three (3) business days. 
(c)  The permit shall expire one (1) year after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 70-12. - Carrying of permit. 
(a)  The peddler or solicitor must carry the permit whenever peddling or soliciting and show it to any person who asks to see the permit. 
(b)  The permit is non-transferable. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 70-13. - Denial or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit may be denied if 
(1)  The application is incomplete; 
(2)  The permit fee has not been paid; 
(3)  Any information on the application is false; or 
(4)  The applicant has had a previous peddler or solicitation permit revoked within the past five (5) years. 
(b)  A permit may be revoked if 
(1)  Any information on the application is false; 
(2)  The peddler or solicitor has made, or caused to be made, false statements or misrepresentations in relation to the reason for the peddling or solicitation; or 
(3)  The peddler or solicitor violates any of the provisions in this chapter; 
(c)  An applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a permit by giving written notice of the appeal to the city manager within seven (7) days of the denial or revocation. The city manager shall render a decision within seven (7) days of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 70-14. - Fees. 
The fee for a permit required by this article shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Any person under this article who conducts business through one (1) or more agents or employees shall, in addition to such fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional agent or employee if they are above the age of eighteen (18). The fees are non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 19-2177, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Chapter 74 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Nepotism, § 11.04; assignment, execution and garnishment, § 11.06. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Texas Municipal Retirement System, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq.; workers' compensation, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8307c et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 74-1—74-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 74-26—74-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Federal old age and survivors insurance coverage for county and municipal employees, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 695g. 
 
Sec. 74-36. - Agreements to be entered into. 
The city council acting for and on behalf of the city shall enter into all necessary agreements with the Employees Retirement System of Texas for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the federal old age and survivor's insurance laws, and applicable state laws. 
(Ord. No. 201, § 1, 2-19-57; Code 1958, § 17-6)  
Sec. 74-37. - Agent of city. 
The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and city to carry out the intent and provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 201, § 2, 2-19-57; Code 1958, § 17-7)  
Sec. 74-38. - Assessing, etc., officer. 
The city manager is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments, and reports, as required by the Employees Retirement System of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 201, § 3, 2-19-57; Code 1958, § 17-8) 
State Law reference— "State agency" defined, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 695g, §§ 1(d), 2.  
Sec. 74-39. - Allocating money, establishment of fund. 
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this division, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the city social security fund, which funds shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Ord. No. 201, § 4, 2-19-57; Code 1958, § 17-9)  
Sec. 74-40. - Coverage for police officers authorized. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby authorized, on behalf of the city, to execute and enter into all necessary or supplementary or amendatory agreements with the Employees Retirement System of Texas for the purpose of extending to and including social security coverage for all police officers of the city. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to make such assessments, collections, payments, and reports as may be required by the Employees Retirement System of Texas to provide social security coverage for all police officers of the city. 
(c)  A sufficient sum of money be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of providing social security coverage for all police officers of the city, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as a part of the City of Lake Jackson's Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Ord. No. 65-311, §§ 1—3, 2-1-65; Code 1958, § 17-10)  
Secs. 74-41—74-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 74-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
System means the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
TMRS Act means V.T.C.A., Government Code chs. 851—855. 
(Ord. No. 87-1056, § 1, 12-7-87; Code 1958, § 17-5.5.7) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-52. - Election to come within state system. 
On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments, except the fire department, participate fully in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., and hereby accepts all of the benefits and obligation of such system. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-11-48; Ord. No. 104, 5-8-50; Ord. No. 152, § 1, 1-19-54; Ord. No. 74-525, § 1, 3-18-74; Code 1958, § 17-1) 
State Law reference— Membership, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 852.  
Sec. 74-53. - Notice to trustees of system. 
The mayor has notified the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have all regular full-time employees of the city participate in such system. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-11-48; Ord. No. 104, 5-8-50; Ord. No. 152, § 2, 1-19-54; Ord. No. 74-525, § 2, 3-18-74; Code 1958, § 17-2) 
State Law reference— Board of trustees, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.001 et seq.  
Sec. 74-54. - Election of single composite participation date. 
The city hereby elects to have all of its departments now participating in the Texas Municipal Retirement System hereafter treated and considered, for the purpose of determining normal and prior service contribution rates to the Texas Municipal Retirement System, and for the purpose of determining any period within which the city must fund the obligations mentioned in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 855.403, 855.405 and 855.406, as having a single composite participation date, which composite date shall be determined by the actuary of the Texas Municipal Retirement System in the manner prescribed by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.407. 
(Ord. No. 72-470, § 1, 7-10-72; Code 1958, § 17-2.1)  
Sec. 74-55. - Effective date of participation. 
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System and becomes an "employee" as defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001(8). 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-11-48; Ord. No. 104, 5-8-50; Ord. No. 152, § 3, 1-19-54; Ord. No. 74-525, § 3, 3-18-74; Code 1958, § 17-3)  
Sec. 74-56. - Wage ceiling prohibited. 
No wage or salary earning ceiling shall be placed on eligibility for participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, and any employee of an eligible city department may contribute and participate fully up to the full extent of his total salary or wage. 
(Ord. No. 74-525, § 4, 3-18-74; Code 1958, § 17-3.1)  
Sec. 74-57. - Adding new participants. 
The city may refuse to add new departments to such system but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-11-48; Ord. No. 104, 5-8-50; Ord. No. 152, § 4, 1-19-54; Ord. No. 74-525, § 5, 3-18-74; Code 1958, § 17-4)  
Sec. 74-58. - Remitting contributions. 
The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's proper contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-11-48; Ord. No. 104, 5-8-50; Ord. No. 152, § 5, 1-19-54; Ord. No. 74-525, § 6, 3-18-74; Code 1958, § 17-5)  
Sec. 74-59. - Maximum earnings considered in calculating current service deposits and contributions. 
Annual earnings in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) which may be paid by the city to any of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall not be considered in calculating the amount to be withheld and the deposits and contributions to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by reason of current service rendered by such employee to this city. The maximum amount which shall be deducted each month for current service deposits to such system, where such compensation is paid on a monthly basis, shall exclude payments in excess of one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of such sum of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) which is prescribed above as the maximum annual earnings to be taken into account in calculating deposits and contributions on account of current service. 
(Ord. No. 283, 11-19-62; Ord. No. 72-469, § 1, 6-5-72; Code 1958, § 17-5.1)  
Sec. 74-60. - Additional municipal contributions to annuity reserve; antecedent service credit and prior service credit for employees. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1975, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement, a sum that is two hundred (200) percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and such sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality current accumulation fund. 
(b)  Each person who is an employee of the city on December 31, 1974 and who is at that date a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be allowed, and, upon the terms and conditions prescribed by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h, § XVI, as amended by chapter 371, Acts Regular Session, 61st Legislature (now repealed), is hereby granted, effective on the date last abovementioned, "antecedent service credit" (as that term is defined in such act) calculated on the basis of one hundred (100) percent of each current service deposit actually made by such person with the Texas Municipal Retirement System during each month of current service performed for this city prior to January 1, 1975. 
(c)  Each person who is an employee of the city on December 31, 1974 and who at such date is a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System and who holds in such system an effective prior service certificate granted by reason of service performed for this city prior to its participation in such system, shall be allowed and is hereby granted (upon the terms and conditions prescribed by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h, § XV, as amended by chapter 371, Acts of the Regular Session, 61st Legislature) (now repealed), a special prior service credit in an amount equivalent to the accumulation at interest, as provided in such act, of a series of monthly payments of five (5) percent of the member's average prior service compensation for the number of months of prior service certified to in such member's prior service certificate. The special prior service credit provided for in this section shall be in addition to the prior service credit heretofore allowed such member. 
(d)  Any person who was employed by the city prior to December 31, 1974, whose membership in Texas Municipal Retirement System by reason of service has not terminated, and who on such date is absent from service in the employment of the city, shall be entitled to antecedent service credit and to special prior service credit in the amount (if any) he would have been allowed under subsections (a) and (b) of this section had he been in active service on such date, provided such person again becomes an employee of the city before termination of his membership in Texas Municipal Retirement System and within five (5) years from December 31, 1974, and provided such person thereupon continues as an employee of a participating department of the city for a period of five (5) consecutive years. 
(e)  New benefits are to become effective January 1, 1975. 
(Ord. No. 74-540, §§ 1—5, 10-7-74; Code 1958, § 17-5.2)  
Sec. 74-61. - Employees 50 years old with 25 years of service. 
Effective on January 1, 1975, any employee of the city who has attained the age of fifty (50) years, and who as an employee of this city has completed twenty-five (25) or more years of creditable service for which he is entitled to credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, and who has been a member of the system for one (1) year or more, shall be eligible for service retirement as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.102(b). Any such employee who shall have completed twenty (20) years or more of creditable service as an employee of the city shall continue as a member of Texas Municipal Retirement System despite subsequent absence from service for a period in excess of sixty (60) months, provided he does not withdraw his deposits during such absence, and shall be eligible to retirement upon and after attainment of the minimum age prescribed by the act abovementioned. 
(Ord. No. 75-541, § 1, 10-7-74; Code 1958, § 17-5.3)  
Sec. 74-62. - Initial allowance of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401 et seq., each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in such system in force and effect on January 1, 1976 by reason of service in the employment of the city, shall be and is hereby allowed updated service credit (as that term is defined in such act) in the amount that is one hundred (100) percent of the base updated service credit of the member, calculated as provided in such act. The updated service credit hereby allowed shall be in lieu of and in substitution for all prior service credits, special prior service credits, and antecedent service credits, if any, heretofore allowed such member by reason of service with the city. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of such act, the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(c)  Subject to approval of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service credits hereby granted shall be and become effective January 1, 1976. 
(Ord. No. 75-576, § 1, 11-17-75; Code 1958, § 17-5.4)  
Sec. 74-63. - Revised allowance of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401 et seq., each member of Texas Municipal Retirement System who on January 1, 1981, has creditable service in such system arising out of employment with the city prior to the first day of the year preceding the date last abovementioned shall be and is hereby granted an updated service credit (as that term is defined in such act) that is one hundred (100) percent of the base updated service credit of the member, calculated as provided in such act. 
(b)  The updated service credits granted in this section shall be effective from and after January 1, 1981, and shall be in lieu of and in substitution for all prior service credits and/or updated service credits previously allowed such member. 
(c)  The granting of updated service credits shall be conditioned upon and subject to approval by the board of trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the act governing such system. 
(Ord. No. 80-769, §§ 1, 3, 12-15-80; Code 1958, § 17-5.4.1)  
Sec. 74-64. - Authorization of updated service credits, 1982. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401—853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in such system in force and effect on January 1, 1982, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with such system, shall be and is hereby allowed updated service credit (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)) in an amount that is one hundred (100) percent of the base updated service credit of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-833, § 1; Code 1958, § 17-5.4.2)  
Sec. 74-65. - Authorization of updated service credits, 1983. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401—853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on January 1, 1983, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed updated service credit (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)) in an amount that is one hundred (100) percent of the base updated service credit of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-875, § 1, 11-1-82; Code 1958, § 17-5.4.3)  
Sec. 74-66. - Authorization of updated service credits, 1984. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401—853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in such system in force and effect on January 1, 1984, by reason of service in the employment of the city and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with such system, shall be and is hereby allowed updated service credit (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)) in an amount that is one hundred (100) percent of the base updated service of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1983, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-904, § 1, 11-21-83; Code 1958, § 17-5.4.4)  
Sec. 74-67. - Authorization of updated service credits, 1987. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401—853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in such system in force and effect on January 1, 1984, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with such system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)) in an amount that is one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service" of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with the city, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1983, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-1015, § 1, 8-4-86; Code 1958, § 17-5.4.5)  
Sec. 74-68. - Authorization of updated service credits, 1988. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401—853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in such system in force and effect on January 1, 1988, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with such system, shall be and is hereby allowed updated service credit (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)) in an amount that is one hundred (100) percent of the base updated service of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1987, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with and the subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-1057, § 1, 12-7-87; Code 1958, § 17-5.4.6)  
Sec. 74-69. - Authorization of updated service credits, 1990. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401—853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on January 1, 1990, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with such system, shall be and is hereby allowed updated service credit (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)) in an amount that is seventy (70) percent of the base updated service credit of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1990, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-1144, § 1, 12-3-90)  
Sec. 74-69.1. - Authorization of updated service credits, 2006. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS ACT"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said Section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-1820, § 1, 10-2-2006)  
Sec. 74-70. - Initial increases in annuities in effect. 
(a)  Pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h, § XVIII, as amended (now repealed) and subject to approval by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in such act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below specified in all monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System after January 1, 1976 to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service of such employee to this city, and in effect prior to the date last above mentioned. 
(b)  Each such monthly benefit for the month of January, 1976, and each month thereafter shall be increased by twenty (20) percent above the amount of the regular benefit (as distinguished from any supplemental or distributive benefit) in effect for the month of December, 1975. 
(Ord. No. 75-576, § 2, 11-17-75; Code 1958, § 17-5.5)  
Sec. 74-71. - Revised increases in annuities in effect. 
(a)  Pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h, § XVIII, as amended (now repealed), the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below specified in all monthly benefits payable by Texas Municipal Retirement System after January 1, 1981, to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service of such employees to this city, and in effect prior to the date last abovementioned. 
(b)  Each such monthly benefit for the month of January, 1981, and each month thereafter shall be increased by thirty (30) percent above the amount of the regular benefit (as distinguished from any supplemental or distributive benefit) in effect for the month of December, 1980. 
(c)  The granting of increases in annuities in effect as provided above shall be conditioned upon and subject to approval by the board of trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the act governing the system. 
(Ord. No. 80-769, §§ 2, 3, 12-15-80; Code 1958, § 17-5.5.1)  
Sec. 74-72. - Increase in retirement annuities, 1982. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in consumer price index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to December, 1980. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 81-833, § 2; Code 1958, § 17-5.5.2)  
Sec. 74-73. - Increase in retirement annuities, 1983. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to December 1981. 
(c)  An increase in annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation under this section does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 82-875, § 2, 11-1-82; Code 1958, § 17-5.5.3)  
Sec. 74-74. - Increase in retirement annuities, 1984. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to December 1982. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation under this section does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant in an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 83-904, § 2, 11-21-83; Code 1958, § 17-5.5.4)  
Sec. 74-75. - Increase in retirement annuities, 1987. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to December 1985. 
(c)  An increase in annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation under this section does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 86-1015, § 2, 8-4-86; Code 1958, § 17-5.5.5)  
Sec. 74-76. - Increase in retirement annuities, 1988. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to December 1986. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation under this section does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 87-1057, § 2, 12-7-87; Code 1958, § 17-5.5.6)  
Sec. 74-77. - Increase in retirement annuities, 1990. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to December 1989. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation under this section does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 90-1144, § 2, 12-3-90)  
Sec. 74-77.1. - Increase in retirement annuities, 2006. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 06-1820, § 2, 10-2-2006)  
Sec. 74-78. - Additional rights, credits and benefits. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 854.202(f), 854.204, 854.405, 854.406 and 854.410, the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System: 
(1)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least twenty-five (25) years of credited service in that system performed for one or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.202(f). 
(2)  If a member described in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.204(b), shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may, by written notice filed with the board of trustees of the system, elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable to the surviving spouse had the member lived and retired at that date under an optional annuity described by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.104(c)(1). 
(3)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom this section applies may, after filing a written application with the board of trustees, receive payment of the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. If the surviving spouse dies before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of the spouse. 
(4)  The rights, credits and benefits authorized by this section shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(5)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a standard occupational disability retirement annuity under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.408, or an optional occupational disability retirement annuity under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.410, upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to the board of trustees: 
a.  That the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; 
b.  That the disability is likely to be permanent; and 
c.  That the member should be retired. 
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.409. 
(6)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5) of this section are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.301 et seq. 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854.202 (g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act." The city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "system"): 
(1)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in the system performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(2)  Prior to adopting this subsection (b), the governing body of the city has: (1) prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at twenty (20) years of service; and (2) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code. 
(3)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this subsection (b) pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 87-1056, § 1, 12-7-87; Code 1958, § 17-5.5.7; Ord. No. 04-1759, § 1, 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 74-79. - Participation in supplemental death benefits fund. 
The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System beginning with the date such fund shall be made operational, for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 854.601 et seq., 855.314 and 855.502, for each of the city's employees who are members of such system, and for the purpose of providing post retirement death benefits as provided in such sections for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 77-642, § 1, 12-19-77; Code 1958, § 17-5.6)  
Sec. 74-80. - Plan provisions affecting participation of employees. 
(a)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department of this city and who is not already a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall become a member of the system as a condition of employment, provided such person is then under sixty (60) years of age. 
(b)  Any member, after one (1) year from the effective date of membership, shall be eligible for service retirement who has attained the age of fifty (50) years and has completed twenty-five (25) years of creditable service with this city or who has attained the age of sixty (60) years and has completed at least ten (10) years of creditable service with participating municipalities which have adopted the plan provisions of this section, or who has become eligible for service retirement under any other applicable provision of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. 
(c)  The membership of any member who has completed at least ten (10) years of creditable service with this city and other participating municipalities which have adopted the plan provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h, § XX (now repealed), shall not terminate because of absence from service. 
(d)  Any person who is an employee of a participating department of this city at the effective date of Ordinance No. 80-770, but who at the date of his employment was under sixty (60) years of age, but did not become a member of Texas Municipal Retirement System because he was then above the maximum age then prescribed by law for initial membership in the system, shall become a member of the system at the effective date of Ordinance No. 80-770, unless he has already become a member under other provisions of the governing act, and shall be allowed prior service credit for each month of creditable service performed for this city subsequent to the date such person was precluded from membership and prior to the effective date of his membership. Such prior service credit shall be calculated using the same percentage of the base prior service credit as was most recently used in calculating prior service credits or updated service credits in the system for current member employees of this city. 
(Ord. No. 80-770, § 1, 12-15-80; Code 1958, § 17-5.6.1)  
Sec. 74-81. - Supplemental disability benefits fund. 
(a)  The city, by its city council, hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city (as above defined) participate in and be covered by the supplemental disability benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.313; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in such fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the abovementioned departments participate in the supplemental disability benefits fund of such system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in such fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the supplemental benefits fund of such system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund. 
(d)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental disability benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings of the abovementioned employees of the city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, provided that the rate of contribution to such fund shall not exceed one-half (½) of one (1) percent of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under such fund. Such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 80-775, §§ 1—4, 2-2-81; Code 1958, § 17-5.6.2)  
Sec. 74-82. - Military service credit. 
(a)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.502, the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. "Eligible members," as used herein, shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.502(b) and 853.503, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by fifteen dollars ($15.00). The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 93-1258, § 1(17-5.5.8), 9-7-93)  
Sec. 74-83. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code tit. 8, § 853.305, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said § 853.305 provided that (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service, and (2) the service meets the requirements of said § 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under said § 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1445, § 1, 1-19-98)  
Chapter 77 - SEXUAL OFFENDERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2083, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2015, amended Ch. 77 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 77, §§ 77-1—77-4, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 06-1810, § 1, adopted May 1, 2006. 
 
Sec. 77-1. - Findings and intent. 
Repeat sex offenders, sex offenders that use physical violence and sex offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sex offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses and most sex offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sex offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. 
It is the intent of this chapter to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city preventing sex offenders from establishing residences near locations where children regularly gather. 
(Ord. No. 15-2083, § 1, 12-7-2015)  
Sec. 77-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Premises where children commonly gather means any public or private: 
(1)  Playground, school, video arcade facility, or youth center as those terms are defined in Ch. 481 of the Texas Health and Safety Code; 
(2)  Day care facility; 
(3)  Swimming pool; or 
(4)  Children's oriented eating establishments. 
Property owner means any property owner of record; any person, firm, or corporation who has contractual responsibility for the property; or any person, firm or corporation who has the legal right of possession of the property. 
Residence means a temporary or permanent place where a sex offender lives, lodges, resides, or stays as an overnight guest, or a place that a sex offender registers as his or her residence with the Texas Department of Public Safety under Texas Code of Criminal Procedure Ch. 62. 
Sex offender means a sex offender who is required to register under Ch. 62 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure due to a violation involving a victim who was less than seventeen (17) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 77-3. - Sex offenders residence location prohibition; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a sex offender to establish a residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any premises where children commonly gather. It shall be prima facie evidence that this chapter applies to a sex offender if the sex offender's record appears on the Texas Public Sex Offender Registry and the registry indicates that the victim was less than seventeen (17) years of age. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather. 
(c)  Exceptions. A sex offender residing within one thousand (1,000) feet of those places where children commonly gather does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The sex offender established the residence and complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to May 1, 2006. 
(2)  The sex offender was under the age of eighteen (18) when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The sex offender is under the age of eighteen (18). 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather that is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sex offender's residence was opened after the sex offender established the residence and after the sex offender complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
(5)  The sex offender provides adequate documentation showing that the information on the registry is incorrect and that, if corrected, this chapter would not apply to that person. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 77-4. - Property owner prohibitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any property owner to rent, sell, or allow a sex offender to live in any building, structure, manufactured home, or trailer with the knowledge that it will be used or is being used as a residence by any person prohibited from establishing such residence under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  It is prima facie evidence that the property owner knew that the building, structure, manufactured home, or trailer would be used or was being used as a residence of a sex offender if the Lake Jackson Police Department provided written notification to the person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 77-5. - Halloween. 
On October 30 and 31 of each year between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., a sex offender shall: 
(1)  Display a Lake Jackson Police Department issued sex offender residence sign on all accessible exterior doors of his or her residence; and 
(2)  Post a Lake Jackson Police Department issued sex offender residence sign in front of the sex offender's residence in a manner that makes the wording visible from the street. If the sex offender lives on a premises that does not face a street, such as an apartment, the sign shall be posted in a manner that the wording is clearly visible to the residents and visitors of the building in which the sex offender lives; and 
(3)  Turn off all exterior porch lights and refrain from displaying Halloween decorations. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Sec. 77-6. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of this chapter governs the public health of Lake Jackson residents. Therefore, upon conviction, any person, firm or corporation that violates this article shall be assessed a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(b)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this chapter and need not be proven. 
(Ord. No. 16-2091, § 1, 2-16-2016)  
Chapter 78 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, adopted May 21, 2007, amended chapter 78 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 78 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1958, §§ 17B-1, 17B-2, 17B-10—17B-12; Ord. No. 80-758, § 1, adopted October 20, 1980; Ord. No. 81-828, § 1, adopted December 21, 1981; Ord. No. 93-1261, § 1(17B-6(A)), adopted November 1, 1993; Ord. No. 96-1384, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 1, 1996; Ord. No. 02-1693, § 1, adopted June 3, 2002; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, adopted October 6, 2003, Ord. No. 04-1771, § 1, adopted February 7, 2005 and Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, January 2, 2007. 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of the beautification commission, § 2-209; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; electrical code generally, § 14-56 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; traffic signs and signals, § 98-56 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Highway beautification, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 4.01 et seq.; municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq.; regulation of outdoor signs, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6674v-3 et seq.; prohibited signs near intersections, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 36(c). 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animation means the movement or the optical illusion of movement of any part of the street graphic structure, design, or pictorial segment, including the movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity; the automatic changing of all or an part of the facing of a street graphic. 
Area means the total area of the face that is used to display a street graphic, not including its supporting poles or structures. If a street graphic has two (2) faces that are parallel and supported by the same poles or structures, only one face is counted. If a street graphic has two (2) or more faces that are supported by the same poles or structures but are not parallel, the area of the street graphic is the total area of all faces. 
Awning means a cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that either is permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. 
Balloons. See "Spinners and pennants." 
Banner means a street graphic, composed primarily of cloth, paper, fabric or other similar non-rigid material, other than a flag, spinner or pennant, which is attached or mounted to a building, pole, pylon, or other device or fixture for the purpose of advertising a business, product, or service. Banners include, but are not limited to, teardrop, blade, pole and feather banners. 
Bare-bulb means any exposed light source other than neon tube illumination. 
Business site means any church, school, or business located in B, C, or M zoning districts. 
Canopy means a roofed structure projecting from and supported by a building when such covered structure extends beyond the building structure or property lines as, for example, in the downtown portion of the city. 
Canopy sign means any street graphic attached to or hung from a canopy or awning. 
Election means the election date set forth in V.T.C.A., Election Code Ch. 41. Election does not mean the early voting period set forth in V.T.C.A., Election Code Ch. 85. 
Electronic message center means a sign or portion of a sign which uses illumination to form messages, words, letters, symbols or figures. 
External illumination means illumination of a street graphic that is affected by an artificial source of light not contained within the sign itself. 
Flag (governmental) means a piece of cloth, plastic, vinyl, canvas, leather, or other similar material that typically has the shape of a square or an oblong rectangle, is attached on one (1) edge to a halyard, and is used as a symbol of a nation, state, political subdivision, or other governmental entity. 
Flag (private) means a piece of cloth, plastic, vinyl, canvas, leather, or other similar material that is secured or attached on one (1) edge to a halyard, and attracts attention to a business, product, service, or non-governmental activity. 
Flashing illumination means illumination in which the artificial source of light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times. 
Freestanding or ground-mounted sign means any permanent or temporary sign or standard which is not attached to a building and on which messages, advertising names, etc., are displayed. 
Indirect illumination means a light source not visible to persons viewing the sign. 
Internal illumination means a light source that is concealed or contained within the street graphic and becomes visible in darkness through a translucent surface. 
Monument sign means a ground graphic permanently affixed to the ground at its base, supported entirely by a base structure. 
Marquee or change-panel sign means a sign specifically designed for periodic changes in its advertising message, for example, a theatre marquee. 
Multiple business site means a development in a B, C, or M zoning district consisting of a building or group of contiguous buildings containing two (2) or more businesses or offices, such as a strip center, shopping center or office building. 
Neon tube illumination means a source of light for externally lit street graphics supplied by a neon tube that is bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes. 
Nonconforming street graphic means a street graphic that was lawfully constructed or installed prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter and was in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter then in effect, but which does not presently comply with this chapter. 
Off-premises sign means a sign displaying advertising or information that refers to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
Pennants. See "Spinners and pennants." 
Pole banner means a street graphic that is painted or otherwise permanently affixed upon cloth or other flexible material and which is vertically mounted on or hung from a single light pole. 
Pole sign means a freestanding sign that is permanently attached to the ground and is supported by a pole or structure of poles, uprights, or braces. 
Portable graphic means a street graphic not permanently attached to the ground or a building or designed to be permanently attached to the ground or a building. 
Projecting sign means any permanent or temporary sign or graphic that is attached to a building and extends or projects in some direction more than twelve (12) inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
Roof sign means any sign or graphic which is painted, drawn, written or mounted on the roof of a building and extends above or outside the front orthographic projection of the roof line. 
Snipe sign means any sized sign, generally of a temporary nature, placed in a public or utility right-of-way. 
Spinners and pennants means any display or attention-seeking device that spins, flutters or waves and is not a flag or banner. This definition includes, but is not limited to, balloons, inflatables, sign waving machines, and robot sign wavers. 
Street graphic or sign means any letter, number, symbol, figure, character, mark, plane, design pictorial, stroke, stripe, trademark or combination of these which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, which can be seen from the right-of-way of a public street or highway, intended to attract the attention of people in the public right-of-way. 
Temporary events means events that last for a specified period of time, such as religious or cultural celebrations, elections, Independence Day, births, etc. 
Vehicle means a device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property. 
Vehicle sign means a sign attached, painted, or placed on or in a vehicle, trailer, skid, or similar mobile structure, excluding bumper stickers and state required registration or inspection stickers. 
Wall sign means any permanent sign that is placed on the front, side or rear wall of a building whether such sign is separate and mounted on the wall or is painted, drawn or written on the wall. 
Works of art means a sculpture, painting, or similar object presenting artistic, historic or nostalgic images or themes. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 12-1980, § 1, 1-17-2012; Ord. No. 13-2005, § 1, 2-4-2031; Ord. No. 14-2031, § 1, 2-3-2014; Ord. No. 17-2133, § 1, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 17-2137, § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 18-2156, § 1, 3-5-2018)  
Sec. 78-2. - Objective. 
(a)  The objective of this chapter is to establish requirements for the placement, installation and maintenance of commercial and personal signs, in order to preserve and protect the health, safety, welfare and general well-being of the community's citizens. As the regulation of the placement, construction and maintenance of buildings and structures through zoning is a valid use of the police power, so too is the regulation of the placement, installation and maintenance of signs since such signs in the literal sense must ordinarily be considered structures, and in a practical sense are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by buildings. 
(b)  The regulation of the placement, installation and maintenance of signs is further justified by the sign's innate scheme and primary purpose to draw mental attention to its content, potentially to the detriment of sound driving practices and the safety of the motoring public to whom a majority of signs are oriented. Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to regulate the size and location of commercial and personal street signs such that their purpose can be served without unduly interfering with motorists and causing unsafe conditions. 
(c)  Finally, it is the objective of this chapter to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the community by regulating the placement, installation and maintenance of street signs. The fact that such graphics are intended to command visual contact recognizes that the signs are important in determining the overall aesthetic quality of the community. 
(d)  The aesthetic impact of commercial and personal signs is an economic fact which may bear heavily upon the enjoyment and value of property; therefore the regulation of the signs is validly justified on the basis of conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. It is contended that it is not irrational for a community's citizens to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized. 
(e)  With this purpose in mind, it is the intention of this section to authorize the use of graphics which are: 
(1)  Compatible with their surroundings. 
(2)  Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain. 
(3)  Expressive of the identity of the individual proprietors or of the community as a whole. 
(4)  Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 78-3. - Violation and penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 78-4. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager or an official designated by the city manager shall be the enforcing official. The enforcing official is charged with the duty of administering the provisions of this chapter and securing compliance therewith. 
(b)  Whenever the enforcing official determines that a violation of this chapter exists, and the violation occurs on private property, he shall give written notice of the violation to the occupant and the owner shown on the most recent tax roll of the city indicating the nature of the violation, and a statement showing the amount of time required to bring the sign into compliance, said time not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(1)  Service of the written notice required by this chapter shall be deemed complete if personally delivered to the person required to be served or if upon sending same by certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of such person and by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(2)  If written notice is not complied with within the time specified in the notice, the enforcing official shall use all available means of enforcement including injunctive relief in order to secure compliance with the provisions of this chapter as well as to secure punishment for its violation. 
(3)  The notice period prescribed in this procedure is for the purpose of allowing the owner a reasonable period of time to correct a violation. The notice period prescribed does not limit the city's ability to seek penalties from the first day the violation exists as prescribed in section 78-3. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the building official may cause any sign which is dangerous to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
(d)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this Code, or whenever the enforcing official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon any premises any condition or violation of this Code which make the building, sign or sign structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the enforcing official shall have the authority to enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform the duties imposed upon the enforcing official by this Code. 
(1)  If entry is refused, the enforcing official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  An application for a permit shall be considered as permission from the enforcing official to inspect the premises. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the enforcing official in the discharge of their duties under this Code. 
(f)  Upon notice from the enforcing, work on any sign or sign structure that is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work or causing such work to be done. Where an emergency exists, the enforcing official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Such work shall not resume until authorized by the enforcing official to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 78-5. - Appeals. 
The city council has the following powers and duties under this chapter: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of the city in enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  To authorize variances from the terms of this chapter when such variance is not contrary to the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 78-5.1. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Application. Application for a variance shall be submitted to the city manager. 
(1)  The application must: 
a.  State the reason the variance is needed; 
b.  Contain a site plan that includes the location of the sign, the placement of structures on the property and on adjacent property, and all setbacks; and 
c.  Contain a diagram of the sign that includes the proposed shape, size, height and placement of the sign. 
(2)  A nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged for the application. 
(b)  Public hearing. Within thirty (30) days after the application is filed, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application. At least ten (10) days before the public hearing, all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the sign shall be located shall be notified in writing of the public hearing. 
(c)  Action on application. After the public hearing, the city council can approve the application as submitted, approve the application subject to modification, or deny the application. If city council does not act on the application within thirty (30) days of the public hearing, the application is automatically denied. 
(d)  Variances allowed. The city council may only grant a variance to the 
(1)  Height of the sign; 
(2)  Size of the sign; 
(3)  Shape of the sign; and/or 
(4)  Placement of the sign. 
(e)  Criteria for approval for new sign. In order for the city council to grant a variance, the applicant must show that: 
(1)  There are unique circumstances or conditions on the lot or on adjacent lots that would cause the sign without the variance to be hidden or obscured from a person's field of vision when in a motor vehicle approaching and/or passing the street frontage where the sign will be located; 
(2)  The unique circumstances were not created by the applicant; 
(3)  The granting of the variance will comport with the purpose of this chapter and will not be materially detrimental to the adjacent property, surrounding area, or to the public in general; and 
(4)  The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to afford relief. 
(f)  Criteria for approval for damaged sign. In order for the city council to grant a variance for a damaged sign, the applicant must show that: 
(1)  The sign was damaged due to an event that caused the mayor to proclaim a local state of disaster. 
(g)  Variances for damaged signs automatically expire within one (1) year from the date the city council terminates the applicable local state of disaster. If a sign is not repaired within that one-year time frame, the sign must meet the requirements in this chapter. 
(h)  Prior installation. The applicant cannot install the sign prior to obtaining the variance. If the sign is installed prior to the public hearing, the applicant must remove the sign before city council may hold the public hearing and act on the application. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 09-1905, § 1, 5-4-2009)  
Sec. 78-6. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for all signs to be erected within the city with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Residential signs, other than temporary or permanent subdivision signs. 
(2)  Contractor signs. 
(3)  Memorial signs. 
(4)  Signs inside buildings. 
(5)  Signs listed in section 78-11(1)—(8) and (10). 
(6)  For sale or lease signs complying with [section] 78-10(7). 
(7)  Pole banners. 
(b)  All signs having illumination shall require an electrical permit in addition to a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 09-1911, § 1, 9-21-2009; Ord. No. 13-2005, § 2, 2-4-2013)  
Sec. 78-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2172, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2018, repealed § 78-7, which pertained to fees and derived from Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, adopted May 21, 2007.  
Sec. 78-8. - Display regulations—Generally. 
(a)  All signs, including vehicle signs where the primary use of the vehicle is to provide a base for the sign or constitute the sign itself, must relate to the present use of the premises upon which they are located. 
(b)  All signs, where applicable, shall meet the standards of the city building codes. 
(c)  Signs shall be prohibited on the staff end of flag shaped lots unless the staff is a driveway that is at least thirty (30) feet wide and allows vehicular access to the principle portion of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 12-1980, § 2, 1-17-2012; Ord. No. 17-2136, § 2, 7-17-2017)  
Sec. 78-9. - Same—Residential areas. 
(a)  In general. 
(1)  All signs prohibited in section 78-13 are also prohibited in residential areas, with the exception of spinners and pennants. 
(2)  Signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches by forty-eight (48) inches. For properties with duplexes or four-plexes, each residential unit may have a sign that does not exceed twenty-four (24) inches by forty-eight (48) inches. The signs may not be located in a side yard and shall not be located farther from the house than the approximate center of the front yard. 
(3)  Signs cannot be placed on a utility pole, street light, traffic sign, or similar object. 
(4)  Off-premise (commercial) signs are prohibited. All signs must pertain to the property or to the persons residing in the house that is located on the property. A contractor that is performing work on the property may place one (1) sign on the property if the contractor obtains permission from the building official. 
(5)  The house occupant or owner cannot accept a fee for posting or maintaining a sign. 
(6)  Signs may not be illuminated or emit sounds. 
(7)  A business that is being advertised on an off-premise sign will receive one (1) phone call or other notice to remove the sign or to contact the building official for permission to temporarily place a sign in a residential area. After this initial notice, any inappropriately placed signs will be removed and held for fourteen (14) days. If the signs are not claimed within the fourteen (14) days, the signs will be disposed of. 
(b)  Signs for temporary events. Signs displayed for temporary events, such as holidays and elections, are subject to subsection (a) with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Temporary signs, including related display items, may be larger than twenty-four (24) inches by forty-eight (48) inches. 
(2)  Temporary signs, and related display items, may be placed up to sixty (60) days prior to the event and remain up to seven (7) days after the event for which the signs are posted except for events such as garage sales and open houses. Signs for events such as garage sales and open houses may only be placed on the property on the days of the event. 
(3)  One (1) real estate sign may be located on a property that is being offered for sale or lease. The real estate sign does not need to be placed in the center of front yard, but it must be placed behind the sidewalk. 
(4)  Illumination and sound are allowed if the light and sound is not emitted into the interior of neighboring homes. 
(c)  Flagpoles. 
(1)  One (1) ground installed flagpole no more than twenty-five (25) feet in height per premises is allowed. The flagpole may not be located in a side yard and shall not be located farther from the house than the approximate center of the front yard. 
(2)  Temporary flags displayed for holidays or historical events, such as Flag Day or Independence Day may be placed at the edge of the property. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 16-2121, § 2, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 17-2137, § 2, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 18-2172, § 2, 12-2-2018)  
Sec. 78-9.1. - Same—Construction signs in commercial and development areas. 
(a)  During the construction and selling phase of a commercial development only one (1) temporary sign shall be permitted every two hundred (200) feet of frontage road to identify the commercial development and proposed owner, tenant, financing, etc. Spacing of signs cannot be closer than two hundred (200) feet to any other sign in the development. Such graphics shall be non-illuminated wall- or ground-mounted signs and shall be permitted on a temporary permit basis only for a maximum legal period of two (2) years. Such graphics shall be removed upon expiration of the two-year period or when development is complete, which ever is sooner. Six-month extensions can be requested by the developer/owner when satisfactory progress of the project will exceed the time allotted. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area nor ten (10) feet in height above the adjacent street's centerline, including structural material, for sites three (3) acres or less; and sixty-four (64) square feet nor ten (10) feet in height above the adjacent street's centerline, including structural materials for sites in excess of three (3) acres. 
(b)  When a commercial development is large and developed in phases, the permit may be renewed for each new phase. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 78-9.2. - Same—Multi-family areas. 
(a)  Signs. 
(1)  Signs shall only be in the form of monument or wall signs. 
(2)  The combined size of all signs may not be greater than one hundred (100) square feet. Each sign may not exceed a 4:1 height to width or width to height ratio. A maximum of twenty-four (24) inches in height of the base structural support shall not be counted toward the total area of a monument sign or the 4:1 ratio. 
(b)  Flags (private). No more than six (6) private flags may be displayed. 
(Ord. No. 17-2133, § 2, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 78-10. - Same—Business areas. 
(a)  Wall signs. Wall signs may not exceed a total of twenty (20) percent of the area of any building wall and may not project above the roof line. They may not interrupt major architectural features. Signs must be tastefully done so that they do not detract from abutting owners. 
(b)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs must be rigidly attached to the building, must be within the owner's property and must not constitute a hazard to the walking public. Such signs may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area nor exceed sixteen (16) feet in height or the height of the building, whichever is less. 
(c)  Roof signs. Roof signs shall be prohibited everywhere in the city. Roof signs on buildings that existed prior to June 1, 2007, shall be permitted to exist until the cost of repairing the sign is more than sixty (60) percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type. Except, a sign shall be removed not sooner than the first anniversary of the date that the business that the sign identifies or advertises ceases to operate on the premises on which the sign is located. Once a roof sign is removed from a premises, no new roof sign shall be permitted. 
(d)  Marquee or change-panel signs. The maximum area and height of marquee signs shall be consistent with other signs described in this chapter. 
(e)  Canopy signs. Signs on top of a canopy must be rigidly attached so as to remain in place under wind loads of one hundred twenty-five (125) miles per hour. Such signs may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area nor four (4) feet in height. 
(1)  Signs under a canopy may not exceed three (3) square feet (one (1) foot by three (3) feet) and must be at least seven and one-half (7½) feet above the walkway. 
(2)  Because of the peculiar circumstances in downtown Lake Jackson where canopies are on city property, this group of signs will be allowed to be outside the owner's property after the owner executes an encroachment agreement with the city and after the owner receives a permit. 
(f)  Area. The total area of all signs in subsections (b) through (e) of this section which are attached to a building shall be included in the total area allowed for wall signs in subsection (a) of this section. 
(g)  Freestanding and monument signs: 
(1)  Each sign shall meet the area requirements as stated in the Table of Basic Design Elements for Freestanding and Monument Signs (see below). A maximum of twenty-four (24) inches in height of the base structural support shall not be counted toward the total area of a monument sign. 
a.  Business sites that have lot lines within sixty (60) feet of single-family residential lot lines (affected lot) and that desire to install freestanding or ground-mounted signs, shall be limited to monument type signs. 
b.  The monument sign requirements of this section are not required when the sign is not visible from any affected lot and the sign and any affected lot are not visible simultaneously from any point along the public roadways. 
(2)  Business sites, except as noted below, shall be limited to one (1) freestanding sign. 
(3)  Multiple business sites (not located in B-1 Zones) of three (3) acres or more that have frontage of three hundred (300) feet or more on SH332/288 shall be allowed a maximum of three (3) freestanding signs. The total area of all signs shall not exceed the maximum area for a single freestanding sign as stated in the Table of Basic Design Elements for Freestanding and Monument Signs. Only one (1) of the freestanding signs may exceed a height of ten (10) feet. 
(4)  Multiple business sites (not located in B-1 zones) of eight (8) acres or more shall be allowed a maximum of two (2) freestanding signs. Each sign shall meet the area and height requirements as stated above. 
Multiple business site signs are intended to display the name of the center. Such signs may use two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the allowed area for a marquee or change panel. Signs may be internally or indirectly lighted. The allowable area may be subdivided to form a "directory" of stores within the center. Multiple business site signs must have a minimum of twenty-four (24) square feet landscaped base and be in good proportions. 
(5)  Developers or owners of business sites (not located in B-1 zones) of twenty (20) acres or more shall be allowed to present an alternate signage plan to the planning commission. The planning commission shall then send a recommendation to city council on the number of signs in the alternate signage plan and the design, location, size, height and material composition of each of the proposed signs in the plan. Council may approve or disapprove the alternate signage plan or it may approve the alternate signage plan with modifications. 
(6)  Wrapping of structural supports is required for all freestanding signs. 
a.  All structural supports shall have coverings that collectively total at least fifty (50) percent of the width of the sign at its widest point. 
b.  The width of the covering shall be symmetrical for all supports (see Figure 1). 
c.  In all circumstances, the covering shall extend from four (4) inches above the ground to the base of the sign face. 
d.  The following material shall not be used for covering structural supports: 
1.  Wood skirting, plywood, or fiberboard. 
2.  Sheet metal of less than twenty-four (24) gauge. 
3.  Aluminum of less than .063 inches. 
e.  Council may grant a variance to the wrapping requirement if the structural supports show a unique, exceptional, and innovative design and if there is visual harmony between the supports and the building site. 
1.  The application for a structural support variance must contain: 
i.  A site plan that shows where the sign will be placed; and 
ii.  A color graphic of the sign that shows how the supports comply with the above listed requirements. 
2.  The variance procedure listed in section 78-5.1 will be followed. 
(7)  Sale or lease of commercial property. 
a.  A sign indicating the property or part of the property is for sale or lease may be displayed on the property. 
b.  Signs under this subsection shall not be in banner form unless they comply with section 78-10.5. 
c.  Signs under this subsection cannot exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(8)  All signs must be on private property and not overhang the property line of the owners. 
 
City of Lake Jackson 
Table of Basic Design Elements for Freestanding and Monument Signs 
B-1, B-1A, B-2, B-3, C-1, C-2, M-1 and M-2 
SH 332/SH 288 
	SMALL < 9,999 S.F. 	LARGE 10,000 + S.F. 
MPH 	Max Size (SF) 	Max Height (FT) 	Max Size (SF) 	Max Height (FT) 
35 	65 	18 	98 	18 
40 	85 	20 	128 	20 
45 	108 	22 	162 	22 
50 	133 	22 	200 	22 
55 	161 	24 	242 	24 
60 	192 	35 	289 	35 
All Other Roadways 
MPH 	Max Size (SF) 	Max Height (FT) 	Multi Tenant 
20 	21 	14 	Max Size (SF) 	Max Height (FT) 
30 	64 	16 	100 	16 
35 	64 	16 	100 	16 
40 	64 	16 	100 	16 
45 	81 	16 	100 	16 
50+ 	100 	18 	100 	18 
 
(h)  Pole banners. 
(1)  Specifications (See Figure 2). Pole banners shall: 
a.  Not exceed eight (8) square feet in size; 
b.  Not project more than three (3) feet from the edge of the pole, including brackets and ornamentation; 
c.  Have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the base of the pole and four (4) inches of clearance from the pole; and 
d.  Not overhang or encroach on any portion of the right-of-way. 
(2)  Appearance. 
a.  No more than one (1) banner shall be allowed per pole. 
b.  The pole banners may only be attached to privately owned poles located on private property. 
c.  The pole banner must be supported by a top and bottom bracket. 
d.  The pole banners shall be made of fabric or other flexible material that is durable in common weather conditions such as summer sun and high winds. 
e.  Pole banners shall be uniform in color, height, and size and the poles and sign supports shall be uniform in design and appearance. 
f.  Pole banners shall not be lit. 
(3)  Maintenance. Pole banners shall be maintained in good condition. The following circumstances violate this subsection: 
a.  Perimeter frayed; 
b.  Fabric ripped or torn; 
c.  Stitching loose; 
d.  Fabric faded to the degree that the content of the sign cannot be easily recognized by passing motorists or pedestrians; 
e.  Banner partially disconnected from its support; or 
f.  Frame or supports rusted. 
(4)  Pole banners shall not be included when computing any size or time limitations otherwise regulated in this chapter. 
(5)  Pole banners shall not obstruct or shield the light produced by the light standard. 
 
(i)  Flags (private). One (1) private flag may be flown at the main entrance of a business site. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 08-1894, § 1, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-1911, § 2, 9-21-2009; Ord. No. 12-1986, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 12-1995, § 1 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 13-2005, § 3, 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 14-2059, § 1, 11-3-2014; Ord. No. 17-2133, §§ 3, 8, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 78-10.5. - Banners—Business areas and multifamily entities. 
(a)  The city council may erect banners for the general benefit of the city as a whole. 
(b)  Businesses and multi-family entities may erect banners for a period not to exceed a cumulative total of sixty (60) days per calendar year. Banners may not be larger than fifty (50) square feet. 
(1)  This period of time may be extended with permission of city council for significant events that exceed the given time period. 
(c)  (1)  Business operators of single occupancy structures may display more than one (1) banner at a time. 
(2)  Business operators of multi-occupancy structures may only display one (1) banner per individual business at any one (1) time and the banners may only be attached to that business' storefront or to lease space area. 
(3)  Business operators of multi-occupancy structures may allow a tenant of the multi-occupancy structure to display a banner in front of the structure, rather than in front of the tenant's storefront or lease space area. However, the tenant's banner will be counted towards the business operator's sixty-day limit. 
(4)  Multi-family entities may only attach banners to buildings or fences. 
(d)  Each separate banner shall require a separate permit and shall count separately toward the cumulative time period allowed per year. Therefore, if a business opens at the beginning of July, that business operator will have thirty (30) days left in the year to display a banner. If the operator displays two (2) banners at one (1) time, that operator will have fifteen (15) days per banner available for display. 
(e)  For buildings where a real estate sign must be in banner form due to the environment surrounding the building, a real estate banner may remain until ten (10) days after the building is leased or sold. 
(f)  If an extended event occurs in the city, such as road construction, and this event affects businesses in a particular area of town, the city council may give the city manager authority to issue thirty-day renewable banner permits to affected businesses. These banners shall not affect the sixty-day banner limit. 
(g)  If an unforeseen event occurs, such as a sinkhole, the city manager has the authority to issue thirty-day renewable banner permits to affected businesses. City council will review the city manager's decision at the next scheduled council meeting. These banners shall not affect the sixty-day banner limit. 
(h)  Affected businesses shall mean businesses whose store fronts are visually or physically obstructed due to the event or whose entrances are changed or diminished due to the event. 
(i)  All banners must be erected on the business' property. 
(j)  Banners must remain in good condition (not tattered, unanchored, faded, frayed, or unsightly). 
(k)  A permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 17-2133, § 4, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 78-11. - Street graphics—Permitted. 
The following types of graphics are allowed on business sites, but are subject to all other non-conflicting prohibitions provided by this chapter: 
(1)  Street graphics bearing only property numbers, street addresses, postal box numbers or names of occupants of the premises, with characters not exceeding ten (10) inches in height. 
(2)  Governmental flags, except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. 
(3)  Private flags, not more than six (6) in number, to draw attention to the main entrance of an apartment complex, hotel, church, nursing home, or home for the aged. Corporations may fly one (1) private flag at their main entrance. 
(4)  Legal notices and other signs or graphics of six (6) square feet or less, either publicly or privately owned, directing and guiding traffic and parking, but bearing no advertising matter. 
(5)  Christmas trees, other holiday displays and window displays of merchandise, except as specifically prohibited herein. 
(6)  Coin-operated vending machines, gasoline pumps, telephone booths and ice vending equipment. 
(7)  Election signs up to sixty (60) days prior to a primary, runoff or general election and up to seven (7) days after the primary, runoff or general election for which posted. Such signs like all other signs herein cannot have spinners or other prohibited attention-getting devices. 
(8)  Street graphics on athletic fields that are owned or maintained by the city with the city council approval. 
(9)  In B-3 zoning districts, temporary street graphics showing or displaying special activities, or events for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. 
a.  A no-fee permit from the city is required for such street graphics to be installed. 
b.  All street graphics must be made of safe materials and displayed in a safe manner. 
c.  No more than two (2) special event permits shall be issued for any one church, school, or other institution during any calendar year. Special event permits cannot be issued in a consecutive nature. A minimum 30-day interval must pass from the expiration of one special event permit to the issuance of another. 
d.  The street graphics shall not be illuminated or lit. There shall also be no lighting either on the street graphics or directed at the street graphics other than the lighting that is normally on the institution's grounds. 
(10)  [Reserved.] 
(11)  Works of art that do not contain a reference or image of products, goods or services of an existing business. Works of art must meet the standards of the building code. If the work of art uses illumination to form messages, words, letters, symbols or figures, it must meet the electronic message center standards in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 12-1984, § 1, 4-2-2012; Ord. No. 14-2031, § 2, 2-3-2014; Ord. No. 17-2133, §§ 5, 9, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 78-12. - Same—Compliance required. 
(a)  Street graphics or signs existing on January 1, 1981, except for those graphics and signs identified in subsections 78-13(2)—(13) shall not be required to conform with this chapter until the need for the street graphics or signs to be repaired meets the requirements of subsection (b). 
(b)  Any sign or street graphic installed prior to January 1, 1981, may not be repaired to such an extent that the repair cost exceeds sixty (60) percent of the replacement cost, unless such sign is brought into conformity with the terms of this chapter. The city manager or enforcing official shall, after issuing notice, have the power to abate signs that are not repairable. 
(c)  Any street graphic lying within a public right-of-way shall be removed immediately, unless its position in the right-of-way is permitted by a provision elsewhere within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 78-13. - Same—Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any of the following: 
(1)  Strip lighting used to outline a sign or street graphic or any part therein except during the Christmas season when they may be used for a maximum of forty (40) days. 
(2)  A street graphic that is a traffic or pedestrian hazard. No street graphic shall obstruct vision at any street intersection as provided in section 110-171. No sign or street graphic shall constitute a hazard to traffic by glare or method of illumination. No sign or other street graphic may use the words, "Stop," "Look," "Drive-in," "Danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character which would be a hazard within twenty-five (25) feet of public right-of-way or two hundred (200) feet of traffic-control devices, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Portable street graphics. 
(4)  Animated graphics. 
(5)  Bare bulb or unsteady illumination. Any illuminated sign which is not shielded and whose source of light is not steady, with the exception of time-temperature signs and electronic message centers. 
a.  Electronic message centers shall not utilize animation, chasing, flashing, or scintillation messages. Each message display shall remain lit a minimum of five (5) seconds. 
(6)  Spinners and pennants. 
(7)  Any privately owned street graphic that is placed on or extends over public property. 
(8)  Snipe signs. 
(9)  Off-premises signs, including vehicle signs where the primary use of the vehicle is to provide a base for the sign or constitute the sign itself. 
(10)  Lighted signs in residential zones or within sixty (60) feet of a residence. 
(11)  [Reserved.] 
(12)  Signs on any structure, tree, pole, curb or elsewhere within the right-of-way of any public street or upon any public property without the permission of the city council, with the exception of traffic, directional, and warning signs installed by a government agency. 
(13)  Signs that encroach into a public right-of-way unless an encroachment agreement has been executed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 07-1862, § 1, 8-20-2007; Ord. No. 09-1906, § 1, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 10-1947, § 1, 9-20-2010; Ord. No. 12-1980, § 3, 1-17-2012; Ord. No. 12-1999, § 1, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 14-2050, § 1, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 17-2133, §§ 6, 7, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 78-14. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Weeds shall be kept cut in front of, underneath and around the base of ground signs and other street graphics and no rubbish or debris shall be permitted so near thereto that the same shall constitute a fire hazard. 
(b)  Signs and other street graphics shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all hazards, such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose fastenings, and must be maintained at all times in such safe condition so as not to be detrimental to the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 07-1846, § 1, 5-21-2007)  
Chapter 82 - SOLID WASTE; CONDITION AND USE OF PREMISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Sanitary garbage disposal, § 3.07(o). 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of the beautification commission, § 2-209; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; refuse and garbage handling in mobile home park zone, § 58-58; subdivisions, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Municipal powers relating to public health, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 122.006; minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq.; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq.; litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Resource Recovery Financing Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 362.001 et seq.; municipal solid waste, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.001 et seq.; litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building materials means any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than three (3) cubic yards nor larger than four (4) cubic yards, made of solid metal construction with doors opening on top, and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically, by specially equipped truck. Containers shall be kept covered at all times. After June 15, 1981, all new bulk containers shall meet these specifications. 
Business trash means any waste accumulation of dust, paper and cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations, other than garbage or household trash, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices and similar businesses. 
Commercial establishment means any building or premises zoned B-1 neighborhood business through M-2 heavy industrial, including any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage or trash may be generated. 
Construction site means any location, lot, site or area in the city upon which building or construction is being performed. 
Detachable container means a unit varying in capacity between fifteen (15) cubic yards and forty (40) cubic yards which is used for collecting, storing or transporting building materials, business trash, industrial waste, hazardous refuse, refuse or yard trash. The unit may or may not use an auxiliary stationary packing mechanism for compaction of materials into the container and may be of the open or enclosed variety. The distinguishing feature of the detachable container is that it is picked up by a specially equipped truck and becomes an integral part of the truck for transporting the waste materials to the disposal site. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Heavy trash means normal household discarded furniture and appliances, oversize household trash, yard trash, and tree and shrubbery trimmings. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Junk shall include all worn out, worthless or discarded material in general, including but not limited to odds and ends, old iron or rusting metal, or glass, paper cordage, or other unsightly waste or discarded materials. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, waste materials, tree or shrubbery trimmings, paper, plastic, or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance. 
Loading and unloading area means any stream, river, or lakeside or land dock, space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities, and persons. 
Multiple residential unit means any duplex, apartment, group of apartments or condominium used for dwelling places of more than one (1) family. 
Portable packing unit means a metal container not exceeding four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds gross weight with a four- to six-cubic yard capacity that contains a packing mechanism and an internal or external power unit. 
Refuse means solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash, yard trash and business trash. 
Refuse bags means two-ply kraft paper bags meeting the standards set for refuse sacks by the Technical Association of Pulp and Paper Industry and polyethylene plastic bags meeting the standards set for trash bags by the Society of Plastic Engineers. Such containers shall be in good and serviceable condition and when full, capable of being safely handled by one worker. Paper or plastic bags shall be closed by a tight-sealing method of suitable type, such as drawstring, wire tie, or multiple folds. 
Refuse receptacle means a metal or plastic container for refuse, of substantial construction, with tightfitting lids, and provided with wheels and/or handles sufficient for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacles shall have a capacity of not less than ten (10) gallons nor more than thirty (30) gallons and shall be kept in serviceable condition at all times. Plastic containers shall meet standards set by the Society of Plastic Engineers. 
Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one (1) family. 
Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size. 
Tree and shrubbery trimmings means a waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery, or other usually created as refuse in the case of trees and bushes. 
Yard trash means waste accumulation of lawn, grass, shrubbery cuttings or clippings and dry leaf rakings, free of dirt, rocks, large branches and bulky or noncombustible material. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-2; Ord. No. 04-1740, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions pertaining to Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.003.  
Sec. 82-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the duty of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-38) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Enforcement of Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.221 et seq.  
Sec. 82-3. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  In case this chapter is violated by a business which is a corporation, the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation, shall be also severally liable for the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 83-907, § 7, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 88-1060, § 7, 1-18-88; Code 1958, § 10-39)  
Sec. 82-4. - Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Scatter refuse about or litter any public or private street or area or place. 
(2)  Cast, throw, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse or trash in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied or unoccupied premises within the city. 
(3)  Throw or deposit any refuse, trash or debris in any stream or body of water. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a nonresident of the city to throw, place, deposit, dispose of, or abandon any garbage, refuse or trash in any place within the corporate limits of the city, except at the city landfill or incinerator after obtaining the city's permission. This subsection shall not apply to persons contemplated by section 82-90(b), or to persons who are in the process of cleaning up a picnic area, park area or to those who are picking up litter found on the ground of the immediate area. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials within the city to transport same without suitable covers. This chapter shall not apply to the transportation of poultry or livestock or silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock nor to the transportation of yard trash by the homeowner. 
(d)  In addition to other remedies, any person arriving at the city landfill and operating an uncovered truck in violation of subsection (c) of this section shall be allowed access to the landfill only after being issued a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Ord. No. 82-872, § 1, 9-13-82; Code 1958, § 10-12) 
State Law reference— Litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq.  
Secs. 82-5—82-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONDITION AND USE OF PREMISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342. 
 
Sec. 82-31. - Responsibility of owners and agents. 
The owners or agents, tenants, or lessees of all residential units and commercial establishments shall be responsible for compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-27)  
Sec. 82-32. - Unlawful accumulation of garbage or refuse upon property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, discard, abandon, cause or allow any litter, foul odor, or potentially dangerous substances or devices on or to emanate from any property in the city, whether private or public. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-1)  
Sec. 82-33. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Sidewalks, alleys, rights-of-way. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a clean and litter-free manner, including sidewalks, grass strips, one-half (½) of alleys, curbs, or rights-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or streets. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of yard refuse, clippings or litter from any building or property. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-28)  
Sec. 82-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-1914, § 3, adopted Oct. 5, 2009, repealed § 82-34, which pertained to burning garbage, trash, rubbish and other materials, and derived from Ord. No. 163, § 1, 11-2-54; Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, §§ 9-1, 10-29. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 82-35. - Accumulation of garbage or refuse. 
Fermented, fermenting, putrid, putrefying, putrefied or odoriferous garbage, or garbage or refuse which shall have remained on the premises for more than seven (7) days is hereby declared to be a nuisance; provided, however, if the owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of the premises shall have complied with the provisions of this chapter and the presence of such refuse and garbage is due to the failure of the city or its authorized agents or employees to collect same, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessees shall not be considered as maintaining a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-30)  
Sec. 82-36. - Places where water may accumulate. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to permit or allow holes or places on such lot where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit same to remain. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-31)  
Sec. 82-37. - Accumulation of stagnant water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit it to remain. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-32) 
State Law reference— Municipal power concerning stagnant water and other unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001.  
Sec. 82-38. - Accumulation of carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building establishment, lot or yard in the city, to permit or allow any carrion, filth, or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-33) 
State Law reference— Municipal power concerning filth, carrion and other unwholesome matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.003.  
Sec. 82-39. - Accumulation of weeds, rubbish, brush, junk, or other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city, to allow weeds, rubbish, brush, junk or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter to accumulate or grow on such lot. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-34) 
State Law reference— Municipal power concerning weeds or other unsanitary matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.004.  
Sec. 82-40. - Notice to correct condition—Generally. 
Should the owner of any lot where stagnant water may accumulate and/or which are not properly drained, or of any premises or building where carrion, filth, or other impure or unwholesome matter may be, fail or refuse to drain such lot, or fail or refuse to remove such filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome matter within seven (7) days after a notice is given personally to the owner in writing, or by letter addressed to such owner at his address as given to the appraisal district. If personal service may not be had, or if the owner's address be not known, the city may obtain service by publication, one (1) time, in the official newspaper or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property that is in violation, after which the city may do such filling, drainage, or removal of filth, carrion, or other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter, or may cause same to be done and may pay therefore; and having done so, the city may then charge the expense incurred in doing such work (or in having such work done or improvements made) to the owner of such lot or lots or real estate. If such work is done or improvements made at the expense of the city, such expense shall be assessed on the real estate or lots upon which such expense was incurred. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-35; Ord. No. 03-1720, § 1, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003) 
State Law reference— Work or improvements by municipality, notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006.  
Sec. 82-41. - Same—Weeds, rubbish, junk, etc. 
Should any owner of any lot or lots where weeds, rubbish, brush, junk or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter grow or accumulate, fail and/or refuse to cut down and/or remove such weeds, rubbish, brush, junk or unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter, within seven (7) days after notice given personally to the owner in writing or by letter addressed to such owner at his address as given to the appraisal district. If personal service may not be had or if the owner's address be not known, the city may obtain service by publication, one (1) time, in the official newspaper or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property that is in violation, after which the city may do such cutting down and/or removing such weeds, rubbish, brush, junk or any other unsightly matter, or cause the same to be done and may pay therefore, and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work, or in having such work done or such improvements made, to the owner of such lot or lots or real estate. If such work is done or improvements made at the expense of the city then such expense or expenses shall be assessed on the real estate or lot upon which such expense was incurred. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-36; Ord. No. 03-1720, § 1, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003) 
State Law reference— Work or improvements by municipality, notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006.  
Sec. 82-42. - Lien for work or improvements, procedure for fixing. 
(a)  The mayor, city health officer or other city official designated by the mayor shall file with the county clerk a statement of such expenses incurred under sections 82-40 and/or 82-41, giving the amount of such expenses, the date on which such work was done or improvements made. The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which such work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007, which such lien shall be second only to tax liens or liens for street improvements; and said amount shall bear ten (10) percent interest from the date of payment of expenses by the city. 
(b)  Regarding such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city. 
(c)  The statement of expenses so made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-37)  
Secs. 82-43—82-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-66. - Receptacles and containers required. 
It shall be required of every person in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which building materials, business trash, garbage, industrial waste, and yard trash is accumulated or produced to provide and at all times to keep in a suitable place adequate and suitable receptacles and containers capable of holding all of such waste materials which would ordinarily accumulate between the times of successive collections. No refuse receptacles or containers shall be stored in front of a home or in front of the building line closest to the street. The department of public works is designated as the agency to determine the quantity and location of such receptacles and to determine whether such receptacles and containers are serviceable. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-3)  
Sec. 82-67. - Receptacles and containers to be safe. 
All receptacles and containers required under this article shall be of safe construction and design and shall be maintained in good and serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacles or containers which do not conform to the provisions of this article, or which have ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof or the public generally, shall be promptly replaced upon notice. If such container, after proper notice, has not been replaced, the department of public works shall have the authority to remove such container for the safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-4)  
Sec. 82-68. - Precollection practices. 
(a)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers. All containers shall be kept covered at all times with tightfitting covers. Heavy duty plastic or two-ply kraft paper bags are to be used to confine all refuse in conjunction with containers. Paper grocery sacks are not permitted. 
(b)  Garbage. All garbage being placed in refuse bags for collection shall have drained from it all free liquid. Refuse receptacles or garbage cans may be used to store garbage in before collection, but may not be placed at curbside for collection. Refuse bags shall be securely tied and placed out for collection no sooner than 5:00 a.m. the day of collection. 
(c)  Household trash. All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its deposit in a refuse bag. Household trash may be combined with garbage, but not combined with yard trash. Any items of household trash which are too large for a refuse bag, and cannot be reduced to a size which can be placed in a bag, may be placed out along with yard trash which is picked up on the individual's designated trash day. Items of this nature should be covered or secured in a manner so as to avoid unsightly litter conditions. 
(d)  Cardboard boxes and cartons. Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons and crates. 
(e)  Yard trash. Yard trash may be stored for collection in suitable receptacles and containers as described in this article. Grass clippings, leaves, and other such yard debris must be bagged in heavy-duty plastic or paper refuse bags. Small sticks or other material not suitable for placement in a refuse bag may be placed in a ten- to thirty-gallon garbage can. At no time should a garbage can be overloaded with materials which would not allow for safe lifting by one (1) worker. This material shall be collected on trash days, which are designated by the city. All trash is to be placed at the curbside. 
(f)  Tree and shrubbery trimmings. Tree and shrubbery trimmings placed for collection by the city shall be placed at curbside. No tree trunks, branches, limbs or shrubbery larger than four (4) inches in diameter or longer than five (5) feet shall be collected by the city. Tree and shrubbery limbs shall have protruding branches trimmed and must be neatly stacked and placed in an orderly manner at curbside. Unless such branches or limbs are of a size not be blown about and scattered by the elements, they shall be effectively tied so as to avoid wind-driven debris and unsightly litter conditions. Thorny vegetation shall be placed in trash containers. Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs, and trimmings cut by landscape or tree service contractors or other commercial workmen, or resulting from land being cleared shall not be collected by the city. 
(g)  Placement for collection. All accumulations of refuse and trash shall be stored or placed for collection in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash on any street, median strip, alley, sidewalk or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property, including his own except as stated herein. 
(2)  Blockage of storm drains and ditches. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles or containers on, upon or over any storm drain or ditch, or so close thereto as to be drawn by the elements into same. 
(3)  Unauthorized accumulations. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. 
(4)  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling except as specified under section 82-74(d) any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, or other item which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of ten (10) days after notice of violation of this section shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. This shall not apply to authorized junk dealers or establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment. 
(h)  Hazardous material and refuse. 
(1)  Refuse. No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection by the city nor shall the same be collected by the city. 
(2)  Dangerous trash items. All dangerous trash items and all waste material of an injurious nature such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, and television tubes shall be securely wrapped to prevent injury to the collection crews. 
(3)  Hypodermic instruments. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-5(a)—(g)(4), (h); Ord. No. 04-1740, § 2, 1-5-2004) 
Cross reference— Abandoned containers, § 62-4.  
Sec. 82-69. - Collection; compliance with regulations prerequisite. 
No garbage or refuse shall be collected from any premises if the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee shall fail to comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-6)  
Sec. 82-70. - Postcollection practices. 
(a)  The owner or resident shall be responsible for cleaning up around refuse receptacles after garbage is picked up. 
(b)  When garbage cans are used for trash pickup, such cans must be removed from the curbside by 12:00 midnight of the day of collection. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-7)  
Sec. 82-71. - Collection by city or private collector. 
(a)  The city shall collect and dispose of all garbage and refuse within the city with its own equipment and facilities, or the city may contract with any person or firm to provide for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse. Private companies may collect garbage and refuse only if they have received permission from the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, entity, firm, group, company or corporation, other than the current owner or lessor of the property on which the items are placed, to remove aluminum cans or other recyclable items that are placed by residents at the curb or the yard area of residences for recyclable pickup, unless the person, entity, firm, group, company or corporation has a refuse collection contract with the city or is instructed by the city to remove the items. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person, other than the current owner or lessor of the property on which the items are placed, to tamper with, search, sort or rummage through any receptacle or container that has been placed for collection in accordance with this article. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person, other than the current owner or lessor of the property on which the items are placed, to remove any solid waste from any receptacle or container that has been placed for collection in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-8; Ord. No. 95-1325, § 1, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 08-1879, § 1, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 82-72. - Fees authorized. 
The city council is hereby authorized to fix and establish by order or resolution fees to be assessed and collected from all premises and establishments in the city, and to fix the fees to be charged for dumping at the city's sanitary landfill. Such fees shall be based upon the type and kind of premises, the volume of garbage and refuse, or either. It shall not be required that such rates be uniform; provided the rates shall be uniform for all premises and establishments similarly situated and similarly classified, and for operators of vehicles of similar cargo capacity who request a permit to dump at the city landfill, or any subsequent definition fixed or enacted by the city council. Such garbage fees shall be collected by the city treasurer in such manner as the city council may by order or resolution authorize. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-10) 
Cross reference— Utility rates and charges, § 102-31 et seq.  
Sec. 82-73. - Transportation of refuse. 
All collectors of refuse who desire to haul over the streets of the city shall use a watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-11) 
State Law reference— Weight of vehicles transporting solid waste, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-19a.  
Sec. 82-74. - Special refuse disposal. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for city collection. 
(b)  Dead animals. Small dead animals will be collected by the city during operating hours of the city landfill, provided the body is in a location accessible to the collector. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(c)  Ashes. Ashes that are to be hauled by the city must have been wetted and cool to the touch prior to collection. Ashes shall be placed in suitable containers of such size and weight that they can be handled by one (1) worker. 
(d)  Collection of household furniture and appliances. The city shall collect normal household discarded furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators (with doors removed or chained shut), washers, dryers, hot water heaters, and similar items. Items for collection shall be placed at curbside. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-13; Ord. No. 04-1740, § 3, 1-5-2004) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10.  
Sec. 82-75. - Points of collection, residential. 
The department of public works shall have the authority to determine the proper receptacle or container location on private property. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-14)  
Sec. 82-76. - Residential collection practices. 
(a)  Garbage and household trash accumulated by residences shall be collected two (2) times each week at the curbs of such residences. Garbage and household trash shall not be placed out any sooner than 5:00 a.m. the day of collection. 
(b)  Heavy trash. Heavy trash shall be collected at least two (2) times per month at curbside on weeks designated by the city. Heavy trash shall be placed at curbside for collection no sooner than 5:00 a.m. on Saturday preceding the individual's regular heavy trash pickup week unless prior arrangements have been made for a special pickup. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-15; Ord. No. 04-1740, § 3, 1-5-2004)  
Secs. 82-77—82-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL REFUSE 
 
Sec. 82-86. - Commercial establishments. 
All commercial establishments shall store their refuse in containers so as to eliminate winddriven debris and litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization include refuse receptacles, bulk containers, and detachable containers. The number of containers necessary for each commercial establishment shall be as required to maintain a clean, neat, sanitary premises as directed by the department of public works. Spillage and overflow shall be immediately cleaned up when and as it occurs by such establishment. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-16)  
Sec. 82-87. - Commercial bulk container. 
Any commercial bulk container or business establishment that furnishes and maintains a bulk container suitable for handling by city equipment will be serviced by the city, provided that such container shall have been approved by the city for use in collection. All new bulk containers approved for service by the city shall be either portable packing units or bulk containers. Such containers and units shall at all times be kept in a place easily accessible to city equipment, and shall at all times be kept clean, neat, painted and in good state of repair. Service shall be discontinued to establishments failing to maintain containers and units appropriately. Establishments utilizing portable packing units or bulk containers shall be responsible for preparing such containers and units for service; no service shall be given those establishments permitting objects, obstructions, or vehicles to hinder in any way the servicing of the container or unit. Cleaning up spilled materials shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-17)  
Sec. 82-88. - Points of collection. 
Commercial refuse containers shall be placed for collection at ground level on the property and with access without the need for walking or carrying a refuse container over, under or around some yard or property obstacle. No refuse shall be collected where refuse containers cannot be reached by sanitation personnel without unlocking or opening a door, gate, or any similar obstacle, encountering a dog, or otherwise being denied reasonable access by parked vehicles, yard tools and equipment, or other similar objects. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-18)  
Sec. 82-89. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The number of containers necessary for each area shall be as required to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary premises as directed by the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-19)  
Sec. 82-90. - Parking lots. 
(a)  Obligation to furnish receptacles. All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles distributed within the parking area and along public walks. The department of public works shall have the authority to determine the number of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the manager of the parking lot to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material for pick up in an approved location. 
(b)  Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the obligation of all persons using parking areas to use such refuse receptacles or containers for the purposes intended. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dispose of, dump, scatter or throw upon any such parking lot, any litter, refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(c)  When dumping prohibited. No person shall deposit, dump, or discharge any garbage, refuse or offensive smelling objects in any commercial dumpster within the city without first having paid the commercial container (dumpster) lease fee to the city. This provision shall not apply to persons contemplated by subsection (b) of this section or to those who are picking up litter found on the ground of the immediate area. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Ord. No. 82-872, § 2, 9-13-82; Code 1958, § 10-20)  
Sec. 82-91. - Industrial waste. 
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed or disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant, or enterprise creating or causing same. Hazardous or liquid waste or highly combustible industrial waste or toxic waste or chemical waste shall not be disposed of in the city's landfill. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-21)  
Sec. 82-92. - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide an adequate number of on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials, and other trash produced by those working on the site. All such materials shall be containerized by the end of each day and the site shall be kept clean, orderly and free of litter and refuse at all times. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of construction or demolition shall be immediately removed by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 81-792, § 1, 6-15-81; Code 1958, § 10-22)  
Chapter 86 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to regulate the use of streets and other public places, § 2.01; powers of city council as to official map, streets, § 3.07(h), (p). 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; broken sidewalks, § 38-33; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 66; signs, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 90; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Street improvements, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1086 et seq.; enumerated powers of home rule municipalities, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175; condemnation for highways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1201 et seq.; municipal charges for use of streets, etc., V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 182.024 et seq.; street lighting system, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1221 et seq.; improvement districts in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 372.041. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Failure to comply. 
Should any person, being the owner, builder, broker or developer of property within the city limits, fail to comply with sections 86-2 through 86-5, the city shall have the right, after notice to the owner in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1105b, to install the required sidewalks and assess the cost of building the sidewalk against either the owner personally or against the property. 
(Ord. No. 77-611, § 2, 2-21-77; Code 1958, § 18-5)  
Sec. 86-2. - General responsibilities, specifications. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of any person, being the owner, builder or developer of residences, businesses, subdivisions or other buildings or developments, to construct all required streets and sidewalks in accordance with the specifications and provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All streets within the city shall have eight (8) inch pavement thickness and a reinforcement schedule as set out as follows: 
Concrete 
Thickness 	Reinforcement 
Bar Size 	Longitudinal Steel 	Transverse Steel 
				Free Span Joint Width 
		60' Exp. Joint 	40' Exp. Joint 	24'-44' 	44'-60' 
8? 	#4 (½?) 	18? O.C. 	24? O.C. 	24? O.C. 	18? O.C. 
 
(c)  Concrete used in constructing streets shall be a 5.5 sack/C.Y. cement batch mix design and reach a flexural modulus strength of five hundred fifty (550) psi in twenty-eight (28) days or as otherwise specified in the development of the city construction standards. 
(d)  All new streets within the city shall be curbed streets and shall have the required sized sidewalk on both sides of the street. The sidewalks shall be set typically back four (4) feet as is possible, or as otherwise directed by the council through the city engineer and parallel the street, and shall be constructed at the time specified by the planning commission. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner, builder or developer of residences within the city limits, to build or construct a residence, residential complex or other structure within the city limits unless at the time of such construction such owner, builder or developer constructs or causes to be constructed a concrete sidewalk four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick and placed along the street, street stub out, parkway or connecting street upon which such residence fronts or abuts. 
(f)  Concrete used in constructing sidewalks shall be 4.5 sack/C.Y. cement mix design and reach a flexural modulus rupture strength of four hundred fifty (450) psi in twenty-eight (28) days and shall be reinforced at a minimum with #3 ( 3/8 ) inch bars at twenty-four (24) inch on center each way. 
(Ord. No. 77-611, § 2, 2-21-77; Ord. No. 79-712, § 1, 9-17-79; Code 1958, § 18-1(a), (b), (d), (e); Ord. No. 03-1722, § 1, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 86-3. - Undeveloped or new areas, residential and commercial. 
(a)  The builder or developer of new subdivisions, housing developments or other new developments causing the street or streets to be developed shall provide the required sized sidewalk on both sides of the street or streets along the entire length of said street or streets at the time specified by the planning commission, and such sidewalk shall be set back four (4) feet from the curb and parallel the street. The term "entire length" shall include, but not be limited to, street corners, street stubouts, through parkways, connecting streets and the front, side and rear of properties. 
(1)  The builder of a house shall provide a sidewalk on the front and side of any property that parallels a street, including street corners, street stubouts and connecting streets. 
(2)  The developer of a subdivision or business development shall provide sidewalks on easements, parkways, street stubouts and the rear of any properties that parallel a street. 
(b)  In areas developed by individual lot owners, sidewalks shall be built by the individual owners along their entire property paralleling the street (including street corners, street stubouts or connecting streets, and the front and side of properties, but not the rear and not parkways) upon which such residence or business fronts or abuts at the time the building occurs, except in cases that may require continuity of sidewalks to assure safety, in which case blanks, skips or vacancies may be required to be filled by the owner before building takes place if the need is so determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 77-611, § 2, 2-21-77; Ord. No. 79-712, § 1, 9-17-79; Code 1958, §§ 18-1(c), 18-2)  
Sec. 86-4. - Developed areas, residential and commercial. 
(a)  Curbed streets. Where no sidewalks exist in developed areas that have curbed streets, the property owner may construct them himself, or the city may assess him for the cost of the sidewalk construction along the entire property paralleling or abutting any street, street corner, street stubout, through parkway or connecting street upon which his residence or business fronts or abuts at the following rates: 
(1)  Those who complied with Ordinances No. 182 and 77-611, fifty (50) percent front, twenty-five (25) percent side; 
(2)  Those who did not comply with Ordinance No. 182 or 77-611, one hundred (100) percent front and side. 
(b)  Uncurbed streets. No sidewalk is required for uncurbed streets. If the street becomes curbed, the property owner may be assessed for sidewalk construction at the rate of fifty (50) percent front, twenty-five (25) percent side. 
(Ord. No. 77-611, § 2, 2-21-77; Code 1958, § 18-3)  
Sec. 86-4.5. - Sidewalk waiver. 
The city council may waive the sidewalk requirements of subsections 86-2(e) and 86-3. In order to waive the requirements, council shall consider whether: 
(1)  The new building will be a single-family or two-family home; 
(2)  The building is being built on a vacant lot in an already developed subdivision; 
(3)  There are no sidewalks that are contiguous to the lot; and 
(4)  The street on which the building shall be built is scheduled to be rebuilt. 
(Ord. No. 14-2055, § 1, 10-6-2014)  
Sec. 86-5. - Commercial areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to have engaged in construction or to construct a business or other structure in a business, commercial or industrial zone without at the same time providing a concrete sidewalk along the entire property paralleling or abutting the street, street corner, street stubout, through parkway or connecting street upon which such business fronts or abuts. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be six (6) feet in width, four (4) inches thick. 
(Ord. No. 77-611, § 2, 2-21-77; Code 1958, § 18-4; Ord. No. 07-1859, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 86-6. - Prohibiting the scattering of litter items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter any litter including, but not limited to, paper (whether circulars, handbills, paper bags, wastepaper or wrapping paper), garbage, refuse, waste materials, tree or shrubbery trimmings, plastic, or any other discarded, used or consumed substance on any public street right-of-way or parkway in the city. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. Each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In case this section is violated by a business which is a corporation, the president, vice-president, secretary-treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation, shall be also severally liable for such penalties. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 3-19-62; Ord. No. 81-807, § 1, 7-20-81; Code 1958, §§ 18-10, 18-11) 
State Law reference— Litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq.  
Secs. 86-7—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driveway means a private way or private entrance/exit, and shall not be construed to include a public street authorized by the planning commission. 
Driveway approach means the portion of the driveway in the road right-of-way designed for and intended for vehicular access from the roadway to private property. 
Width means a linear measurement made parallel to the roadway at a point within the road right-of-way at least six (6) feet from the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 63-293, § 1, 7-1-63; Ord. No. 85-958, § 1, 1-21-85; Code 1958, § 18-6.1; Ord. No. 03-1710, § 1, 4-7-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-32. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. Each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense; in case this article is violated by a business which is a corporation, association, firm, partnership or other entity, the president, vice-president, secretary-treasurer of such business, or any manager, agent or employee of such business shall be also severally liable for such penalties. 
(Ord. No. 77-613, § 1, 1-17-77; Ord. No. 77-625, § 1, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 79-679, § 1, 1-15-79; Code 1958, § 18-6.4)  
Sec. 86-33. - Construction, curb cuts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner, builder or developer of residences within the city limits, to build or construct a driveway without first breaking out or constructing the curb connecting such driveway with the street in such a manner as to form an even ramp-like approach from the street level to the garage entrance. Such curb shall not be broken or constructed for a distance in excess of four (4) feet or less than two (2) feet outside of each side of such driveway at the curb. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-12-52; Code 1958, § 18-6)  
Sec. 86-34. - Driveway approach standards. 
(a)  The maximum width of a driveway approach serving a single-family residential lot shall be not more than twenty-seven (27) feet. 
(b)  A single-family residential lot may be served by multiple driveway approaches provided that the driveway approaches are separated by at least twenty-four (24) feet measured along the property line and the total width of the driveway approaches is thirty-six (36) feet or less. 
(Ord. No. 03-1710, § 1, 4-7-2003)  
Sec. 86-35. - Driveway approach permits. 
A building permit shall be required for all driveway approaches. If the permit is for driveway approaches only, the fee for such permit shall be twenty ($20.00) dollars. An approved inspection is required prior to the pouring of all driveway approaches. 
(Ord. No. 04-1766, § 1, 10-18-2004)  
Sec. 86-36. - Into Highway 332 prohibited. 
No permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential driveway leading onto Highway 332 within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner, builder or developer of property within the city limits and abutting Highway 332 to build or construct a residential driveway onto Highway 332. Construction of business driveways onto Highway 332 shall be granted by the planning commission with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 63-293, § 1, 7-1-63; Ord. No. 85-958, § 1, 1-21-85; Code 1958, § 18-6.1; Ord. No. 03-1710, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 04-1766, § 1, 10-18-2004)  
Sec. 86-37. - Leading onto Yaupon Street between Oyster Creek Drive and F.M. 2004 prohibited. 
No permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential driveway leading onto Yaupon Street between Oyster Creek Drive and F.M. 2004 within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner, builder or developer of property within the city limits and abutting Yaupon Street between Oyster Creek Drive and F.M. 2004, to build, channel, create by use, or construct a residential driveway leading onto Yaupon Street between Oyster Creek Drive and F.M. 2004. Construction of business driveways onto Yaupon Street shall be granted by the planning commission with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 77-613, § 1, 1-17-77; Ord. No. 85-958, § 2, 1-21-85; Code 1958, § 18-6.2; Ord. No. 03-1710, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 04-1766, § 1, 10-18-2004)  
Sec. 86-38. - Leading onto That Way Street between the Oyster Creek bridge and F.M. 2004 prohibited. 
No permit shall be issued for the construction of any driveway leading onto That Way Street between the Oyster Creek bridge and F.M. 2004 within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner, builder or developer of property within the city limits and abutting That Way Street between the Oyster Creek bridge and F.M. 2004 to build, channel, create by use or construct a driveway leading onto That Way Street between the Oyster Creek bridge and F.M. 2004. 
(Ord. No. 77-625, § 1, 6-20-77; Code 1958, § 18-6.2.1; Ord. No. 03-1710, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 04-1766, § 1, 10-18-2004)  
Sec. 86-39. - Residential driveways leading onto Plantation Drive south of Highway 332 prohibited. 
No permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential driveway leading onto Plantation Drive south of Highway 332 within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner, builder or developer of property within the city limits and abutting Plantation Drive south of Highway 332 to build, channel, create by use or construct a residential driveway leading onto Plantation Drive south of Highway 332. 
(Ord. No. 79-679, § 1, 1-15-79; Code 1958, § 18-6.2.2; Ord. No. 03-1710, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 04-1766, § 1, 10-18-2004)  
Sec. 86-40. - Leading onto Oak Drive between Highway 332 and Oyster Creek Drive prohibited. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for the construction of any driveway leading onto Oak Drive between Highway 332 and Oyster Creek Drive within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner, builder or developer of property within the city limits and abutting Oak Drive between Highway 332 and Oyster Creek Drive, to build or construct a driveway leading onto Oak Drive between Highway 332 and Oyster Creek Drive. 
(b)  Exception: City council may allow a driveway leading onto Oak Drive between Highway 332 and Oyster Creek Drive if: 
(1)  The driveway does not require or will not cause any damage or destruction of city parkway, park land, or green space. 
(2)  The driveway only allows traffic to enter from one (1) direction and leave from one (1) direction; 
(3)  The driveway does not require any changes to the medians on Oak Drive; and 
(4)  The owner, builder or developer shall pay for any cost of adjustments to existing utilities made necessary by the driveway installation. 
(Ord. No. 66-335, § 1, 6-6-66; Code 1958, § 18-6.3; Ord. No. 03-1710, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 04-1766, § 1, 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 14-2058, § 1, 11-3-2014)  
Secs. 86-41—86-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC PARK AND STREET USE PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 66. 
 
Sec. 86-61. - Statement of intent. 
It is the intent of the city that traditional public fora such as outdoor public parks and portions of certain streets be available to all persons, groups and the public generally on an equal access basis subject to such reasonable regulations as are necessary to assure the maximum lawful enjoyment and safe use of the facilities. All individuals, groups and entities are welcome to use city parks and portions of streets for peaceful assembly. 
(Ord. No. 93-1252, § 1(13B-1), 8-2-93)  
Sec. 86-62. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  All persons, groups and entities are welcome to use city parks and streets for any and all peaceful assembly that is not in conflict with the opinions of the U.S. Supreme Court. 
(b)  Because of the popularity of the use of city parks and streets, it is necessary for general enjoyment and safety to regulate and schedule their use for the maximum benefit of all concerned so as to eliminate conflict and maintain harmony of use. 
(Ord. No. 93-1252, § 1(13B-5), 8-2-93)  
Sec. 86-63. - Park use permits. 
(a)  Required. Groups, organizations, corporations, associations or other entities desiring to use the city parks for meetings, rallies or other purposes shall apply for a use permit to the director of the city parks and recreation department. It shall be unlawful to hold any group meetings, rallies or other group activity on city park property unless a permit for such event has been issued by the city parks and recreation department. 
(b)  Application. Application for use of a park for group meetings, rallies or other activities shall be made to the parks and recreation department at least seven (7) days prior to the event, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the event. 
(2)  The day and hour of the event. 
(3)  Location of the event. 
(4)  A reasonable and good-faith approximation of the number of persons expected to attend the event. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the persons sponsoring the event. 
(Ord. No. 93-1252, § 1(13B-6), 8-2-93)  
Sec. 86-64. - Park use fees. 
(a)  Rental use fees for the pavilions, facilities and other areas of the parks shall be formulated by the parks board and approved by city council to include rules on the leasing of the pavilions, facilities or other portions of the parks for more than one (1) day and the rates to be charged for the pavilions, facilities or portions of the parks. 
(b)  Rental use fees for the pavilions, facilities and other areas shall be posted by and available at the office of the director of parks and recreation. 
(c)  Any nonprofit event cosponsored by the city may have the use fee waived by the parks board. 
(Ord. No. 93-1252, § 1(13B-7), 8-2-93)  
Sec. 86-65. - Park admission fees. 
Charitable, political or nonprofit organizations may use city park facilities and charge a fee for an event such as a Rotary shrimp boil. However, it shall be unlawful for any person, group or entity to charge a public admission fee or event fee for entrance to a public park. 
(Ord. No. 93-1252, § 1(13B-4), 8-2-93)  
Sec. 86-66. - Parade permits. 
(a)  Required; application. The city welcomes the use of its streets for parades and rallies conducted in a peaceful and lawful manner after proper application for a parade permit has been made. However, it shall be unlawful to conduct a parade or rally on a city street unless the proper parade permit has been received. The application for a parade permit shall be submitted to the chief of police at least five (5) working days prior to the event and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade, the types of animals and a description of the vehicles. 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(12)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(b)  Compliance with parade regulations; alternatives. If the proposed rally or parade does not comply with rules and regulations for city parades, the chief of police may present alternative locations, times, routes or other conditions that will comply. The applicant can either accept the chief of police's changes or submit a new application at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event that does not comply with the issues raised by the chief of police. 
(c)  Issuance. Upon compliance with this section, a permit shall be issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 93-1252, § 1(13B-8), 8-2-93)  
Sec. 86-67. - Sound amplification. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, group or entity, while in a public park or on a public street or sidewalk, to amplify noise, music or speech to such a volume that it would disturb the sensibilities of a reasonable person residing in a surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  Nothing in this subsection shall apply to officers and employees of the city, the county, the state, or the federal government when the amplified sound is being used in the officer's official duty. 
(Ord. No. 93-1252, § 1(13B-1), 8-2-93; Ord. No. 15-2062, § 2, 2-3-2015)  
Sec. 86-68. - Attachment of symbols to city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group or entity to install, erect, affix or to attach (by whatever means) any religious symbols, on or to city property. Such forbidden symbols shall include those symbols of the Church of Satan and the satanic cult religions and atheism as well as each and every recognized world religion. Such symbols would include crosses, creches, Stars of David, the crescent and any similar symbol of a religion or cult. However, this does not prohibit persons, groups or entities from possessing or displaying these symbols while the persons, groups or entities are on city property as long as the symbols are not affixed or attached to city property. The city, in the spirit of neutrality, hereby expresses its intent never to endorse, advance, sponsor, inhibit or engage in the prohibition, promotion or establishment of religion or any religion in specific. 
(Ord. No. 93-1252, § 1(13B-3), 8-2-93)  
Sec. 86-69. - Penalty for article violations. 
Any person who violates this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 93-1253, § 2, 8-2-93)  
Secs. 86-70—86-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 86-75. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council of the City of Lake Jackson is enacting this article to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public and private property. The council is authorized to enact this article pursuant to its police powers, as specified in section 2.02 of the City Home Rule Charter and state law, to provide for the removal of graffiti from private and public property. 
The council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Unless the city acts to remove graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city. 
The city council intends, through the adoption of this article, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The council does not intend for this article to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state laws. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-76. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
Broad-tipped marker means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth (¼) of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble. 
Etching equipment means any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, signature, symbol, design, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, engraved on, or applied to or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property or real property improvement by any graffiti implement. 
Graffiti implement means a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Owner means any person with the legal right of possession to tangible property which includes, but is not limited to, the actual owner or his lessee. 
Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of an inch in width. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person. 
Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
Unauthorized means without the permission of the owner or person in control of property, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-77. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Defacement. V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.08 makes it an offense under state law to knowingly make markings with aerosol paint or an indelible marker. Accordingly, it shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly apply graffiti by any other method to any manmade surface, on any publicly owned or privately owned property within the City of Lake Jackson without the permission of the owner or occupant. 
(b)  Possession of graffiti implements. 
(1)  In designated public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement or aerosol paint container while in or upon any park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the city unless otherwise authorized by the city, or while on private commercial property after business hours, unless authorized by the business. 
(2)  In designated specific places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement or aerosol paint container while in or upon any private property that has been condemned or been abandoned, without the prior written consent of the owner of such private property. 
(3)  By minors at or near school facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement or aerosol paint container while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, without the consent of school officials. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession of graffiti implements by a minor attending or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a class at the school that formally requires the possession of graffiti implements. It shall be a complete defense in any prosecution for violation of this section that the minor student was required by the school to possess a graffiti implement. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-78. - Responsibility of parent or guardian for graffiti created by minor. 
(a)  Permitting or allowing minor to create graffiti. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence permits the minor to create graffiti on tangible property in the city without the property owner's consent. 
(b)  [Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-79. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fines. Any person violating this article shall be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense and each subsequent offense. 
(1)  In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for payment of all fines. 
(2)  Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's property that includes the fine and administrative costs. 
(3)  Upon any application and finding of indigence, the court may decline to order fines against the minor, parents or guardian. 
(b)  Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the court may order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severally liable with the minor to make the restitution. 
(c)  Community service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in this section, a minor or adult may be required to perform community service as described by the court based on the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  The minor or adult shall perform at least thirty (30) hours of community service. 
(2)  At least one (1) parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance at a minimum of ten (10) percent of the period of the assigned community service. 
(3)  The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police. 
(4)  Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that involves graffiti removal. 
(5)  Any minor determined to be a ward of the court under Texas law as a result of committing an offense in the city shall be required, at the city's option, to perform community service, including graffiti removal service of not less than thirty (30) hours nor more than forty (40) hours. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-80. - Rewards and reimbursements for information. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to offer a reward up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for information leading to the identification and apprehension of any person who willfully damages or destroys any public or private property by the use of graffiti. In the event of damage to public property, the offender or the parents or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor must reimburse the city for any reward paid. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it shall deem appropriate. 
(b)  Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city manager. 
(c)  No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-81. - Graffiti as nuisance. 
(a)  The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this article is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this article. 
(b)  It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-82. - Removal of graffiti by perpetrator. 
Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the chief of police, the director of the department of public works, or any additional city department head, as authorized by the city council. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this article. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-83. - Removal of graffiti by property owner or city. 
If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to section 86-82, graffiti shall be removed pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  Property owner's responsibility. 
a.  It shall be the responsibility of any person who is the owner of property or who has primary responsibility for control or for repair or maintenance of property in the city to remove graffiti from any public property or right-of-way or from any private property under his control that becomes defaced with graffiti visible from the right-of-way or visible from any private property, other than the property that is defaced with graffiti, and remains defaced with graffiti for a period of forty-eight (48) hours after receipt of notification from the city that graffiti is present and must be removed. 
b.  Unless findings are adduced in court under subsection (2) below that the alleged graffiti is not a nuisance or violation of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner of property or who has primary responsibility for control or for repair and maintenance on the property to permit property that is visible from any public property or right-of-way or from any private property, other than the property that is defaced with graffiti, to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of forty-eight (48) hours after receipt of notification from the city that graffiti is present and must be removed. 
(2)  Right of city to remove. 
a.  Use of public funds. Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasipublic place, the city shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the graffiti after obtaining consent from the property owner, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city manager, or the designee of the city manager, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. 
b.  Right of entry on private property. Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city for the purpose of graffiti removal the city shall secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the city from liability for property damage or personal injury. If the property owner or responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the forty-eight (48) hours specified by this subsection (a) above, and if the city has requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party has provided consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city and consistent with the terms of this section, the city shall be authorized to remove the graffiti and institute cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal against the property owner as well as the perpetrator. 
c.  If, within forty-eight (48) hours after receipt of notification from the city that graffiti is present and must be removed, under subsection (a) above, the property owner does not remove or consent to the removal of the graffiti, then the city may file an action in municipal court to declare the graffiti to be a public nuisance and at a hearing in the court on the matter, ask that the court order an abatement of the graffiti, and that the court grant the authority for the city to remove the graffiti and institute cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal against the property owner as well as the perpetrator. The property owner shall not be required to pay for the removal if the property owner or person responsible for the property can demonstrate that the property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to remove the graffiti. 
(3)  City liability. The city or its employees shall not be liable for any aspect of the work performed by the city, its employees or by volunteers, pursuant to this section, nor shall the city or its employees be liable for the conduct of any person performing work, pursuant to this section or for any accident, mishap or misfortune that occurs to any person(s) participating in the graffiti eradication program. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-84. - Prevention provisions. 
Excessive graffiti public nuisances. The city manager may, with regard to an excessive number of public nuisances involving graffiti at the same site, treat the nuisances as follows: 
(1)  At offender or trust fund expense. Any surface of a structure on a parcel of land used for nonresidential purposes that has been defaced with graffiti more than five (5) times in twelve (12) months may be declared a public nuisance and may be required to be retrofitted, at the cost of the offender or the trust fund, with features or qualities as may be established by the city after receipted notice to the property owner and a public hearing as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal of graffiti. 
(2)  At city's cost. Property used for nonresidential purposes on which is located a surface of a structure that has been defaced with graffiti more than five (5) times in twelve (12) months may be declared a public nuisance and after receipted notice to the property owner and a public hearing, the city may enter the property and, the city shall be authorized to remove the graffiti and institute cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal against the property owner as well as the perpetrator. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 86-85. - Trust fund. 
The city council hereby creates the City of Lake Jackson Anti-Graffiti Trust Fund Penalties assessed against violators of this article shall be placed in the fund, along with any monetary donations received from persons wishing to contribute to the fund. The city manager shall direct the expenditures of monies in the fund. Such expenditures shall be limited to the payment of the cost of graffiti removal, the payment, at the discretion of the city manager, of rewards for information leading to the conviction of violation of the ordinance, the costs of administering the ordinance, and such other public purposes associated with removing or prohibiting graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 99-1587, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Chapter 90 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal planning and zoning, art. 8. 
Cross reference— Electrical code generally, § 14-56 et seq.; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 66; signs, ch. 78; solid waste, condition and use of premises, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 102; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Interlocal Cooperation Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 791.001 et seq.; extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.; municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq.; municipal regulation of subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq.; extension of subdivision rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.003; extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities in counties that regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 242.001; public records generally, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 11.001 et seq.; instruments concerning property, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 12.001; recording of plats, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 12.002. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arterial street means a principal traffic artery, more or less continuous across the city, which connects remote parts of the city, and constitutes a through traffic facility that services to channel traffic through or out of the city. 
Collector street means a street that collects traffic or that will carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets by serving as a gathering traffic facility providing the residents on minor streets a means of reaching arterial streets or other areas in the city. 
Filed means the date of the first meeting that the planning commission reviews a plat or plan that has been determined to be administratively complete by the city engineering department. 
General plan means a site plan submitted for the purpose of establishing a street system for a large tract that will be developed in sections. 
Minor street means a street that is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district and which is not necessarily continuous through several residential districts and due to location, limited traffic and a limited paved width of twenty-seven (27) feet, is the smallest type of street in the city. 
Paving width means the width of that portion of the street required to be paved. 
Plat means a map or chart of the subdivision including a preliminary plat, general plan, replat and final plat. 
Preliminary site plan means an incomplete site plan. 
Resubdivision means the division of an existing subdivision, together with any change of lot size therein, or with the relocation of any street lines. 
Site plan means a subdivision development plan, including a subdivision plan, subdivision construction plan, site plan, land development application and site development plan. 
Street means the entire right-of-way or width between property lines of a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, thoroughway, road, avenue, boulevard, drive, lane, place or however otherwise designated, but shall not be deemed to include an alley. 
Street width means the shortest horizontal distance between the lines which delineate the right-of-way of a street. 
Subdivider means an owner of land, an agent of any owner of land, or a person or entity with a legal right to change or add physical improvements on a tract of land. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership, and shall include the word "resubdivision." 
(Ord. No. 191, § 2, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-1(b); Ord. No. 79-705, § 1, 8-20-79; Ord. No. 11-1973, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 19-2184 , § 1, 9-3-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions pertaining to subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001.  
Sec. 90-2. - Purpose. 
The general objectives of this chapter are to promote the health, safety, welfare and general well-being of the community's citizens. It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the subdivision, resubdivision, the laying out of suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, sites, streets, alleys or parks or other portions intended for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto and in part to achieve the following: 
(1)  Safety. To promote subdivision development and building within the city by ensuring that: 
a.  Adequate planning is undertaken to assure proper boundary lines, widths of lots and streets, proper location of drainage ditches, culverts, bridges, etc., as well as proper off-street parking, school sites and parking placements. 
b.  Streets are constructed so as to eliminate hazards to motorists or to the public generally by ensuring: 
1.  Adequate width or adequate paving. 
2.  Adequate grading, curb, gutter and sidewalk. 
3.  Good construction using suitable material. 
4.  Fire response capability and police surveillance. 
5.  Proper drainage. 
(2)  Landscape quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare and to enhance the appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing lots and streets that: 
a.  Are of a standard size or width, with the specific standard to be based upon location and use. 
b.  Are platted with appropriate regard for all topographical features lending themselves to attractive treatment and layout of utilities. 
c.  Provide continuity with existing utility and street systems. 
(3)  General well-being. To promote the efficient transportation of people by providing streets that: 
a.  Are connecting to other streets. 
b.  Are sufficient in paving and width to serve the needs of the location. 
c.  Are in conformance with the city traffic plan. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 2, 11-1-55; Ord. No. 79-705, § 1, 8-20-79; Code 1958, § 19-1(a))  
Sec. 90-3. - Applicability of chapter. 
This chapter shall govern every subdivider of any tract of land within the city limits or within five (5) miles thereof, who may divide the same into two (2) or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to the city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys or parks or other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 1, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-2; Ord. No. 11-1973, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
State Law reference— Extent of extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021.  
Sec. 90-4. - Applicability of chapter provisions to include area within extraterritorial jurisdiction of city. 
(a)  Ordinance Number 191 (chapter 90), passed and approved on November 1, 1955, establishing rules and regulations governing plats and the subdivision of land is hereby extended in its application to include all of the area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. The provisions of such chapter shall have the same force and effect within such area of extraterritorial jurisdiction as within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  No violation of any provision of such Ordinance Number 191 (chapter 90) outside the corporate limits of the city, but within such city's area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall constitute a misdemeanor under such ordinance (chapter), nor shall any fine provided for in such ordinance (chapter) be applicable to a violation within such area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(c)  If any provision of Ordinance Number 191 (chapter 90) is violated within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and outside its corporate limits, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in the district court to enjoin the violation of such ordinance (chapter). 
(Ord. No. 71-435, §§ 1—3, 6-7-71; Code 1958, § 19-2.1) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.003.  
Sec. 90-5. - Policy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any subdivider to lay out, subdivide, plat or replat any land into lots, blocks and streets within the city, or within a maximum distance of five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the city without the approval of the city planning commission. It shall also be unlawful for any such subdivider to offer for sale or sell property therein or thereby, which has not been laid out, subdivided, platted or replatted with the approval of the city planning commission. 
(b)  The city hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city improvements of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewage, facilities and water service from all additions and subdivisions, the platting of which has not been approved by the city planning commission. 
(c)  No street number and no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building in the city on any piece of property other than an original or a resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision without the written approval of the planning commission. 
(d)  The attention of each subdivider is directed to V.T.C.A., Property Code § 12.002, which states in part: 
The county clerk or a deputy of the clerk with whom a plat or replat of a subdivision of real property is filed for recording shall determine whether the plat or replat is required by law to be approved by a county or municipal authority or both. The clerk or deputy may not record a plat or replat requiring approval unless it is approved as provided by law by the appropriate authority and unless the plat or replat has attached to it the documents required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0105 or 232.0035, if applicable. If a plat or replat does not indicate whether land covered by the plat or replat is in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the municipality, the county clerk may require the person filing the plat or replat for recording to file with the clerk an affidavit stating that information. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 3, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-3; Ord. No. 11-1973, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
State Law reference— Extent of extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021.  
Sec. 90-6. - Planning commission authority. 
(a)  Where extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with the regulations in this chapter, the planning commission may vary such regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, however, that such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  The planning commission may refuse to approve a plat or site plan unless it is evident that proper water and sewer facilities can be supplied within a reasonable length of time. 
(c)  The planning commission will assist the subdivider through preliminary discussion of proposed plats at all possible times, and will, through the city engineer, make available all possible assistance. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 9, 11-1-55; Ord. No. 79-717, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 19-12)  
Sec. 90-7. - Preservation of high bank. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city council that the safety, health and well-being of the residents of the city be served by guarding against flood hazards. In furtherance of that policy, the natural high and low banks of Oyster Creek shall be preserved at their present heights and formations. 
(b)  An excavation, ditch, street development or other alteration of the bank (high or low) of Oyster Creek which is within the jurisdiction of the city shall be a violation of this Code and shall be prohibited unless permission is obtained from the city planning commission and a permit is issued by the city manager. 
(c)  The city shall have the authority to enjoin any activity that is in violation of this section or take any other action in a court of law it may deem proper. 
(Ord. No. 78-644, § 1, 1-16-78; Code 1958, § 19-8.2)  
Sec. 90-8. - Payment for street lighting costs. 
(a)  The developer or subdivider of a subdivision or a commercial or industrial development shall pay the cost of street lighting facilities to Houston Lighting and Power Company and the payment shall be made at the time that electric service is provided. 
(b)  All street lighting facilities shall be maintained in good operating condition by the power company or its agents. 
(c)  Street lighting facilities provided by the developer or subdivider shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Residential: 
a.  A light of at least five thousand eight hundred (5,800) lumen brightness on an ornamental steel pole served underground. 
b.  Lights shall be provided at all corners, intersections and directional changes, and in addition at six-hundred-foot intervals along straight-of-ways. 
c.  Additional lights may be required at the option of the city manager. 
(2)  Highways (2004 and 332 and other major highways): 
a.  A light of at least sixteen thousand (16,000) lumen brightness on an ornamental steel pole served underground. 
b.  Lights shall be provided at all intersecting streets and shall be placed to backlight turning traffic. 
c.  Additional lights may be required at the option of the city manager. 
(3)  Downtown: 
a.  A light of at least sixteen thousand (16,000) lumen brightness on an ornamental steel pole served underground. 
b.  Lights of at least double sixteen thousand (16,000) lumen brightness shall be provided in the center of streets when such locations are available. 
c.  Additional lights may be required at the option of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 81-806, § 1, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 85-989, § 1, 10-21-85; Code 1958, § 19-9.3; Ord. No. 11-1973, § 1, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 90-9. - Placement of sprinklers and plantings on city easements. 
Developers and others who extend or place sprinklers, landscaping or plantings in city easements or city owned areas shall: 
(1)  Be required to secure a permit from the city manager's office prior to any extension or placement; 
(2)  Maintain the sprinkler system, landscaping or plantings to the satisfaction of the city or be responsible for the cost of removal; 
(3)  Place sprinklers, landscaping or plantings only in the areas and locations that are specified in the permit; 
(4)  Follow the tree or landscaping program of the city when there is an overall tree or landscaping plan for the area; and 
(5)  Have no recourse against the city if either sprinkler or landscaping systems on city property or easement is disturbed by the city or any utility crew, and will bear any and all repair or replacement costs. 
(Ord. No. 87-1041, § 1, 7-20-87; Code 1958, § 19-9.4)  
Secs. 90-10—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Approval procedure—Preliminary plat requirements. 
Three (3) copies of a preliminary plat shall be submitted to the city manager for presentation to the city planning commission five (5) days prior to the meeting at which approval is asked. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch or larger, and shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  Names of the owner, subdivider if not the owner, and engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and design. 
(3)  Boundary lines, existing building lines, and width and location of platted streets and alleys within and adjacent to the property. 
(4)  Width and depth and/or area of proposed lots. 
(5)  Physical features of the property, including location of water courses, culverts, bridges, proposed drainage ditches and present structures, streets and alleys, highway, etc., including widths and names. 
(6)  A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision. 
(7)  Adequate off-street parking must be provided for lots set aside or planned for business, public or institution use. 
(8)  A map on a smaller scale must be presented to show the nearest subdivisions, and how the streets, alleys or highways in the subdivision submitted may connect with those nearby. 
(9)  Profiles of streets and ditches may be called for. 
(10)  In subdividing property, due consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, and to the dedication of parks and playgrounds. Such provision should be indicated on the preliminary plan in order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be dedicated to the public use. Such property shall not be of a less desirable nature than other property in the subdivision. 
(11)  A letter from the appropriate independent school district stating that provisions for the use of future schools, if such be required, are adequate or if not required, then such letter shall so state. 
(12)  If the subdivider is not the property owner or agent of the property owner, proof of notice by certified mail or hand delivery of the plat filing to the property owner. If the notice is by certified mail, it must be postmarked at least fourteen (14) days before the meeting at which the planning commission shall consider the plat. If the notice is by hand delivery, proof must be presented that notice was delivered at least seven (7) days before the meeting at which the planning commission shall consider the plat. 
(Code 1958, § 19-8; Ord. No. 11-1973, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
State Law reference— Subdivision plats, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.004 et seq.  
Sec. 90-31.1. - Flag lots. 
Flag lots are prohibited except where unique property features prevent direct access to a public street. The staff portion of the lot shall be at least thirty (30) feet in width and shall be used for vehicular ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 17-2136, § 1, 7-17-2017)  
Sec. 90-32. - Same—Special flood hazard zone; review by planning commission. 
In those areas of the city that are identified as special flood hazard zones based upon the one hundred-year flood level, the planning commission shall review all proposed subdivisions to assure that: 
(1)  New construction or substantial improvements of residential structures within the area of special flood hazards shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above the level of the one hundred-year flood; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within the zone of special flood hazards meets the standards established in sections 46-26—46-30 and 46-41—46-45. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 8.01, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-8.1)  
Sec. 90-33. - Action on preliminary plats. 
(a)  Following a review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the planning commission shall, within thirty (30) days, act thereon as submitted, or modified, and if approved shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved shall express its disapproval and the reasons therefor. 
(b)  The action of the planning commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy presented to the city council and the third retained by the planning commission. 
(c)  Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but is merely authority to proceed with the preparation of the final or record plat. No work shall be done on the subdivision before the final plat is accepted and recorded. Approval of a preliminary plat expires at the end of ninety (90) days, unless the final or record plat has been submitted to the planning commission. Any changes by the planning commission, the city engineer or others may require submission of another preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 8.02, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-9)  
Sec. 90-33.1. - Preliminary site plans. 
Preliminary site plans cannot be filed with the city planning commission, but the engineering department, the city manager, or the applicant may request that the city planning commission review and discuss the preliminary plan. 
( Ord. No. 19-2184 , § 2, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 90-34. - Filing of final or record plat, or site plan. 
(a)  Two (2) white print copies of the final or record plat with reproducible tracing of final plat shall be submitted to the city planning commission after the preliminary plat has been approved and all changes and alterations made. No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has first been submitted. Such plats shall be submitted to the city manager at least five (5) days prior to the meeting at which approval is requested. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following data: 
(1)  Plats shall be drawn upon sheets twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and to the scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch. 
(2)  A title including name of subdivision, owner or owners, subdivider if not the owner, and licensed land surveyor or registered engineer or registered public surveyor responsible for the plat, and the scale and location of the subdivision with reference to original land grants or surveys, the date and north point. 
(3)  The certificate of the registered engineer or licensed surveyor who surveyed, mapped and monumented the land should be placed on the face of the plat. 
(4)  A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks and playgrounds to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner and lien holder of the land. A complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and the streets dedicated. 
(5)  An accurate on-the-ground boundary survey of the property with bearings and distances and showing the lines of all adjacent land, streets and alleys with their names and width. Streets, alleys and lot lines in adjacent subdivisions shall be shown dotted. All necessary data to reproduce the plat on the ground must be shown on the plat. 
(6)  Certificate of approval to be signed by the city planning commission shall be placed on the face of the plat. 
(7)  Two sets of plans and specifications for water, sewer, paving and drainage prepared by a registered engineer. 
(8)  A letter from the appropriate drainage commission addressed to the city planning commission stating that plans for drainage of the subdivision are approved by the drainage commission. 
(9)  A letter from the servicing utility companies stating that the plat includes the easements required by them in the furnishing of utilities to this and future subdivisions. 
(10)  Two (2) copies of deed restrictions. 
(11)  An overall plan that incorporates a tree planting or saving plan for the development. 
(12)  An overall plan that incorporates the design and placement of street lighting as set out in section 90-8. 
(13)  A statement that the subdivider, if the subdivider is not the property owner or the agent of the property owner, will indemnify the city against any claims that may be brought due to approval of the plat. 
(14)  If the subdivider is not the property owner or agent of the property owner, proof of notice by certified mail of the plat filing to the property owner. The certified mailing must be postmarked at least fourteen (14) days before the meeting at which the planning commission shall consider the plat. 
(b)  In the case of all site developments such as apartments, church buildings, schools, or any other nonresidential development on two (2) acres and over, the developer shall submit to the city engineering department a final site or record plan for an administrative review. The site plan shall show or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Plans shall be drawn upon sheets twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and to the scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch. 
(2)  A title including name of site, owner, subdivider if not the owner, registered surveyor, registered engineer and registered architect responsible for the plan should be placed on the face and the plan should also include the scale and location of the site with reference to the original land grant surveys or subdivision, the date and north point. 
(3)  Certificate of approval to be signed by the city planning commission shall be placed on the face of the plat. 
(4)  Two (2) sets of plans and specifications for water, sewer, paving and drainage prepared by a registered engineer. 
(5)  A letter from the appropriate drainage commission addressed to the city planning commission stating that plans for drainage of the site are approved by the drainage commission. 
(6)  An overall plan that incorporates a tree planting or saving plan for the development. 
(7)  An overall plan that incorporates the design and placement of street lighting as set out in section 90-8. 
(8)  A statement that the subdivider, if the subdivider is not the property owner or the agent of the property owner, will indemnify the city against any claims that may be brought due to approval of the site plan. 
(9)  If the subdivider is not the property owner or agent of the property owner, proof of notice by certified mail of the site plan filing to the property owner. The certified mailing must be postmarked at least fourteen (14) days before the meeting at which the planning commission shall consider the site plan. 
(10)  All relevant items listed in the City of Lake Jackson Development Manual. 
(c)  Once the engineering department determines that the site plan contains all necessary components, the engineering department will file the site plan at the next available planning commission meeting. 
(d)  (1)  In the case of all site developments such as businesses, schools, office buildings, apartments, church buildings or any other nonsingle-residential development of two (2) acres or less, the developer shall submit to the city manager. 
a.  A plan drawn upon sheets twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and to the scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch 
b.  Specifications for water, sewer, paving and drainage prepared by a registered engineer. 
(2)  Additionally, in the case of all site developments such as businesses, schools, office buildings, apartments, church buildings or any other nonsingle-family residential development of two (2) acres or less that have lot lines within sixty (60) feet of single-family residential area lot lines, the city manager shall send a certified letter to all residents within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed project informing them of the site plan or record plan for the proposed site. 
(3)  A statement that the subdivider, if the subdivider is not the property owner or the agent of the property owner, will indemnify the city against any claims that may be brought due to approval of the site plan. 
(4)  If the subdivider is not the property owner or agent of the property owner, proof of notice by certified mail of the site plan filing to the property owner. The certified mailing must be postmarked at least fourteen (14) days before the meeting at which the planning commission shall consider the site plan. 
(e)  The site plans for developments of less than two (2) acres will be assessed for approval by the engineering department. Either the city manager, city engineer, or the applicant may choose to have the site plan filed with and assessed by the planning commission. If such a review is chosen, the city engineering department will file the site plan at the next available planning commission meeting after the engineering department determines that the site plan contains all necessary components. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 8.03, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-10; Ord. No. 79-717, § 1, 10-15-79; Ord. No. 81-824, §§ 2, 3, 11-2-81; Ord. No. 81-806, §§ 2, 3, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 82-836, § 1, 1-18-82; Ord. No. 00-1626, § 4, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 11-1973, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 19-2184 , § 3, 9-3-2019) 
State Law reference— Subdivision plats, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.004 et seq.  
Sec. 90-35. - Action on final plat and site plan. 
(a)  Following a review of the final plat or site plan and when, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, all conditions and requirements have been met, the planning commission shall approve such plat or site plan. 
(b)  Should the final plat or site plan, as submitted, fail to meet the conditions and requirements of the planning commission, then the planning commission shall either approve the plat or site plan with conditions or disapprove such plat or site plan and note its disapproval thereon, and attach thereto a statement of the reasons for disapproval. 
(c)  Approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of the final plat or site plan shall be voted by the planning commission within thirty (30) days after the filing of such final plat or site plan. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 8.04, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-11; Ord. No. 79-717, § 1, 10-15-79; Ord. No. 19-2184 , § 4, 9-3-2019) 
State Law reference— Approval of plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.005 et seq.  
Sec. 90-35.1. - Reconsideration of final site plans. 
If the applicant submits to the engineering department a written response to the conditional approval or disapproval of the final site plan, the engineering department shall review the response to ensure that it satisfies each condition for approval or remedy for each reason for disapproval. If the engineering department finds that all conditions or reasons have been addressed, the engineering department shall file the response with the planning commission at the next available planning commission meeting. The planning commission shall vote to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove with reasons within fifteen (15) days after the filing of the response. 
( Ord. No. 19-2184 , § 5, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 90-36. - Fees for filing subdivision plats, etc. 
The following schedule of fees and charges will be paid into the general fund of the city when any map or plat is tendered to the city planning commission, and each of such fees and charges shall be paid in advance and no action of the city planning commission shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid. The city manager or his deputies or assistants shall calculate the fees and charges in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Preliminary plats, site plans, or preliminary plat amendments: one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  Final plats, site plans, or final plat amendments: one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) per plat. 
(3)  Replats or the subdividing of a lot: three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus cost of advertising. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 11, 11-1-55; Ord. No. 79-717, § 1, 10-15-79; Ord. No. 81-820, § 3, 9-21-81; Code 1958, § 2-41; Ord. No. 03-1721, § 1, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 18-2166, § 1, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 19-2176, § 1, 2-4-2019)  
Sec. 90-37. - Amending plat. 
(a)  The municipal authority responsible for approving plats may approve and issue an amending plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of the plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is solely for one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat. 
(2)  To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat. 
(3)  To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat. 
(4)  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments. 
(5)  To show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat. 
(6)  To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent recorded plats. 
(7)  To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots if: 
a.  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  Neither lot is abolished; 
c.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
d.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat. 
(8)  To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement. 
(9)  To relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots. 
(10)  To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
a.  The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality; 
b.  The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the municipal planning commission or other appropriate governing body of the municipality has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area. 
(b)  Notice, a hearing and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat.  
Secs. 90-38—90-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 90-56. - Survey requirements. 
(a)  Monuments consisting of one-inch iron pipe, twenty-six (26) inches in length, shall be placed at all corners of the block lines, the point of intersection of curves and tangents of the subdivision. 
(b)  One (1) bench mark for each five (5) acres of property or fraction thereof shall be permanently installed in an approved manner, with their location and the elevation shown on the plat. 
(c)  Lot markers shall be metal or concrete stakes placed at each corner of all lots, flush with the average ground elevation, or they may be countersunk, if necessary, to avoid being disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 5, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-5)  
Sec. 90-57. - As-built plans. 
The engineer representing the subdivider must present to the city, reproducible, complete as-built plans for all paving, drainage structures, water lines and sewer lines within thirty (30) days after completion of each contract. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 10, 11-1-55; Ord. No. 79-717, § 1, 10-15-79; Code 1958, § 19-13)  
Sec. 90-58. - Improvements—Requirements. 
(a)  Paving. Improvements shall be installed to a permanent line and grade and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. All street construction work shall be performed by a bonded contractor who has filed a faithful performance bond with the city. Approval of the plat shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning maintenance of such improvements until the city shall have made actual acceptance of the same. 
(1)  The minimum improvements which the subdivider shall make or agree to make, prior to acceptance and approval of the final plat by the city planning commission, shall be: 
a.  Grading, drainage and drainage structures necessary to properly drain the area. 
b.  Pavement of a width which the council has determined under its city traffic plan, is suitable for traffic on the street. 
c.  Curb and gutter of three thousand (3,000) psi concrete. 
d.  Four-foot wide sidewalk set back four (4) feet from the curb line. 
(2)  Payment for streets shall be as follows: 
a.  The subdivider shall pay for the total cost of all minor streets. 
b.  The subdivider shall pay for the total cost of collector and arterial streets in all subdivisions except single-family residential subdivisions in which the lot width and the lot area are equal to, or greater than that required for R-2A zoning. 
c.  In single-family subdivisions in which the lot width and the lot area are equal to or greater than that required for R-2A zoning, the subdivider shall pay for the total cost of grading, drainage, drainage structures, curbs, gutters and sidewalks for all collector streets. The subdivider shall pay for the total cost of paving and subbase up to thirty-six (36) feet of a paving width. The city will pay for the cost of paving and subbase in excess of thirty-six (36) feet for collector streets. 
d.  In single-family subdivisions in which the lot width and lot area are equal to or greater than that required for R-2A zoning, the subdivider shall pay for the total cost of grading, drainage, drainage structures, curbs, gutters, sidewalks for all arterial streets. The subdivider shall pay for the total cost of paving and subbase up to thirty-two (32) feet of a paving width. The city will pay for the cost of paving and subbase in excess of thirty-two (32) feet for all arterial streets. 
e.  In subdivisions where less than ninety (90) percent of the residential units are on lots with the width and lot area equal to or greater than that required for R-2A zoning, or where more than ten (10) percent of the land area of the subdivision is zoned other than residential, the subdivider shall pay for the total cost of collector and arterial streets. If neither of the conditions of this paragraph apply, the subdivider shall pay for collector and arterial streets in accordance with subsections c. and d. of this subsection. 
f.  In the case where one-half (½) the paving width of an arterial is in one (1) subdivision and the remaining paving width is in another subdivision, the subdividers shall pay the total cost of the arterial street. 
g.  When the city is required to pay for paving under the terms of this subsection, the schedules for the work and payment will be set by the city council. 
h.  The city may assume a greater portion of the payment for paving of any street under this subsection after a public hearing on the matter. 
i.  This subsection shall apply to any plan, plat or replat submitted to the planning commission after August 1, 1983. However, this subsection shall not apply to any replat where the city has already accepted curbed streets nor shall it apply when the city planning commission is authorized to approve and issue an amending plat for one (1) or more of the purposes set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212. 
(b)  Utilities. The minimum improvements which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, prior to acceptance and approval of the final plat by the city planning commission shall be: 
(1)  Water systems with mains of sufficient size and having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish adequate domestic water supply, furnish fire protection to all lots and meet the requirements of the city. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer facilities to service the subdivision and meet the requirements of the city. 
(3)  All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such a manner as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street pavement, gutter, curb and drainage structures when connections are made. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 6, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-6(b))  
Sec. 90-58.1. - Same—Plantation Village. 
Utilities. All utility service facilities installed for the purpose of the distribution of electricity, telephone, telecommunications, gas, cable services or any other such service in the Plantation Village subdivision shall be placed underground or in dedicated utility easements, drainage rights-of-way, or on existing utility structures. The Plantation Subdivision is bounded by State Highway 332, State Highway 288, FM 2004 and the adjoining right-of-way lines of Oak Drive South, Medical Drive, Canna Lane, and the Dow Fresh water canal. 
(Ord. No. 18-2154, § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Sec. 90-59. - Same—Payments. 
(a)  Basic. The subdivider may award the contract and make payments directly to the contractor, after the plans and specifications have been approved by the city engineer and city council for all grading, paving, drainage structures, utilities and sidewalks in the subdivision. 
(b)  Alternate method. The engineer representing the subdivider may present the plans and specifications for the water and sewer lines and paving to the city council for approval, after which the city will advertise for bids and award the contract after the cost for such contract has been paid to the city by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 7, 11-1-55; Code 1958, § 19-7)  
Sec. 90-60. - Drainage easement, requirements. 
(a)  Storm drainage easements. In subdivisions, the developer shall provide all necessary easements and rights-of-way required for drainage facilities, including storm sewers, open and lined channels. 
(1)  Easement width for storm sewer pipe shall not be less than twenty (20) feet or the maximum outside diameter of pipes plus sixteen (16) feet, whichever is more. 
(2)  Easement width for open and lined channels, up to thirty (30) feet wide shall be at least twenty (20) feet wider than the top of the channel, comprised of at least sixteen (16) feet of easement on one (1) side and four (4) feet on the other side. 
(3)  Easement width for open and lined channels over thirty (30) feet wide shall be at least thirty-two (32) feet wider than the top of the channel comprised of a minimum of twelve (12) feet of easement on one (1) side and the balance of the easement width to be on the other side. 
(b)  Side slopes: 
(1)  Side slopes of lined channels shall not be steeper than one-foot vertical rise to one and one-half-foot horizontal distance. 
(2)  Side slopes of unlined channels shall not be steeper than one-foot vertical rise to three-feet horizontal distance. 
(Ord. No. 80-728, § 1, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 19-7.1)  
Sec. 90-61. - Streets. 
(a)  City streets shall be classified as minor, collector or arterial. 
(b)  A city traffic plan shall be prepared by the traffic commission and approved by the planning commission and by the city council that designates present arterial and collector streets and shows future arterial streets. 
(1)  Minor streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of sixty (60) feet and twenty-seven (27) feet of paving. 
(2)  Collector streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of seventy (70) feet and a minimum paving width of thirty-six (36) feet. 
(3)  Arterial streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of one hundred (100) feet and a minimum paving width of forty-eight (48) feet. 
(4)  Greater width right-of-way and paving may be required by the city council upon the recommendation of the traffic commission and planning commission or the city staff. 
(c)  Future arterial streets will be designated on the traffic plan in their approximate location. The exact location of future arterials will be set when the area is platted. 
(d)  Future collector and minor streets shall be designated by the planning commission and approved by the city council on a case by case basis. 
(e)  Streets shall be platted with appropriate regard for all topographical features lending themselves to attractive treatment and layout of utilities. 
(f)  Streets shall be named to provide continuity with existing streets. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 4, 11-1-55; Ord. No. 79-705, § 2, 8-20-79; Code 1958, § 19-4)  
Sec. 90-62. - Park and recreation sites or facilities. 
(a)  A subdivision developer and the city have the dual responsibility to provide leisure-time facilities for the residents of a subdivision or condominium or apartment development. Therefore, the developer of each subdivision, condominium or apartment complex and the city planning commission shall assure that adequate and suitable areas for park and recreation sites are planned for the use of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  The method for assuring that adequate and suitable areas for park and recreation sites are set aside for public use shall be guided by the comprehensive master plan and shall be governed by the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  The subdivider or developer shall dedicate a site or sites to the public for public use for park purposes at the time the plat is submitted, at a location recommended by the parks and recreation board, at a ratio of one-half (½) acre of park for every one hundred (100) persons in the subdivision or development. This ratio is the city standard number of acres of park to be available in ratio to the increment of population added and to be served by the completely developed subdivision or development complex, said added population being computed at the rate of three and three-tenths (3.3) persons per single-family residence or two and eight-tenths (2.8) persons per multifamily living unit. The planning commission shall approve the site selected. The following definitions and conditions shall apply if there is a site dedication for park purposes: 
a.  The area of the park to be dedicated shall be clearly defined. Where streets, ditches or easements infringe on or are part of the area to be dedicated, the planning commission must agree to the acceptance of those areas. The park dedication acreage must be in addition to the above infringements. 
b.  When a subdivision or complex is to be developed in stages or by units, the actual platting of the park area to be dedicated by the subdivider or developer shall be completed and delivered to the planning commission and the parks and recreation board with the final plat of the first unit of such subdivision. 
c.  The foregoing subsections shall not apply in the case of a replat of a plat, subdivision or addition that has previously met park requirements or the resubdividing of existing single lots, unless the replatting results in a change in park requirements or modification of park location. 
d.  Each park shall have ready access to a public street. 
e.  Final acceptance and approval of park lands shall be by the city council. 
(2)  The city council may elect to accept money as an alternative to the dedication of land for subdivision or development complexes where there is no park designated by the comprehensive master plan or no park or recreation facility is recommended in the area by the parks and recreation board. 
(3)  The subdivider or developer may make application for this alternative by submitting to the city council a final plat approved by the planning commission and a written statement of intent to deposit money in the city's park and recreation development fund at the initial rate of two hundred ninety-five dollars ($295.00) per lot in the subdivision or two hundred fifty-two dollars ($252.00) per living unit in a duplex, townhouse, apartment or other multifamily units, computed on the average base market value of eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000.00) for one (1) acre of land served by a street, sewer and city utilities. The amount of money in lieu of park acres shall be set by the city council and shall be reviewed each year in January and may be changed if the market value warrants. 
(4)  After approval of the application of the city council, the subdivider or developer shall make payment of the approved amount of money to the city secretary at the time of city acceptance of streets, water and sewer for deposit in the park and recreation development fund for the purchase of park land or the development of existing parks or recreation facilities. 
(Ord. No. 77-620, § 1, 3-21-77; Ord. No. 79-683, § 1, 1-15-79; Ord. No. 84-916, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 86-998, § 1, 2-3-86; Code 1958, § 19-9.1; Ord. No. 07-1836, § 2, 2-19-2007) 
State Law reference— Effect of approval of plat on dedication, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.011.  
Sec. 90-63. - Trees and landscaping. 
(a)  Purpose. This section establishes the rules for preservation and enhancement of the natural beauty of the hardwood forest and prairie that led the founders of the city to pick this spot for a city. A major feature of the original town layout was large areas reserved for trees and green space, both as parkland and in commercial zones. Succeeding city leaders and developers have continued in this tradition by the setting aside of natural areas, the planting of trees and shrubs, and with other beautification efforts. The forest of the city should be preserved and enhanced, to the maximum extent reasonably feasible, for future generations. Mature trees, if destroyed, can be replaced only after generations of time. Any landscaping plan developed to meet the requirements of this section should strive to preserve and utilize the existing trees as much as possible. One of the purposes of this section is to encourage and provide incentives for the preservation of existing trees on developmental tracts. The vital role of trees and other plants in the earth's ecology is well known. This section does provide that an alternative plan can be approved by the planning commission where strict compliance with a subsection of the ordinance is not achieved. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Alternate landscaping plan means an approved landscaping plan that deviates from the minimum standards set forth in this section. 
(2)  Arborist, qualified means an individual trained in the care of trees and shrubs that is a certified member of the International Society of Arboriculture or a member of the American Society of Consulting Arborists. 
(3)  Building site means the tract, parcel or lot of land area being developed. 
(4)  Clear-cutting means the indiscriminate removal of protected trees from a site or tract. 
(5)  Critical root zone means the area of native soil around a tree defined by a concentric circle with a radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost portion of the drip line (See city development manual). 
(6)  Damage or damaged means to "damage" a tree means to take any action which could result in a tree's death, either immediately or after a reasonable period of time. Some examples of such action, which are not intended to limit this definition, are as follows: severing the main trunk or large branches or large roots, girdling, poisoning, carving, mutilating, touching with live wires, piercing with nails or spikes, crushing or exposing the roots, digging or drilling any hole larger than three (3) cubic feet (or a trench) within the critical root zone, covering a substantial part of the critical root zone or compacting a substantial part of the soil in the critical root zone. 
(7)  DBH means diameter at breast height (DBH), is the tree trunk diameter measured in inches at height of fifty-four (54) inches above ground level. 
(8)  Development manual means the reference manual containing standards, specifications, requirements, and other information required by the city for conformance to the city code. A copy is maintained in the office of the city secretary and the engineering department. 
(9)  Diameter means the measurement of a tree at one (1) foot above ground level. 
(10)  Drip line means the periphery of an area underneath a tree which would be encompassed by the perpendicular lines dropped from the outermost edges of the crown of the tree. 
(11)  Ground cover plants means no minimum size is required but the planting is to be done so as to develop full coverage within eighteen (18) months. 
(12)  Interior of the parking lot means and will be considered to be all areas within the perimeter of the parking area, including areas bounded by the perimeter line when extended to their intersecting points, provided the area does not exceed an eighteen-foot by eighteen-foot square. Any area within the perimeter, which could be used as a parking space, may be considered for use as interior for the use of landscaping. 
(13)  Landscape development means trees, shrubs, ground cover vines or grass installed in planting areas, having a minimum of ten (10) square feet of actual plantable area and a minimum inside dimension on any side of eighteen (18) inches. 
(14)  Large tree means a tree of a species which normally reaches a height of at least thirty (30) feet or more upon maturity. 
(15)  Permeable area means an area that is not covered with asphalt or concrete, or other impervious material. 
(16)  Private property means any industrial, commercial, business, multifamily or town home site development. 
(17)  Public property means any land owned by the city, including street rights-of-way and yards around public buildings. 
(18)  Screening means any method of visually shielding or obscuring one (1) land use from another, and shall meet minimum requirements that provide a year round visual obstruction. 
(19)  Shrubs means self-supporting, woody, evergreen species as normally will grow in the county. 
(20)  Small tree means a tree of a species which normally reaches a height of not less than fifteen (15) feet upon maturity. 
(21)  Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant which will attain a trunk diameter of two (2) inches or more when measured at a point six (6) inches above ground level. 
(22)  Tree, protected. 
a.  Any tree that has been shown as an existing tree to be retained on an approved landscaping plan that is listed in the approved plant list in the development manual that has a diameter of six (6) inches or greater measured at fifty-four (54) inches above ground. For a multi-trunk tree, the diameter shall be the total diameter of the largest trunk plus one-half (½) of the diameter of each additional trunk; or 
b.  Any tree that is on undeveloped property that is listed in the approved plant list in the development manual that has a diameter of twelve (12) inches or greater measured at fifty-four (54) inches above ground. For a multi-trunk tree, the diameter shall be the total diameter of the largest trunk plus one-half (½) of the diameter of each additional trunk. 
(c)  Landscaping requirements. This section shall be a minimum standard and shall apply in full to all property zones except E-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential. For property zones E-1, R-1, R-2, and R-3 residential; only the "tree removal permit" requirements of subsections (c)(5)a, (c)(5)c, (c)(5)c.2, and (c)(5)c.3, shall apply, and then only for properties that are not platted. 
(1)  Minimum area. No building permit shall be issued unless a minimum area, as shown below, of the building site not covered by a building or structure is devoted to landscape developed with landscaping which shall include greenery, shrubbery and trees, unless an alternate landscaping plan is approved. 
Total Area of Site 	Required Landscape Development 
Up to 20,000 sq. ft. 	7.5% of area not covered by building or structure 
20,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. 	10% of area not covered by building or structure 
Above 200,000 sq. ft. 	12.5% of area not covered by building or structure 
 
(2)  Number of trees. The required number of trees on the building site based on the area of the site not covered by a building or structure shall be as follows, unless fewer trees are approved in an alternate landscaping plan under subsection (c)(8): 
a.  Less than 3,000 square feet .....0 
b.  3,000—7,000 .....1 
c.  7,001—10,000 .....2 
d.  10,001—20,000 .....3 
e.  20,001—30,000 .....4 
f.  30,001—40,000 .....6 
g.  40,001 or greater, per 20,000 sq. ft., rounded to the next highest whole tree .....3 
(3)  Approved plants. 
a.  Trees and shrubbery shall be limited to those published on the approved list in the development manual and reviewed annually by the city's beautification commission and planning commission. 
b.  If a subdivider wishes to plant a tree that is not on the approved list and have it count towards the number of trees required under this section or in an approved alternate landscaping plan, the subdivider shall give specific reasons as to why the subdivider's business cannot use the trees on the approved list. When deciding whether to allow a subdivider to deviate from the approved tree list, the planning commission shall take into account such factors as the substitute plants' wind resistance, roots, height, and suitability for the local climate, and the type of business enterprise—such as a business that regularly displays its products outdoors. 
(4)  Minimum diameter. 
a.  Large trees planted to meet the requirements set forth herein shall be a minimum of thirty-gallon size with a minimum diameter of three (3) inches as measured one (1) foot above the ground level. 
b.  Small trees planted to meet the requirements set forth herein shall be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size with a minimum diameter of two (2) inches as measured one (1) foot above the ground level. 
c.  Trees planted to meet the requirements of this subsection shall be a minimum of fifty (50) percent large trees, unless a smaller size is approved in an alternate landscaping plan. 
(5)  Tree preservation guidelines. 
a.  No clear-cutting of land is allowed. Prior to construction or development on a site that contains one (1) or more protected trees, a landscaping plan or alternate landscaping plan must be approved by the city or in the case of E-1, R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoned property a plat must be approved by the city. 
b.  All reasonable efforts shall be made by subdividers and developers to preserve protected trees. When a tree is to be preserved there it shall be protected under the following conditions: 
1.  No materials intended for the use in construction or waste materials accumulated due to excavations or demolition shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone. 
2.  No equipment shall be cleaned or other foreign materials deposited or allowed to flow overland within the critical root zone of a protected tree. This includes without limitation, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar materials. 
3.  No signs, wires or other objects, other than those of a protective nature shall be attached to any protected tree. However, lighting of a decorative nature may be attached to a protected tree. The lighting shall be attached in a manner as not to damage the protected tree. 
4.  No vehicular and/or construction traffic or parking shall take place within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree other than on an existing paved surface. This restriction does not apply to access within the critical root zone for purposes of clearing underbrush, establishing the building pad and associated lot grading, vehicular traffic necessary for routine utility maintenance or emergency restoration of utility service or routine mowing operations. 
5.  Grade changes shall be allowed within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree only upon approval by the city. 
6.  No paving with asphalt, concrete or other impervious materials shall be placed within the critical root zone of a protected tree. 
i.  Any existing paved surfaces within the critical root zone of a protected tree may be replaced or maintained. 
7.  In those situations where a protected tree is within fifty (50) feet of a construction area, a protective fence, minimum of four (4) feet in height, shall be erected and maintained outside of the critical root zone of each protected tree or tree group. 
8.  No protected tree shall be pruned in a manner which would reasonably lead to the death of the tree. This section is not intended to require a tree removal permit for reasonable pruning performed or contracted to be performed by the owner of the tree. 
c.  Tree removal permit. No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or move, or effectively destroy through damaging, any protected tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit, except as otherwise specified in this section. The application for a tree removal permit shall be submitted on a form provided by the city. Tree removal permits may only be issued when: 
1.  The proposed removal is consistent with an approved landscaping plan; or 
2.  The proposed removal is limited to a diseased or damaged tree, which is beyond the point of recovery or in danger of falling and removal of a diseased trees as required to reduce the chance of spreading the disease to adjacent, healthy trees. In disputed cases, the city may require the owner to provide the written opinion of a qualified arborist to the city; or 
3.  The proposed removal is on unplatted property that is zoned E-1, R-1, R-2, or R-3 and the cumulative removal of protected trees including the proposed removal and trees removed during the five-year period preceding the request is less than ten (10) percent of the protected trees on the property. The determination of the number of protected trees on the property may be estimated and does not require a survey of the property. 
d.  Tree removal permit exceptions. No tree removal permit is required when: 
1.  During the period of an emergency, such as a hurricane, tornado, storm, flood or other natural disaster, the requirements for a tree removal permit are waived as deemed necessary by the emergency management coordinator or other designee of the city manager. 
2.  In the pursuit of maintenance and installation of its facilities, registered users of rights-of-way acting in accordance with the provisions of article II of [chapter] 95 of the Code of Ordinances shall not be required to obtain tree removal permits. 
e.  Tree preservation credit. Landscaping plans that preserve protected trees shall be given credit toward the total number of trees required as shown below, unless an alternate landscaping plan is approved: 
Diameter of Existing Tree (inches) 	Credit Against Tree Requirement 
5—9 	2.0 trees 
9½—15 	3.0 trees 
15½—30 	6.0 trees 
30½ or greater 	12.0 trees 
 
1.  If protected trees, shown [on] an approved landscaping plan, are removed then replacement trees are required. 
2.  Replacement trees shall be planted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter per the following rates: 
For Each Protected Tree to be Removed 	Required Size and Number of NewReplacement Trees 
6-inch DBH to 12-inch DBH 	Minimum 3-inch DBH, equivalent to 100 percent of DBH removed 
Greater than 12-inch DBH 	Minimum 4-inch DBH, equivalent to 100 percent of DBH removed 
Greater than 30-inch DBH 	Minimum 6-inch DBH, equivalent to 100 percent of DBH removed 
 
3.  Replacement trees shall be a minimum height of seven (7) feet, measured at ground level, at the time of planting. 
4.  No more than thirty-five (35) percent of the number of replacement trees shall be of the same species when twelve (12) or more trees are required. 
5.  Acceptable types of replacement trees are designated in the approved tree list, in the development manual. 
6.  The replacement trees shall be located on the subject site whenever possible. However, if there is not a suitable location for the replacement trees on the subject site the city council or their designee may approve the planting of the replacement trees within a public right-of-way, public park land or any other publicly owned property. 
7.  Subdividers are required to replace any replacement trees that die within two (2) years of the date they were planted. 
(6)  Buffering and screening. Screening shall conform to sections 110-168, 110-171 and 110-172 of this Code. 
(7)  Landscaping plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted. For properties less than two (2) acres, the landscaping plan shall be submitted to the building official. For properties two (2) acres or greater, a landscaping plan shall be submitted in conjunction with preliminary plat for approval by the planning commission. The landscaping plan required under this section must contain the following information: 
a.  Location, DBH, and type of all existing protected trees on the lot or having thirty (30) percent or more of their critical root zone on the lot and other natural features, and delineation of which trees or natural features are to be retained. 
b.  Location, height and material of proposed screening and fencing, with berms to be delineated by one-foot contours. 
c.  Location and dimension of proposed landscaping development. 
d.  A description of trees, shrubs, ground cover plants, shown on the plan, names, location, quantities, size (diameter and/or container), heights, spread and spacing. 
(8)  Alternate landscaping plan. 
a.  The planning commission may approve an alternate landscaping plan which is not in strict compliance with the requirements of this section. The alternate landscaping plan must meet the purposes of this section as determined by the planning commission. The subdivider must provide the planning commission with specific facts that explain (1) why the subdivider's business site or type of business makes complying with the requirements of this section excessively burdensome, and (2) why the alternate landscaping plan is the best substitute. In making the determination, the planning commission may: 
1.  Consider the existing trees to be preserved; the topography, shape, size or other natural features of the property; the suitability of any alternative screening or buffering proposal; 
2.  Consider the type of business that occupies or will occupy the site, prior unsuccessful attempts to comply with this section, any unusual features of the property or of existing landscaping, and other similar factors. 
3.  Award credit against the tree requirement of subsection (5) for alternate landscaping plans that preserve existing trees and natural settings or beauty. 
4.  Consider easements and rights-of-way which have resulted in the request for the alternate landscaping plan. 
5.  Alter the number of trees required and the size of trees required based on the type of business that will occupy the site (for example, a business which regularly displays its product for sale outdoors). 
b.  The city staff may approve an alternate landscaping plan that is not in strict compliance with the requirements of this section on developmental tracts of less than two (2) acres, provided that all of the rules under subsection (c)(8)a. are complied with. 
(9)  Replacement of dead landscaping plants. If any required landscaping tree, shrub or ground cover plant should die, the subdivider shall replace these plants in compliance with subsections (4) and (5) of this subsection by the end of the next planting season. If the plants are dying due to a required size or type of plant required under this section, the subdivider may request an alternate landscaping plan from the planning commission. The subdivider must provide the planning commission with specific facts as to why the size or types of plants cannot sustain life on the subdivider's site as well as the requirements listed in subsection (8)(a). 
(10)  Replacement of existing landscape development. Any major modification to the existing landscape development plan must be approved by the city's building official. 
(11)  City property. Requirements of this section shall apply to land owned or developed by the city. 
(d)  Parking lot requirements. 
(1)  Interior landscaping of parking lots. 
a.  Any parking lot to be constructed on a tract of property governed by this section that contains twenty (20) or more spaces shall be subject to this subsection. 
b.  Landscaping is not required for interior of the parking lots. For a reduction in parking, as required by section 110-162 of the Zoning Code, each percent over the first five (5) percent may be reduced by that same percentage up to a twenty (20) percent maximum reduction in parking spaces. 
(2)  Tree requirements. When landscaping is provided to decrease the parking spaces required under section 110-162 of the Zoning Code, one (1) small tree shall be required for every ten (10) parking spaces of each parking lot that contains twenty (20) or more spaces. Each island shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of landscaped development and shall have at least one (1) tree. The formula used to calculate the number of islands will be the total parking spaces divided by ten (10). Those islands may be grouped or separated. Some flexibility may be used provided the parking lot is broken by landscaped island and the intent of this section is met. 
(3)  Distribution. The landscaped areas for parking lots shall be distributed throughout the parking lot. Adjustments to this requirement may be approved by the planning commission. 
(4)  Inclusive of minimum requirements. The landscaping area for the interior of parking lots provided for herein shall be inclusive of the minimum landscaped area requirement set forth in subsection (c) herein. The requirements set forth in this section are exclusive of other screening and landscape requirements for parking lot perimeters set forth in subsection (b) herein. 
(e)  Screening of parking lots. 
(1)  Perimeter trees. The perimeter of each parking lot, excluding driveways, which fronts upon or is adjacent to a public street other than a public alley shall include trees. The number of trees required under subsection (c)(2) shall be one (1) tree for every thirty-foot interval of parking lot frontage, starting at end points with a tree. Trees planted in accordance with this section shall not interfere with the existing utilities, roadways, sidewalks or street lights. Trees planted to meet the requirements of this subsection shall be a minimum of fifty (50) percent large trees. However, if power line easements or other easements or impediments make use of large trees impractical or unreasonable as to a particular tract, the planning commission may entertain alternate landscaping under subsection (c)(8) herein. Alternate plans, particularly those that focus on preservation of existing trees to meet the requirements of this section, can be approved in conformance with subsection (c)(8). 
(2)  Perimeter screening. The perimeter of each parking lot, excluding driveways, which fronts upon or is adjacent to a public street, other than a public alley, shall contain a visual screen of a minimum height of three (3) feet, measured from the surface of the parking lot perimeter. The screening must extend along the entire street frontage of the parking lot exclusive of driveways and access ways at points of ingress and egress to and from the parking lot and visibility triangles. Sites adjacent to a city parkway (twenty-five (25) feet in width or greater) may use a perimeter design which includes berms, shrubs and trees in a cluster format to where a solid line of landscaping is not required. This will allow flexibility in the design of perimeter planting to take advantage of city parkway. Also, at the discretion of the planning commission, sites adjacent to extra wide right-of-way where the pavement is over twenty-five (25) feet from the property line, may also take advantage of this depth and do as is described above. Alternate plans, particularly those that focus on preservation of existing trees, to meet the requirements of this section herein can be approved in conformance with subsection (c)(8). 
(3)  Screening materials. The perimeter screening shall be constructed of at least one (1) of the following materials: 
a.  Earthen berm which has a slope not to exceed one (1) foot in height for each three (3) feet in width to be used in conjunction with shrubs, trees and other landscaping materials. 
b.  Evergreen shrubbery and trees. 
c.  A solid stone or masonry fence used in conjunction with shrubs, trees and other landscaping materials. 
(f)  Easements. 
(1)  Trees and shrubs shall not be placed on city easements, utility easements or city parkways without the approval of the city. Other plantings may be planted with the permission of the city, subject to the city's right to remove the plantings if entrance to the easement is needed. 
(2)  City-owned easements do not count as area to be landscaped by the subdivider or developer, nor do they count as credit toward landscaping requirements for the remainder of the tract unless there is alternative landscaping under subsection (c)(8) herein. 
(3)  Easements on land owned by landowners may be counted toward the landscaping percentage requirements. 
(g)  Maintenance. All landscaping required herein shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times. The subdivider shall on a regular basis mow the grass, irrigate, fertilize, prune and otherwise maintain all landscaped areas. The subdivider shall also keep all landscaped areas free of refuse and debris at all times. 
(h)  Compliance with landscaping plan. The subdivider shall implement and maintain the landscaped areas as described herein in accordance with the landscaping plan approved by the planning commission; and after implementation of the plan, the subdivider shall not deviate from the plan unless the subdivider receives approval from the planning commission. 
(i)  Noncompliance of landscaping plan. If the city's building official determines that the subdivider is not in compliance with the landscaping plan approved by the planning commission, said official shall give written notice of such noncompliance to the subdivider at the address of the property. Such notice shall contain a description of the noncompliance and require compliance within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the notice by the subdivider. If the noncompliance is a result of trees, shrubs or ground cover dying, the subdivider shall comply with the landscaping plan by planting new trees, shrubs or ground cover by the end of the next planting season following the date of receipt of the notice; or if the notice is received during a planting season, the subdivider must comply by the end of that planting season. 
(j)  Irrigation. The subdivider shall be required to irrigate the landscaped areas by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  A fully automatic or manual underground irrigation system. 
(2)  Hose attachment within fifty (50) feet of all landscaped area. 
(3)  Installation of quick coupler system with a valve one hundred (100) feet on center. 
(k)  The plans that have been approved by the planning commission (or in cases of less than two (2) acres, by city staff), prior to May 15, 2000, shall be subject to the provisions of the Code in effect on May 14, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 81-824, § 1, 11-2-81; Ord. No. 86-1004, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. 92-1202, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. 00-1627, § 1, 5-9-2000; Ord. No. 01-1656, § 1, 4-2-2001; Code 1958, § 19-9.2; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 05-1777, § 1, 3-1-2005; Ord. No. 11-1973, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 13-2017, § 1, 8-5-2013)  
Chapter 94 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to assess, levy and collect taxes, § 2.01; department of taxation, § 9.17; taxation generally, § 9.18 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; bond of city collector of taxes, § 2-126; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58. 
State Constitution reference— Taxation and revenue, art. VIII; municipal taxes generally, art. XI, § 5. 
State Law reference— Property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.; local occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 101.008; occupation taxes generally, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 191.081 et seq.; local taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1987, § 1, adopted June 4, 2012, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 94-1—94-7, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation of these former provisions. 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Appropriation and setting apart of moneys collected. 
All moneys collected from taxation for specific items are appropriated and set apart for the specific purpose indicated in the city budget, and the city manager shall keep these accounts so as to readily and distinctly show the amount collected, the amounts expended and the amount on hand at any time belonging to such funds. It is hereby made the duty of every person collecting the money for the city to deliver to the city manager at the time of depositing any moneys, a statement showing to what fund such deposit should be made and from what source received. All receipts for the city not specifically apportioned by ordinance are hereby made payable to the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 1, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 94-2. - Residence homestead exemption. 
(a)  Seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) of the assessed taxable value of all residence homesteads of an individual who is disabled or is sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall be exempt from all ad valorem taxes hereafter levied by the City of Lake Jackson, effective beginning the 2014 tax year to begin October 1, 2014. 
(b)  Each person desiring such exemption shall apply for the exemption with the chief appraiser for each appraisal district in which the property subject to the claimed exemption has situs. 
(c)  "Disabled" means under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under Federal Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 1, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 13-2012, § 1, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 14-2041, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
Sec. 94-3. - Establishing an ad valorem tax exemption for disabled and who are under age sixty-five. 
(a)  Forty-five thousand dollars ($45,000.00) of the assessed taxable value of residential homesteads of persons who are one hundred (100) percent disabled as determined by the Social Security Administration, and who are under age sixty-five (65) shall be exempt from all ad valorem taxes hereafter levied by the city, effective beginning the 2002 tax year. 
(b)  Each person desiring such exemption shall apply for the exemption with the chief appraiser for each appraisal district in which the property subject to the claimed exemption has situs. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 1, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 94-4. - Penalties and interest. 
In addition to the penalty provided by state law for delinquent taxes, the following penalties shall be imposed: 
(1)  Taxes that are delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent, shall incur an additional penalty to defray the costs of collection in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the amount of taxes, penalties, and interest due, as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07. 
(2)  Taxes for personal property for tax year 2011 and subsequent years shall incur an additional penalty to defray the costs of collection in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the amount of taxes, penalties, and interest due if the tax becomes delinquent on or after February 1 of the year in which they become due and remains delinquent on the 60th day thereafter, as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.11. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 1, 6-4-2012)  
Secs. 94-5—94-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1987, § 2, adopted June 4, 2012, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 94-31—94-65, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation of these former provisions. 
State Law reference— Municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
 
Sec. 94-31. - Definitions. 
The words, terms and phrases used in this article are as defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 2, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 94-32. - Penalty. 
A violation of this ordinance shall be a Class C misdemeanor and the penalty for violating this ordinance shall be as provided for in section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake Jackson. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 2, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 94-33. - Levy of tax; rate; exception. 
There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven (7) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 2, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 94-34. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel or motel in the city shall collect the tax imposed in section 94-33 for the city. All taxes collected pursuant to this article shall be held in trust for the city until payment is made to the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 2, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 94-35. - Reporting and remitting. 
(a)  Persons required to collect the tax imposed under this article shall pay the hotel occupancy tax and file a hotel occupancy report by the first business day following the 20th day after the end of each calendar month. The hotel occupancy report shall contain the price paid for all room occupancies for the preceding month, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the city requires to be in the report. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax imposed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 2, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 94-36. - Rules and regulations. 
The city shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this article, and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to any books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 2, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 94-37. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  Original delinquency. Any person who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(b)  Continued delinquency. Any person who fails to remit any delinquent remittance imposed by this article on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. 
(c)  Fraud. If the nonpayment of any remittance due under this article is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any person who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article shall pay interest at the rate of one-half (½) of one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(e)  Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 12-1987, § 2, 6-4-2012)  
Secs. 94-38—94-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TAX ABATEMENT IN REINVESTMENT ZONES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Tax abatement in municipal reinvestment zone, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 94-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abatement means the full or partial exemption from ad valorem taxes on certain real property in a reinvestment zone designated by the city for economic development purposes. 
Affected jurisdiction means the county and any municipality or school district, the majority of which is located in the county, that levies ad valorem taxes upon and provides services to property located within the proposed or existing reinvestment zone designated by the county. 
Agreement means a contractual agreement between a property owner and/or lessee and the city for the purpose of tax abatement. 
Base year value means the assessed value of eligible property on January first preceding the execution of the agreement, plus the agreed upon value of eligible property improvements made after January first but before the execution of the agreement. 
Deferred maintenance means improvements necessary for continued operations which do not improve productivity or alter the process technology. 
Distribution center facility means buildings and structures, including machinery and equipment, used or to be used primarily to receive, store, service or distribute goods or materials owned by the facility operator, where a majority of the goods or services are distributed to points at least fifty (50) miles from its location in the county. 
Expansion means the addition of buildings, structures, machinery or equipment for purposes of increasing production capacity. 
Facility means property improvements completed or in the process of construction which together compromise an integral whole. 
Manufacturing facility means buildings and structures, including machinery and equipment, the primary purpose of which is or will be the manufacture of tangible goods or materials or the processing of such goods or materials by physical or chemical change. 
Modernization means the replacement and upgrading of existing facilities which increases the productive input or output, updates the technology or substantially lowers the unit cost of the operation. Modernization may result from the construction, alteration or installation of buildings, structures, fixed machinery or equipment. It shall not be for the purpose of reconditioning, refurbishing or repairing. 
New facility means a property previously undeveloped which is placed into service by means other than or in conjunction with expansion or modernization. 
Other basic industry means buildings and structures, including fixed machinery and equipment not elsewhere described, used or to be used for the production of products or services, which serve a market primarily outside the Brazoria Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) and result in the creation of new permanent jobs and create new wealth in the PMSA. 
Productive life means the number of years a property improvement is expected to be in service. 
Regional entertainment facility means buildings and structures, including machinery and equipment, used or to be used to provide entertainment through the admission of the general public, where the majority of users reside at least fifty (50) miles from its location in the county. 
Regional service facility means buildings and structures, including machinery and equipment, used or to be used to service goods, where a majority of the goods being serviced originate at least fifty (50) miles from the facility's location in the county. 
Research facility means buildings and structures, including machinery and equipment, used or to be used primarily for research or experimentation to improve or develop new tangible goods or materials or to improve or develop the production processes relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 1, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-67. - Abatement authorized. 
(a)  Authorized facility. A facility may be eligible for abatement if it is a manufacturing facility, research facility, distribution center or regional service facility, regional entertainment facility or other basic industry. 
(b)  Creation of new value. Abatement may only be granted for the additional value of eligible property improvements made subsequent to and specified in an abatement agreement between the city and the property owner or lessee, subject to such limitations as the city may require. 
(c)  New and existing facilities. Abatement may be granted for new facilities and improvements to existing facilities for the purposes of modernization or expansion. 
(d)  Eligible property. Abatement may be extended to the value of the buildings, structures, fixed machinery and equipment, site improvements, plus that office space and related fixed improvements necessary to the operation and administration of the facility. 
(e)  Ineligible property. The following types of property shall be fully taxable and ineligible for abatement: land; inventories; supplies; tools; furnishings and other forms of movable personal property; vehicles; vessels; aircraft; housing; hotel accommodations; retail facilities; deferred maintenance investments; property to be rented or leased, except as provided in subsection (f) of this section; property owned or used by the state or its political subdivisions or by any organization owned, operated or directed by a political subdivision of the state. 
(f)  Owned/leased facilities. If a leased facility is granted abatement, the agreement shall be executed with the lessor and the lessee. Publicly owned land leased to private entities shall be eligible if otherwise qualified. 
(g)  Value and term abatement. Abatement shall be granted effective with the January 1 valuation date immediately following the date of execution of the agreement. One hundred (100) percent of the value of new eligible properties shall be abated for up to two (2) years during the period of construction and for five (5) years thereafter or one-half (½) the productive life of the improvement, whichever is less. The abatement may be extended through an initial agreement and a subsequent agreement as may be required to comply with state law regarding the term of a reinvestment zone. 
(1)  If the period of construction exceeds two (2) years, the facility shall be considered completed for purposes of abatement, and in no case shall the period of abatement inclusive of construction and completion exceed seven (7) years. 
(2)  If a modernization project includes facility replacement, the abated value shall be the value of the new unit less the value of the old unit. 
(h)  Economic qualification. In order to be eligible for designation as a reinvestment zone and receive tax abatement, the planned improvement: 
(1)  Must be reasonably expected to increase the value of the property in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more. 
(2)  Must be expected to prevent the loss of employment, retain or created employment for at least ten (10) people on a permanent basis in the county. 
(3)  Must not be expected solely or primarily to have the effect of transferring employment from one part of the county to another. 
(4)  Must be necessary because capacity cannot be provided efficiently utilizing existing improved property. 
(i)  Taxability. From the execution of the abatement contract to the end of the agreement period, taxes shall be payable as follows: 
(1)  The value of ineligible property as provided in subsection (e) of this section shall be fully taxable; 
(2)  The base year value of existing eligible property as determined each year shall be fully taxable; and 
(3)  The additional value of new eligible property shall be taxable in the manner described in subsection (g) of this section. 
(j)  Zoning. An improvement, repair, development or redevelopment taking place under an agreement under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.204 or this section must conform to the comprehensive zoning ordinance and building codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 2, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-22)  
Sec. 94-68. - Application. 
(a)  Any present or potential owner of taxable property in the city may request the creation of a reinvestment zone and tax abatement by filing a written request with the city. 
(b)  The application shall consist of a completed application form accompanied by a general description of the proposed use and the general nature and extent of the modernization, expansion or new improvements to be undertaken; a descriptive list of the improvements which will be a part of the facility; a map and property description; a time schedule for undertaking and completing the planned improvements. In the case of modernizing, a statement of the assessed value of the facility, separately stated for real and personal property, shall be given for the tax year immediately preceding the application. The application form may require such financial and other information as the city deems appropriate for evaluating the financial capacity and other factors of the applicant. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the mayor of the city shall notify in writing the presiding officer of the legislative body of each affected jurisdiction. Before acting upon the application, the city shall through public hearing afford the applicant and the designated representative of any affected jurisdiction opportunity to show cause why the abatement should or should not be granted. Notice of the public hearing shall be clearly identified on a city council agenda, to be posted at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  After receipt of an application for creation of a reinvestment zone and application for abatement, the city shall prepare a feasibility study setting out the impact of the proposed reinvestment zone and tax abatement. The feasibility study shall include, but not be limited to, an estimate of the economic effect of the creation of the zone and the abatement of taxes and the benefit to the eligible jurisdiction and the property to be included in the zone. 
(e)  The city shall not establish a reinvestment zone for the purpose of abatement, if it finds that the request for the abatement was filed after the commencement of construction, alteration or installation of improvements related to a proposed modernization, expansion of new facility. 
(f)  Requests for variance from the provisions of subsections 94-67(a), (e) and (g) may be made in written form to a designated member of the city, provided, however, the total duration of an abatement shall in no instance exceed seven (7) years. Such request shall include a complete description of the circumstances, explaining why the applicant should be granted a variance. Approval of a request for variance requires a three-fourths (¾) vote of the council. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 3, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-23)  
Sec. 94-69. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Should any affected jurisdiction be able to show cause in the public hearing why the granting of abatement will have a substantial adverse effect on its bonds, tax revenue, service capacity or the provision of service, that showing shall be reason for the city to deny any designation of the reinvestment zone, the granting of the abatement or both. 
(b)  Neither a reinvestment zone nor abatement agreement shall be authorized, if it is determined that: 
(1)  There would be a substantial adverse effect on the provision of government service or tax base; 
(2)  The applicant has insufficient financial capacity; 
(3)  Planned or potential use of the property would constitute a hazard to public safety, health or morals; or 
(4)  Such planned or potential use would constitute violation of other codes or laws. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 4, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-24)  
Sec. 94-70. - Agreement. 
(a)  After approval, the city shall formally pass a resolution and execute an agreement with the owner of the facility and lessee as required which shall include: 
(1)  Estimated value to be abated and the base year value. 
(2)  Percent of value to be abated each year, as provided in section 94-67(g). 
(3)  The commencement date and the termination date of abatement. 
(4)  The proposed use of the facility; nature of construction, time schedule, map, property description and improvement list as provided in section 94-68(b). 
(5)  Contractual obligations in the event of default, violation of terms or conditions, delinquent taxes, recapture, administration and assignment as provided in sections 94-67(a), (f) and (g), 94-71, 94-72 and 94-73. 
(6)  Size of investment and average number of jobs involved for the period of the abatement. 
(b)  Such agreement shall be executed within sixty (60) days after the applicant has forwarded all necessary information and documentation to the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 5, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-25)  
Sec. 94-71. - Recapture. 
(a)  If the facility is completed and begins producing product or service, but subsequently discontinues producing product or service for any reason excepting a fire, explosion or other casualty or accident or natural disaster for a period of one (1) year during the abatement period, then the agreement shall terminate and so shall the abatement of the taxes for the calendar year during which the facility no longer produces. The taxes otherwise abated for that calendar year shall be paid to the city within sixty (60) days from the date of termination. 
(b)  Should the city determine that the company or individual is in default according to the terms and conditions of its agreement, the city shall notify the company or individual in writing at the address in the agreement, and if such is not cured within sixty (60) days from the date of such notice ("cure period"), then the agreement may be terminated. 
(c)  If the company or individual: 
(1)  Allows its ad valorem taxes owed the county or affected jurisdiction to become delinquent and fails to timely and properly follow the legal procedures for their protest and/or contest; or 
(2)  Violates any of the terms and conditions of the abatement agreement and fails to cure during the cure period, 
the agreement then may be terminated, and all taxes previously abated by virtue of the agreement will be recaptured and paid within sixty (60) days of the termination. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 6, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-26)  
Sec. 94-72. - Administration. 
(a)  The chief appraiser of the county shall annually determine an assessment of the real and personal property comprising the reinvestment zone. Each year, the company or individual receiving abatement shall furnish the assessor with such information as may be necessary for the abatement. Once value has been established, the chief appraiser shall notify the affected jurisdiction which levies taxes on the amount of the assessment. 
(b)  The agreement shall stipulate that employees and/or designated representatives of the city will have access to the reinvestment zone during the term of the abatement to inspect the facility to determine if the terms and conditions of the agreement are being met. All inspections will be made only after the giving of twenty-four (24) hours' prior notice and will only be conducted in such manner as to not unreasonably interfere with the construction and/or operation of the facility. All inspections will be made with one (1) or more representatives of the company or individual and in accordance with its safety standards. 
(c)  Upon completion of construction, the city shall annually evaluate each facility and report possible violations of the contract and agreement to the city and its attorney. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 7, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-27)  
Sec. 94-73. - Assignment. 
Abatement may be transferred and assigned by the holder to a new owner or lessee of the same facility, upon approval by resolution of the city, subject to the financial capacity of the assignee and provided that all conditions and obligations in the abatement agreement are guaranteed by the execution of a new contractual agreement with the city. No assignment or transfer shall be approved if the parties to the existing agreement, the new owner or new lessee are liable to the county or any affected jurisdiction for outstanding taxes or other obligations. Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 8, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-28)  
Sec. 94-74. - Sunset provision for guidelines and criteria. 
(a)  These guidelines and criteria under this article are effective upon the date of their adoption and will remain in force for two (2) years, at which time all reinvestment zones and tax abatement contracts created pursuant to its provisions will be reviewed by the city to determine whether the goals have been achieved. Based on that review, the guidelines and criteria will be modified, renewed or eliminated, providing that such actions shall not affect existing contracts. 
(b)  This policy is mutually exclusive of existing industrial district contracts and owners of real property in areas deserving of special attention as agreed by the affected jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 88-1070, § 9, 4-18-88; Code 1958, § 20-29) 
Editor's note— The provisions of this article were renewed in their entirety by Ord. No. 92-1204, adopted on June 15, 1992 and Ord. No. 96-1374, adopted May 6, 1996.  
Secs. 94-75—94-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
Sec. 94-91. - Sales tax on residential use of gas and electricity. 
(a)  Ordinance No. 72-473, approved by the voters of the city at an election held on November 7, 1972, at which a one (1) percent local sales and use tax within the city was adopted is hereby retained, continuing in all respects the taxes authorized by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.101 et seq., including the full one (1) percent city sales tax on the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use. 
(b)  The intent of this section is to carry out the option available to the city under section 6 of House Bill No. 1 of the 65th Legislature—second called session—to retain the one (1) percent city sales tax on residential use of gas and electricity. 
(Ord. No. 72-483, § 2, 11-8-72; Ord. No. 79-696, §§ 1, 2, 4-2-79; Ord. No. 12-1987, § 3, 6-4-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-483, adopted Nov. 8, 1972, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 2 of said ordinance as § 94-91 herein was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 94-92. - Sale at retail of taxable items; tangible personal property. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts the sales and use tax authorized and imposed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch 505 (Type B Corporations) as amended, to be used for the purposes authorized by (the "act") but limited to provisions for payment of the costs of land, buildings, equipment, facilities, improvements and maintenance and operation costs for public park purposes, recreational facilities to be used for sports and entertainment, and for infrastructure improvements for development of new or expanded business enterprises, and accordingly, there is hereby levied and there shall be collected within the city (i) a tax on receipts from the sale at retail of taxable items within the city at a rate equal to one-half (½) of the one (1) percent, and (ii) an excise tax on the use, storage, or other consumption within the city of tangible personal property purchased, leased or rented from a retailer during the period that the tax is effective within the city, such excise tax to be at the same rate of the sales tax described in clause (i) above, and to be applied to the sale price of the tangible personal property, the imposition, computation, administration, collection, and remittance of the tax to be governed by V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 321, except as inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 505. 
(b)  The city council hereby declares and orders that the effective date for the commencement of collection of the tax adopted and levied by this section is October 1, 1995, the date being the first day of the first calendar quarter after the date upon which the comptroller of public accounts shall have received a certified copy hereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-1335, § 2, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 12-1987, § 3, 6-4-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-1335, adopted June 5, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 2 of said ordinance as § 94-92 herein was at the editor's discretion.  
Chapter 95 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cable communications service, § 102-316. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 2012, deleted the former Art. I, §§ 95-1—95-22, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-1566, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998; Ord. No. 07-1870, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 5, 2007; and Ord. No. 11-1970, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2011. 
 
Sec. 95-1. - Findings. 
The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("the Act") grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over: 
(1)  The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions from telecommunications facilities; and 
(2)  The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum. The regulations contained in this chapter have been developed under the following general guidelines as provided in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
a.  Cities have local authority over "placement, construction and modification" of cellular telephone facilities and other personal wireless telecommunications service facilities. 
b.  Regulations "shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services." 
c.  Regulations "shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services." 
d.  "Denial shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence. 
e.  Cities may not "regulate the placement, construction and modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental or radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Federal Communication Commission's regulations concerning such emissions." 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-2. - Purposes. 
The general purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of telecommunications towers and telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the city. 
Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To regulate the location of telecommunications towers and telecommunications facilities in the city; 
(2)  To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of telecommunications towers and telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  To minimize adverse visual impact of telecommunications towers and telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of telecommunications towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use telecommunications towers; 
(5)  To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new telecommunications tower structures to support antenna and telecommunications facilities; 
(6)  To avoid potential damage to property caused by telecommunications towers and telecommunications facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or if determined to be structurally unsound; and 
(7)  To ensure that telecommunications towers and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Communications Act of 1934, 42 U.S.C § 332, as amended. 
Alternative mounting structure means a manmade tree, clock tower, church steeple, bell tower, utility pole, light standard, identification pylon, flagpole, or similar structure, designed to support and camouflage or conceal the presence of telecommunications antennas. 
Antenna means a structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals, including directional antennas, such as panels, wireless cable and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whips, but not including satellite earth stations. 
Antenna, array means an arrangement of antennas and their supporting structure. 
Antenna, panel means an antenna which receives and/or transmits signals in a directional pattern. 
Antenna, support structure means any building or structure other than a telecommunications tower which can be used that can be used as a support structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of antennas. 
Antenna, telecommunications means an antenna used to provide a telecommunications service. This excludes lightning rods, private mobile radio systems, amateur radio antennas less than fifty (50) feet (fifteen (15) meters) in height and whip antennas less than four (4) inches (ten (10) cm) in diameter and less than ten (10) feet (three (3) meters) in height. 
Antenna, whip means an omnidirectional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape which is no more than six (6) inches (fifteen (15) cm) in diameter. 
Applicant means any person that applies for a permit to install or construct a telecommunications tower or telecommunications facility. 
Application means all necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant submits to receive a special use permit or conditional use permit for a telecommunications tower or telecommunications facility. 
Co-location means a single telecommunications tower and/or or telecommunications facility used by more than one (1) telecommunications service provider. 
CUP means conditional use permit. 
EIA-222 means Electronics Industries Association Standard 222, "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antennas Support Structures." 
Engineer means any engineer licensed by the State of Texas. 
Identification pylon means a permanent ground mounted sign consisting solely of a single monolithic structure used to identify a development. 
Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit. 
Satellite dish means a parabolic or bowl shaped device that receives and/or transmits signals in a specific directional pattern. 
SUP means special use permit. 
Stealth means any telecommunications tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower, such as light poles, power poles, and trees. The term stealth does not necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole tower designs. 
Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to, buildings, poles, water towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines. 
Telecommunications means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
Telecommunications facilities means a structure, facility, or location designed or intended to be used as, or used to, support antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. It also includes all related facilities and equipment such as cabling, equipment shelters, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment or structures associated with the site. However, telecommunications facilities shall not include: 
(1)  Any satellite earth station antenna two (2) meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or 
(2)  Any satellite earth station antenna one (1) meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category. 
Telecommunications tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The term telecommunications tower shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC, or water towers, silos buildings, or other antenna support structures. 
Tower, electric transmission means a self-supporting structure in excess of fifty (50) feet (fifteen (15) meters) in height designed to support high voltage electric lines. This does not include local utility or distribution poles (with or without transformers) designed to provide electric service to individual customers. 
Tower, guyed means any telecommunications tower supported in whole or in part by cables anchored to the ground. 
Tower, height means the distance measured from grade to the highest point of any and all components of the structure, including antennas, hazard lighting, and other appurtenances, if any. 
Tower, monopole. means a self-supporting telecommunications tower which consists of a single vertical pole fixed into the ground and/or attached to a foundation. 
Tower, self-supporting lattice means a telecommunications tower which consists of an open network of metal braces forming a tower which is usually triangular or square in cross-section. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-4. - Development of telecommunications towers. 
(a)  A telecommunications tower shall be a specially permitted use of land. No person shall build, erect or construct a telecommunications tower without first obtaining a permit from the planning commission of the city. 
(1)  Applicants wishing to install a telecommunications tower in an M-1 or M-2 zone must apply for a special use permit (SUP) under section 95-5 on this chapter. Self-supporting lattice or guyed telecommunications tower structures may only be placed in M-1 or M-2 zoning districts. 
(2)  Any person who desires to place a telecommunications tower in a zone that is not in an M-1 or M-2 district must apply for a conditional use permit (CUP) and follow the procedure outlined in sections 95-5 and 95-5.1. 
(3)  The following telecommunications towers are exempt from section 95-4(a): Telecommunications towers constructed or placed on land or other structures owned, leased, held or dedicated for use by the state or federal government or any political subdivision thereof, if the telecommunications towers are used by the governmental entity primarily for rendering fire, police or other public protection services. These telecommunications towers do not lose their exemption status if they are also used by public or private persons or entities for other purposes. 
(b)  Telecommunications towers shall be permitted to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet. Telecommunications towers may be permitted in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet in accordance with section 95-18 "Criteria for Site Plan Development Modifications". 
(c)  No new telecommunications tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the city unless the telecommunications tower is capable of supporting another applicant's telecommunications facilities. 
(d)  Unless an exception is granted by the planning commission, all telecommunications facilities, including towers and related equipment buildings, shall be located on a platted lot. 
(e)  The applicant, in addition to the usual application fee, shall reimburse the city for the actual cost to the city for the services of a technical expert to review the application and/or information supplement. The technical expert shall be retained for areas in which the city does not have an expert on staff, such as the applicant's coverage maps or other representations as to why the chosen site is necessary. The initial deposit shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and shall be made upon submission of the completed application. The city will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. If at any time during the process this escrow account has a balance less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the city, replenish the escrow account so that it has a balance of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the city before any further action or consideration is taken on the application. Any time interval between the city's requests funds and the deposit of the funds shall toll the time limit in section 95-5. In the event that the amount held in escrow is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(f)  To facilitate co-location and coordination of telecommunications sites, the city shall within thirty (30) days of its effective date, notify the providers of telecommunications services, as that term is defined by federal law, of the enactment of this chapter. Said providers shall, within ninety (90) days of the date of such notice, provide the city with their respective master antenna plans. Said plans shall include detailed maps, showing the locations and characteristics of all telecommunications towers and antennas serving any portion of the city and indicating coverage areas for current and, to the extent possible, future telecommunications towers and antennas. Providers shall also provide the city with any updates to the above documents within ninety (90) days of their creation. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-5. - Special use permit application. 
(a)  The fee for a special use permit shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(b)  An application to develop a telecommunications tower shall include: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the telecommunications tower is situated. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the telecommunications tower is situated, the written consent of the owner shall be included by an executed copy of the lease with the landowner or landlord or a signed letter from the landowner or landlord stating that a lease will be executed if the permit is approved, If the applicant owns the site, a copy of the ownership record shall be included in the application. 
(2)  The legal description, deed record and address of the parcel of land upon which the telecommunications tower is situated. 
(3)  A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant in the city. The design plan shall include, (1) use of the most recent technological designs available; (2) a demonstrated need for a telecommunications tower; and (3) reasons why design alternatives cannot be used to accomplish the goals of the applicant's telecommunications services. 
(4)  An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or co-locate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on towers or usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within a one (1) mile radius of the proposed telecommunications tower site. Copies of written requests for collocation and responses shall be provided. 
(5)  Statements or drawings from an engineer that must show that: 
a.  The proposed telecommunications tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or co-located on another person's tower or usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within one (1) mile radius of the proposed telecommunications tower site; 
b.  The construction and placement of the telecommunications tower will not interfere with public safety communications and the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television or other communications services enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties; 
c.  The proposed structure meets the standards set forth in section 95-7, "Structural Requirements," of this chapter; and 
d.  The proposed site of the telecommunications tower or telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire or other danger to life or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals. 
(6)  Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the telecommunications tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed telecommunications tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways. 
(7)  Information on the proposed power density of the proposed telecommunications facilities and demonstration of how this meets FCC standards. This information is necessary because, although the Act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of RF emissions and does not allow the city to condition or deny on the basis of RF impacts the approval of any telecommunications facilities (whether mounted on towers or antenna support structures) which meet FCC standards, the city needs to make available upon request copies of ongoing FCC information and RF emission standards for telecommunications facilities transmitting from towers or antenna support structures. 
(8)  The special use permit fee. 
(c)  The city manager may require an applicant to supplement any information that the city manager considers inadequate or that the applicant has failed to supply. 
(d)  The planning commission may deny an application on the basis that the applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information required in this section. 
(e)  Final action shall be taken on the application within a time range that shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) days unless an extension is agreed to by the applicant and the city. Despite the one-hundred-fifty-day time limit, the city shall not unreasonably delay the proceedings. 
(f)  Disapproval of the plan shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-5.1. - Conditional use permit application. 
(a)  The fee for a conditional use permit shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(b)  Any person who desires to place a telecommunications tower in a zone that is not in an M-1 or M-2 district must: 
(1)  Meet all requirements listed in section 95-5. 
(2)  Demonstrate, either in writing or through graphics, why the site chosen is necessary for the applicant's' network capacity and coverage. 
(3)  Demonstrate, through a balloon or other physical representation, the maximum height of the proposed telecommunications tower if required to do by city officials or city staff. The representation shall be on a Saturday, with the date and length of time for the representation to be agreed upon by the city and the applicant. Applicant shall publish notice in the local newspaper prior to the date and the city shall publish notice on its social communication sites. 
(4)  Provide photographs of the proposed site, taken from the adjacent public right(s)-of-way, from the surrounding properties and on the property on which the telecommunications tower will be located. 
(5)  Provide a computer photo simulation of (1) the proposed telecommunications tower, (2) supporting cellular equipment cabinets and infrastructure in context with its existing surroundings, and (3) the fencing that shall be used to screen the ground level equipment. 
(6)  Provide a computer photo simulation of at least one (1) image from all adjacent public right-of-ways. 
(7)  Pay the conditional use permit fee. 
(c)  The planning commission shall review the plan and make a recommendation to city council. Before making a recommendation to city council, the planning commission may ask the applicant to modify the plan. 
(d)  After the planning commission makes it recommendation, city council shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notice of the meeting shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation and shall be placed on the city's social communication sites no less than ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing. The city shall notify landowners within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property line of the site of the proposed telecommunications tower. The applicant shall pay the costs of the publication and the notifications. 
(e)  Final action shall be taken on the application within a time range that shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) days unless an extension is agreed to by the applicant and the city. Despite the one-hundred-fifty-day time limit, the city shall not unreasonably delay the proceedings. 
(f)  Disapproval of the plan shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-6. - Setbacks. 
(a)  All telecommunications towers as well as guys and guy anchors shall be located within the buildable area of the lot and not within the front, rear or side yard building setbacks. 
(b)  All telecommunications towers up to four hundred (400) feet in height shall be set back, on all sides, at distance at least equal to one and one-half (1½) times the height of the telecommunications tower or within a fall radius that would not allow the telecommunications tower to fall on a structure or on a separate lot. The fall radius shall be based on a certified engineers report. 
(c)  Telecommunications towers in excess of four hundred (400) feet (one hundred twenty (120) meters) in height shall be set back a minimum of twenty-six hundred (2,600) feet (eight hundred (800) meters) from the right-of-way of all controlled access federal and state roadways designated as freeways to provide unobstructed flight paths for helicopters. 
(d)  Setback requirements for telecommunications towers shall be measured from the base of the telecommunications tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-7. - Telecommunications tower standards. 
(a)  Applicable federal and state standards. All telecommunications towers and antennas shall be erected and operated in compliance with current Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) rules and regulations and other applicable federal, state and local standards. 
(b)  Structural standards. Telecommunications tower structures must conform to the most current revision of EIA 222 standards. Guyed telecommunications towers shall be designed and located so that the structure shall not fall on habitable structures or public streets. 
(c)  Design and certification by engineer. All telecommunications towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and, at minimum, in conformance with the building code, and any other standards outlined in this chapter. All telecommunications towers in operation shall be affixed to land. 
[(d)]  Fencing. Security fencing, if installed, shall be by a wrought iron or steel chain link fence, masonry wall, or a vinyl slat chain link fence, each not less than six (6) feet (one and eight-tenths (1.8) meters) in height. The exterior of equipment buildings and/or metal equipment cabinets visible from residential areas or public rights-of-way must have a neutral aggregate finish or be painted to reflect the color and character or adjoining structures or blend with adjacent landscaping and other surroundings. 
[(e)]  Noise. Telecommunications towers shall be designed so that the telecommunications towers and equipment associated with the telecommunications towers comply with all state laws and local ordinances regarding noise. Emergency backup power sources may only be used during a power-outage or to test the power sources. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-8. - Separation or buffer requirements. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the separation distances between telecommunications towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed telecommunications tower. Telecommunications tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands shall be measured from the base of a telecommunications tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property. The minimum telecommunications tower separation distances from residentially zoned land and from other telecommunications towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city jurisdictional boundaries. 
(b)  Telecommunications towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands and public or private schools by a minimum of five hundred (500) feet or two hundred (200) percent of the height of the proposed telecommunications tower, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Telecommunications towers shall be separated from all city-declared scenic areas or scenic roadways by a minimum of three hundred (300) feet. 
(d)  Proposed telecommunications towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing telecommunications towers or telecommunications towers which have a special use permit (SUP) or conditional use permit (CUP) but are not yet constructed at the time an SUP or CUP is granted pursuant to this Code: 
(1)  Monopole telecommunications tower structures shall be separated from all other telecommunications towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice or guyed, by a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet. 
(2)  Self-supporting lattice or guyed telecommunications tower structures shall be separated from all other self-supporting or guyed telecommunications towers by a minimum of fifteen hundred (1,500) feet. 
(3)  Self-supporting lattice or guyed telecommunications tower structures shall be separated from all monopole telecommunications towers by a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet. 
(e)  Telecommunications tower spacing. Any new telecommunications tower in excess of one hundred eighty (180) feet (fifty-five (55) meters) in height must be located a minimum of one (1) mile (one and six-tenths (1.6) km) from any existing telecommunications tower in excess of one hundred eighty (180) feet (fifty-five (55) meters) in height. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-9. - Method of determining telecommunications tower height. 
Measurement of telecommunications tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this section shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto which extend more than twenty (20) feet over the top of the tower structure itself. Telecommunications tower height shall be measured from grade. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-10. - Illumination. 
(a)  Telecommunications towers shall not carry lettering, signage, symbols, images, signals, lights or illumination and shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
Exception: The United States flag may be flown on the telecommunications tower with the lighting that is required by federal law. 
(b)  The applicant shall request dual mode lighting from the FAA in cases where the telecommunications tower will be located less than three hundred (300) percent of the height of the telecommunications tower from residential uses and when required by federal law, 
(c)  Exemption. Telecommunications towers constructed or placed on land or other structures owned, leased, held or dedicated for use by the state or federal government or any political subdivision thereof, if the telecommunications towers are used by the governmental entity primarily for rendering fire, police or other public protection services, may be artificially lighted with no more than one (1) light fixture at the top of the telecommunications tower and no more than one (1) lighting fixture per main upright leg at midpoint of the telecommunications tower. These telecommunications towers do not lose their exemption status if they are also used by public or private persons or entities for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-11. - Exterior finish. 
Telecommunications towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, as approved by the planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-12. - Landscaping. 
All landscaping on a parcel of land containing telecommunications towers, antenna support structure or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the telecommunications tower, antenna support structure, or telecommunications facilities are located. If required, landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-13. - Access. 
A parcel of land upon which a telecommunications tower is located must provide access to at least one (1) paved vehicular parking space on site. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-14. - Stealth design. 
(a)  All telecommunications towers which must be approved as a conditional use shall be of stealth design. 
(b)  If the United States flag is flow[n] on the telecommunications tower, the applicant shall, no later than thirty (30) days after notice, replace the flag due to wear or damage. If the flag is not replaced, the applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for every day that the flag is not replaced. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-15. - Telecommunications tower location standards. 
Historical/cultural. Except for compatible alternative mounting structures that effectively camouflage or conceal the presence of telecommunications antennas, telecommunications facilities should not be located on or within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned historic or property included in a national or local historic district. In addition, said facilities should, wherever possible, be located so as to ensure that historic or culturally significant vistas and landscapes are protected and that the views of and vistas from architecturally and/or historically significant structures are not impaired or diminished. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-16. - Certifications and inspections. 
(a)  All telecommunications towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the building code and all other construction standards set forth by the city's Code and federal and state law. For new monopole telecommunications towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 95-5 of this chapter and every five (5) years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter and then every five (5) years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 95-5 of this chapter and every two (2) years thereafter. For existing lattice or guyed towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter and then every two (2) years thereafter. The telecommunications tower owner may be required by the city to submit more frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the telecommunications tower is jeopardized. 
(b)  The city or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a telecommunications tower is located, between the inspections and certifications required above, to inspect the telecommunications tower for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the building code and all other construction standards provided by the City Code and federal and state law. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the telecommunications tower owner. All expenses related to such inspections by the city shall be borne by the telecommunications tower owner. 
(d)  Indemnification. Telecommunications tower owners shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers and its employees, from any loss or liability or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily injury, personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, construction, existence, use, or maintenance of the applicant's telecommunications tower. 
(e)  Insurance. The applicant shall obtain, pay for and maintain, in full force and effect through the term of the permit, an insurance policy or policies that fully protect the city from claims and suits for bodily injury and property damage. The insurance must afford coverage for the applicant or wireless provider's use, operation and activity, vehicles, equipment, facility, representatives, agents and employees. Before issuance of any permit, the applicant shall furnish the city with certificates of insurance and endorsements. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-17. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Telecommunications tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  Telecommunications tower owners shall install and maintain telecommunications towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and all FCC, state and local regulations, and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property. 
(c)  All telecommunications towers, telecommunications facilities and antenna support structure shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. 
(d)  All maintenance or construction of telecommunications towers, telecommunications facilities, or antenna support structure shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel. 
(e)  All telecommunications towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC. 
(f)  In the event that the use of a telecommunications tower is discontinued by the tower owner, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-18. - Criteria for site plan development modifications. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the telecommunications tower requirements provided in this chapter, a modification to the requirements may be approved as a conditional use in accordance with the following: 
(1)  In addition to the requirement for a telecommunications tower application, the application for modification shall include the following: 
a.  A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that might occur as a result of approving the modification. 
b.  A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any adverse impacts which might occur as a result of the modification. 
c.  A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted by the applicant upon which the request for modification is based. The technical study shall be certified by an engineer and shall document the existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and its relationship to surrounding rights-of-way and properties. 
d.  For a modification of the setback requirement, the application shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed telecommunications tower could be located, attempts by the applicant to contract and negotiate an agreement for co-location, and the result of such attempts. 
e.  The planning commission or city council may require the application to be reviewed by an independent engineer to determine whether the antenna study supports the basis for the modification requested. The applicant shall reimburse the cost of review by the engineer to the city. 
(2)  The planning commission shall consider the application for modification based on the following criteria: 
a.  That the telecommunications tower as modified will be compatible with and not adversely impact the character and integrity of surrounding properties. 
b.  Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse impacts, if any, created by the modification. 
c.  In addition, the commission may include conditions on the site where the telecommunications tower is to be located if such conditions are necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed telecommunications tower and mitigate any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the approval of the modification. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of subparagraph (a) of this section, in the following cases the applicant must also demonstrate with written evidence the following: 
(1)  In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirements of section 95-6, that the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel of land upon which the telecommunications tower is proposed to be located and the alternative for the person is to locate the telecommunications tower at another site which is closer in proximity to a residentially zoned land. 
(2)  In the case of a request for modification to the separation and buffer requirements from other telecommunications towers of section 95-8, "Separation or buffer requirements," that the proposed site is zoned "industrial" or "heavy industrial" and the proposed site is at least double the minimum standard for separation from residentially zoned lands as provided for in section 95-8. 
(3)  In the case of a request for modification of the separation and buffer requirements from residentially zoned land of section 95-8, if the person provides written technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the proposed telecommunications tower and telecommunications facilities must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system and if the person is willing to create approved landscaping and other buffers to screen the telecommunications tower from being visible to residentially zoned property. 
(4)  In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for telecommunications towers and telecommunications facilities or to the minimum height requirements for antenna support structures, that the modification is necessary to: (i) facilitate co-location of telecommunications facilities in order to avoid construction of a new telecommunications tower; or (ii) to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system, which requirements must be documented with written, technical evidence from an engineer(s) that demonstrates that the height of the proposed telecommunications tower is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily, and no telecommunications tower that is taller than such minimum height shall be approved. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-19. - Abandonment. 
(a)  If any wireless communications facility, telecommunications tower or other antenna support structure shall cease to be used for a period three hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive days, the city council send written notification to the land owner, the applicant, and the tower owner that the site will be subject to a determination by the city council that such site has been abandoned. The tower owner shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of said notice to show that the telecommunications tower has been in use or under repair during the period. If the tower owner fails to show that the telecommunications tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the city council shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final determination of abandonment, the tower owner shall within ninety (90) days, dismantle and remove the telecommunications tower. If said telecommunications tower or antenna support structure is not removed within ninety (90) days, the building official may cause it to be removed at the owner's expense. 
(b)  To secure the obligation set forth in this section, the applicant (and/or owner) shall post a bond in an amount determined by the city manager after receiving an independent estimate from an engineer. The applicant shall reimburse the cost of the estimate by the engineer to the city. 
(c)  If ownership is transferred from the applicant to a different owner, the applicant shall give the city written notice within thirty (30) days of the transfer. The new owner shall then have thirty (30) days to secure a bond in an amount determined by the city manager after receiving an independent estimate from an engineer. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-20. - Antenna mounting standards. 
The purpose of this section is to promote public safety and maintain order and harmony within the city's business, cultural and residential districts by restricting the size and location of telecommunications antennas. The objective is to avoid the creation of visual distractions, prevent obstructions to the view of pedestrians and motorists on public thoroughfares, and to ensure the structural integrity of supporting structures. 
(1)  Whip and panel antenna mounting standards. 
a.  Individual telecommunications antennas are allowed on existing electric utility poles, light standards, water towers and telecommunications towers in excess of forty (40) feet (twelve (12) meters) in height, provided that the total length of any antenna does not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the height of the structure. The height of a telecommunications tower is determined by the highest point of any and all components of the structure, including antennas. 
b.  Telecommunications antennas and arrays are allowed by right on existing electric transmission towers. 
c.  Existing structures in excess of fifty (50) feet (fifteen (15) meters) in height may, as a matter of right, be rebuilt, if necessary, to support or contain a new antenna, provided that the new structure is the same height and substantially the same in appearance as the structure it replaces. 
d.  Panel antennas which do not extend above the structure, or whip antennas fifteen (15) feet (four and one-half (4.5) meters) or less in height, are permitted on conforming billboard structures. 
e.  Building mounted panel antennas are permitted on nonresidential buildings and multifamily dwellings in all zoning districts, provided that they are mounted flush with the exterior of the building and that they do not project above the roof line nor more than thirty (30) inches (seventy-five (75) cm) from the surface of the building to which they are attached. The antenna's appearance shall be such that its color and texture blends with the surrounding surface of the building. 
f.  Whip antennas are permitted on nonresidential buildings and multifamily dwellings in all zoning districts, provided that the total length of said whip antennas, regardless of mounting method or location, does not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the height of the building. 
g.  Only one (1) building/roof mounted antenna support structure, less than one hundred (100) square feet (nine (9) square meters) in area, is permitted per five thousand (5,000) square feet (four hundred fifty (450) square meters) of building floor area. 
(2)  Structural certification. Prior to the installation of any building/roof mounted telecommunications antenna, antenna array or support structure, the city's building official shall be provided with an engineer's certification that the structure will support and not be adversely affected by the proposed antenna and associated equipment. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-21. - Appeal. 
Any entity that desires to erect or utilize telecommunications facilities that wishes to present evidence that such entity would be limited by the current ordinances or regulations of the city dealing with zoning and land use may apply for such use under this section. The city council shall, upon a showing that strict application of the regulations would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless service, as defined by federal law, modify the subject regulations, consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter 95 of the Code of Ordinances to the extent necessary to prevent the prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-22. - Existing telecommunications towers; compliance with chapter. 
All telecommunications tower facilities erected in the city prior to June 1, 1998, are hereby approved as exceptions to this chapter. Any additions or modifications of the facilities after June 1, 1998, shall be subject to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 95-23. - Emergencies. 
The city manager or the emergency management coordinator may exempt wireless telecommunications facilities from any or all of the requirements contained in this chapter during the duration of a state of emergency or disaster. 
(Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Secs. 95-24—95-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY PROVIDERS OF UTILITY, TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND CABLE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 95-31. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this article, the following terms shall have the following definitions and meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used clearly indicates otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the single number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
City means the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
Department means the Public Works Department of the City of Lake Jackson. 
Director means the director of the Public Works Department of the City of Lake Jackson or his/her designee. 
Emergency means a reasonably unforeseen situation presenting an imminent hazard to personal or public health or to property. 
Facilities means personal property, owned by a provider of utility, telecommunications, or cable television services, including, but not limited to pipe, conduit, ducts, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, any associated converters, and all equipment located in the right-of-way. 
Permittee means a person to whom a construction permit has been granted hereunder. 
Person means natural persons (individuals), corporations, companies, associations, partnerships, firms, limited liability companies, joint ventures, joint stock companies or associations, and other such entities, and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers. 
Public nuisance means a condition dangerous to the health, safety, peace, comfort or convenience of the general public. 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Registered user means a person who has complied with the registration provisions of this article. 
Use and occupancy means the acquisition, installation, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, or utilization of any facilities within the rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 95-32. - General provisions. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy rights-of-way without the permission of the city. No person shall use or occupy rights-of-way within the city for the purpose of providing utility, telecommunications, or cable television services, or any other purposes or services, except in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to the use and/or occupancy of the rights-of-way by a person under the authority granted by a franchise agreement or ordinance as if fully set forth in the franchise agreement or ordinance. The express terms of this article will prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a franchise agreement or ordinance unless such franchise agreement or ordinance was in existence prior to July 20, 2000. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed in favor of the city in order to effectuate the purposes and objectives of this article and to promote the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 95-33. - Registration of users and occupants of rights-of-way. 
(a)  Registration required. All users and occupants of the rights-of-way shall register with the city pursuant to this section. For existing users and occupants, such registration shall be accomplished within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of final adoption of this article. Persons seeking to use or occupy the rights-of-way after adoption of this article shall register with the city prior to initiating any such use or occupancy. All registrations must be renewed annually on or before January 31 of each calendar year. Registration forms shall be provided by the city. The city shall provide notification to the utility if the utility does not re-register. For persons with a current franchise from the city, the franchise will be evidence of renewal. If a registration is not renewed, the facilities will be deemed to have been abandoned. Persons who are not certificated telecommunications providers providing access lines, as defined in V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code Ch. 283 are also required to obtain a franchise or license from the city in accordance with the City Charter and ordinances in addition to registering under the provisions of this article prior to entering into the right-of-way. 
(b)  Purpose of registration. The purpose of registration under this section is to: 
(1)  Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the users and occupants of the rights-of-way; 
(2)  Assist the city in enforcement of this article; 
(3)  Assist the city in monitoring compliance with applicable laws. 
(c)  Contents of registration. The registration shall include: 
(1)  The name of the user and occupant of the right-of-way; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of people who will be contact person(s) for the user and occupant; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, if known, who will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the user and occupant; 
(4)  The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day; 
(5)  Proof of insurance as required in section 95-38 hereof; and 
(6)  A description of the type of facilities in the rights-of-way, for example, electric conduit, telecommunications cables, and the like. This description shall include a statement of whether the applicant is a certificated telecommunicates provider as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.002(2) and, if so, whether the applicant is providing access lines as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.02(1). 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 95-34. - Use and occupancy—Regulation by city. 
(a)  Temporary rearrangement or removal of aerial facilities. Upon request, a registered user shall remove, raise, or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the person requesting them, and the registered user may require payment in advance. The registered user shall be given fifteen (15) working days notice to arrange for such temporary arrangements. 
(b)  Right to trim trees. The registered user, its contractors and agents have the right, permission and license to trim trees upon and overhanging the rights-of-way to prevent trees from coming in contact with the registered user's facilities. Registered users shall notify the city forty-eight (48) hours prior to tree trimming activities beginning within the city and provide an estimate of the duration of the tree trimming activity. All trimming shall be done in consideration of the health of the trees. When directed by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city or under the supervision of the city's delegated representative. Any tree trimmings generated by the registered user, its contractors or agents, shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours. Should the registered user, its contractors or agents, fail to timely remove such trimmings, the city may remove same or have them removed, and shall bill registered user for all costs incurred, which costs shall be promptly paid by the registered user. Nothing herein shall be construed to grant to a registered user the right of access to private property. 
(c)  City work. The city shall have the right at all times to lay, and to permit to be laid, sewer, gas, water and other pipelines or cables and conduits, as well as drainage pipes and channels and streets and to do and permit to be done any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the governing body of the city, in, across, along, over or under any right-of-way occupied by a registered user, and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street and to maintain all of the city's facilities. 
(d)  Removal of facilities. Whenever by reason of widening, straightening, relocating, realigning, or closure of streets, or whenever by reason of public work projects (such as the installation or improvement of storm drains, water lines, sewer lines, or similar projects), it shall be deemed necessary by the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a registered user, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at its expense within ninety (90) calendar days from receipt of written notice from the city to make such alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the director. Additionally, the city shall have the power at any time to order and require the registered user to remove and abate any facility that is dangerous to life and property. In the event the registered user, after notice, fails or refuses to comply with either type of notice described herein, the city shall have the power to remove the same at the expense of the registered user, all without compensation or liability for damages to the registered user. At the city's option, in lieu of removing registered user's facilities, the city may deem such facilities abandoned. 
(e)  Public safety. The city retains the right to move any facilities within the rights-of-way to cure or otherwise address a public health or safety emergency. The city shall cooperate to the extent possible with the registered user in such instances to assure continuity of service and to afford to the registered user the opportunity to make such relocation itself. 
(f)  Third party convenience. If the city requires a registered user to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any way or manner to alter, relocate or change its property to enable any other person, except the city, to use, or to use with greater convenience, any right-of-way, a registered user shall not be required to make any such changes until such other person shall have undertaken with solvent bond, to reimburse the registered user for any loss and expense which will be caused by, or arise out of such removal, change, adaptation, alteration, conformance or relocation of the registered user's facilities; provided, however, that the city shall never be liable for such reimbursement. 
(g)  Abandonment of facilities. Whenever a registered user intends to abandon any of its facilities within the rights-of-way, it shall submit to the director notification of its intent to abandon the facility, describing the facility to be abandoned, and the date of the proposed abandonment. City may require the registered user, at the registered user's expense: (a) to remove the facility from the rights-of-way, or (b) to modify the facility in order to protect the public health and safety. Unless such notification is received or unless otherwise provided in this article, a registered user shall remove all abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from the city and shall restore any affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant, structures, and equipment a registered user shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the rights-of-way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this article shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a registered user with the terms and conditions of this section. Upon abandonment of any facilities in place, a registered user, if required by the city, shall submit to the city a written instrument, satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the city the ownership of the abandoned facilities or transferring to the city the right of use of the abandoned facilities. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this article, a registered user may abandon any underground facilities in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights-of-way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator, or other registered users. 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 95-35. - Construction notification. 
(a)  Notification required. 
(1)  No person shall perform any construction, or installation of structures or facilities in the rights-of-way without notifying the city five (5) working days prior to the commencement of the project or as approved by the director. Notification will be required in the name of the person who will own the facilities to be constructed. This notification must be completed and signed by a representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
(2)  The phrase "construction, or installation of structures or facilities" does not include repair or maintenance of existing facilities necessary to install service to customer's property, unless such repair, installation or maintenance requires breaking of pavement, the closure of a nonresidential street for a period to exceed four (4) hours, excavation or boring. 
(3)  The registered user has the burden to demonstrate in its notification compliance with all requirements of this article and with all applicable laws. 
(4)  All notifications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the notification on behalf of the registered user. 
(5)  All notifications shall be made available by the city for public inspection. 
(b)  Information to be required in notification. Notification will require the following information: 
(1)  The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the registered user's schedule for right-of-way construction. 
(2)  A copy of construction plans for the proposed project, in accordance with accepted industry standards. 
(3)  Two (2) sets of construction plans must be submitted on a maximum twenty-four (24) inches × thirty-six (36) inches media. 
(4)  A description of the construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the rights-of-way and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to the approval of the director. 
(5)  A statement that the insurance and bonding requirements contained herein are met. 
(c)  Surety bond. The applicant shall file a surety bond that will be valid prior to the commencement of any construction through three (3) full years after the completion of the construction from a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The surety bond shall be in the amount of the estimated amount of the cost to restore the right-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in that year and shall guarantee the restoration of the right-of-way in the event the applicant leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete, or unsafe. The surety bond requirement can be waived upon proof of financial responsibility by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 95-36. - Construction work—Regulation by city. 
(a)  Existing facilities. Before initiating construction on rights-of-way, a registered user will make all reasonable efforts to attach its facilities to existing poles and to share existing conduit space, as appropriate. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require or permit the attachment on or placement in a registered user's facilities of any electric light or power wires or facilities or other systems not owned by the registered user. If the city desires to attach or place electric light or power wires, communications facilities or other similar systems or facilities in or on the registered user's facilities, then a further separate, noncontingent agreement with the registered user shall be required. Nothing contained in this article shall obligate the registered user to exercise, or restrict the registered user from exercising, its right to enter voluntarily into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with any person authorized to operate in the rights-of-way of the city. 
(b)  Traffic disruptions. The registered user shall endeavor to minimize disruptions to the efficient use of the rights-of-way by pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and rights-of-way shall not be blocked for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all construction, maintenance and/or repair work. If traffic signs are required, they will be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)  Utility/pole placement. All poles placed shall be of sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be set so that they will not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and so that they will not unduly interfere with ordinary travel on the streets or sidewalk. The location and route of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, conduits, fiber, and cables placed and constructed by the registered user in the construction and maintenance of its facilities in the city shall be subject to the lawful, reasonable and proper control, direction and/or approval of the city. 
(d)  Time for completion. If the work cannot be completed in the time specified in the submitted schedule, the registered user shall submit a revised schedule forty-eight (48) hours prior to the end date of the original schedule. 
(e)  Prior notification. The department must be notified twenty-four (24) hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either the registered user, its contractor, or other representative. All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state, and federal laws. The notification shall include the name, address and phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor who will be available at all times during the construction. 
(f)  Signage. Information signs measuring a minimum of three (3) feet by three (3) feet, stating the identity of the person doing the work, telephone number and registered user's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. 
(g)  Erosion and stormwater controls. Erosion control measures (e.g., silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades must be in place before work begins. Registered user shall be responsible for stormwater management erosion control that complies with city, state, and federal guidelines. Upon request, registered user may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from federal or state governments relating to erosion or stormwater controls. 
(h)  Lane closures. Unless in the event of emergency, lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to after 8:30 a.m. and before 4:00 p.m. unless the department grants prior approval. Traffic control signs will comply with the specifications of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(i)  Responsibility of registered users. Without affecting the legal relationship between registered users and their contractors and subcontractors, registered users are responsible for the workmanship of and any damages caused by contractors or subcontractors. A responsible representative of the registered user shall be available to the department at all times during construction. 
(j)  Damage to utilities. Registered user or its contractor or subcontractor shall notify the department immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or privately owned. 
(k)  Cuts. Unless in the event of emergency, when a street or sidewalk cut is required, prior approval must be obtained from the department and all requirements of the department shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk cuts shall be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic. In the event of emergency repairs, the registered user will notify the city as soon as possible. 
(l)  City utilities. Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity dependent facilities. 
(m)  Installed depth. New nonmunicipal facilities must be installed at a depth as approved by accepted industry standards. 
(n)  Line locations. Registered users working in the right-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locations from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the rights-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of geographic information system or the plans or records does not satisfy this requirement. Registered users shall be responsible for verifying the location of all potentially affected facilities prior to any excavation or boring, with the exception of work involving lane closures, as set forth above. 
(o)  Manholes. Placement of all manholes and/or hand holes must be approved in advance by the department. Hand holes or manholes will not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the director. 
(p)  Pumping. Construction that requires pumping of water or mud shall be contained in accordance with city ordinances and federal and state law and the directives of the department. 
(q)  Restoration. Restoration of rights-of-way shall be to the reasonable satisfaction of the department. Restoration shall be made in a timely manner as specified by approved department schedules and to the satisfaction of the director. Registered user shall warrant all pavement repairs for a period of one (1) year after restoration has been completed. If restoration is not satisfactory or is not performed in a timely manner, all work in progress, except that related to the problem, may be halted and a hold may be placed on any further work until all restoration as required herein is complete. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Installation of all manholes and hand holes, as appropriate; 
(2)  Trenches or any other holes shall be covered and fenced as approved by the director or filled daily, unless other safety procedures are approved by the department; 
(3)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines to natural ground to be maintained for a period of three (3) months after leveling; 
(4)  Sweeping of streets shall be provided on a daily basis during construction; 
(5)  Restoration of all landscaping, ground cover, and sprinkler systems. 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 95-37. - Indemnification. 
(a)  General provisions. The registered user shall indemnify and hold the city, its officers and employees, harmless from all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorneys fees and costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any kind and nature, including but not limited to, personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought that may arise out of or be occasioned or caused solely by the registered user's negligent act, error, or omission of the registered user, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, or subcontractor of the registered user, and their respective officers, agents, employees, directors and representatives while in the exercise of or performance of the rights or duties under this article. The indemnity provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of city, its officers or employees, in instances where such negligence causes personal or bodily injury, death, or property damage. In the event the registered user and city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of the state, without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under Texas law and without waiving any defenses of the parties under Texas law. The provisions of this paragraph are solely for the benefit of the parties hereto and not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(b)  Notice. The city shall give the registered user prompt written notice of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The registered user shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise any such claim. The registered user shall promptly advise the city, in writing, of any claim or demand against the city or the registered user known to the registered user related to or arising out of the registered user's activities under this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 95-38. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Certificate of insurance. In order to comply with the registration requirements of this article, the registered user shall at the time of registration furnish a completed certificate of insurance. 
(b)  Coverage amounts. A registered user shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration of the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way, or of the work to be performed under the permit, respectively, at the registered user's sole expense, insurance coverage written on an occurrence basis, by companies authorized and admitted to do business in the state and rated A or better by A.M. Best company and/or otherwise acceptable to the city, in the following types and amounts: 
		TYPE 	AMOUNT 
1. 	Workers' Compensation 	Statutory 
	Employers' Liability 	$500,000/$500,000/$50,000 
2. 	Commercial General (public) Liability Insurance to include coverage for the following: 
	a. 	Premises operations 	Combined Single Limit its equivalent 
	b. 	Independent contractors 	for Bodily Injury and 
	c. 	Products/completed operations 	Property Damage of 
	d. 	Contractual liability 	$1,000,000 per occurrence; with 
	e. 	Explosion, collapse, underground 	an aggregate of $3,000,000 or 
	f. 	Broad from property damage, to include fire legal liability 	its equivalent 
3. 	Business Automobile Liability 
	a. 	Owned/leased vehicles 	Combined Single Limit for 
	b. 	Nonowned vehicles 	Bodily Injury and Property 
	c. 	Hired vehicles 	$1,000,000 per occurrence or its equivalent. 
 
(c)  Required provisions. All insurance contracts and certificates of insurance will contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  A cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city in writing not fewer than thirty (30) calendar days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
(2)  The certificate shall state the policy number, the name of the insurance company, the name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company, the name, address, and telephone number of the insured, the policy expiration date, and specific coverage amounts. 
(d)  Self-insurance. With respect to the registered user's obligations to comply with the requirements for commercial general (public) liability insurance coverage, the city may allow the registered user to self-insure upon annual production of evidence that is satisfactory to the city's risk manager. With respect to the registered user's obligations to comply with the requirements for automobile liability insurance and for workers' compensation insurance, the registered user may self-insure, provided the registered user tender satisfactory evidence of self-insurance as contemplated by the state motor vehicle financial responsibility law, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 601.124, and the Texas Workers' Compensation Act, Tex. Labor Code § 407.001, et seq. 
(e)  Persons with franchise agreements or licenses from the city may meet the above insurance and bonding requirements if their current franchise adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 95-39. - Plans of record. 
Provision of plans. Registered users shall provide the director with construction drawings within ten (10) calendar days of completion of facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 00-1631, § 1, 7-3-2000)  
Secs. 95-40—95-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WIRELESS FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 95-50. - Applicability. 
A network provider seeking to site, install, collocate, maintain, repair, relocate, replace, and remove wireless facilities in the public right-of-way must comply with the provisions of state and federal law and with chapter 95 of the City Code of Ordinances and the city's pole attachment specifications approved by the city, as they currently exist or may hereafter be amended, except where in conflict with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon and its derivatives abandoned facilities means facilities not operated for any continuous period of six (6) months. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes as adopted by the city and adopted by a recognized national code organization; and 
(2)  Any local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284. 
Chapter 284 means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284 of Subtitle A, Title 9. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Concealment or camouflaged means any wireless facility or pole that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged or otherwise concealed such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive as allowed as a condition for city advance approval under Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105), in historic or design districts. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility or pole also includes any wireless facility or pole conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is located and may include, but is not limited to hidden beneath a facade, blended with surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree branches. 
Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes. 
Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
Director means the city manager or a designee. 
Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
Local means within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
Location means the city approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node. 
Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103) and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity, including but not limited to the Hike and Bike Trail System and Greenway and Linear Parkways as designated in the Parks and Open Space Master Plan, as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended. 
Municipally owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 11.003, and located in a public right-of-way. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term includes: (1) equipment associated with wireless communications; (2) a radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; (3) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and (4) a distributed antenna system or DAS. The term does not include: (a) an electric generator; (b) a pole; or (c) a macro tower. Small cell shall be included as a type of "network node." 
Network provider means: (1) a wireless service provider; or (2) a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: (a) network nodes; or (b) node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Pole means a service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
Pole attachment specifications means the structural, electrical, design, contractual and other requirements adopted or approved by the city which are applicable to wireless facilities and transport facilities, including but not limited to those requirements set forth in this article III. 
Residential area means any area designated as residential pursuant to the city's zoning code, and includes but is not limited to districts with zoning designations E-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4, T-1, MH-1, and MH-2, PURZ and PUDs with residential areas. 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include a private easement or the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications 
Right-of-way management ordinance means chapter 95 of the City Code of Ordinances and any other ordinances regulating access, use, or maintenance of the right-of-way. 
Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
Street, as used in this article, includes only the paved portion and sub-grade of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two (2) parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements, a "street" does not. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. If the street includes at least two (2) separate roadways, the term applies to each roadway separately. 
Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
Underground requirement area means an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground pursuant to municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way. 
User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. 
Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than thirty-four and one-half (34.5) kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002. 
Wireless facilities means "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284. 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-52. - Permit application. 
A network provider must submit an application for a permit prior to installing a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in the public right-of-way and prior to any excavating or closing sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way in association with any routine maintenance, replacement, repair, or upgrading work. The application for such a permit must include the following: 
(1)  Detailed drawings, with calculations to show strict conformity to the size limitations as set forth in Chapter 284, including, but not limited to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.002, size of a micro network node, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.003, size of network nodes, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103, maximum pole height, and with the requirements of this article, the right-of-way management ordinance, and the pole attachment specifications; 
(2)  An analysis showing that the proposed wireless facility(ies) will not cause any interference with city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, traffic signal preemption systems, SCADA, or other city safety communications components, smart meter systems in accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.304); 
(3)  A proposal and depiction to camouflage or conceal the network node consistent with the requirements of this article; 
(4)  Disclose on a map in GIS or other format acceptable to the city, whether the location is any of the following: 
a.  Within a municipal park or a residential area; 
b.  Within a design district with decorative poles or in an area of the city zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district or design district; 
c.  Within an area that has undergrounding requirements; 
d.  Within three hundred (300) feet of a historic site or structure or historic landmark recognized by the city, state or federal government (see, for example, and not limited to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 442.001(3) and 16 U.S.C. § 470), as of the date of the submission of the permit. 
(5)  A certificate that the network node complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-53. - Fees. 
(a)  In lieu of the fees provided elsewhere in this Code, a network provider must pay fees for permit applications and use of the public rights-of-way as provided in Chapter 284. Because the city requires the payment of a fee for similar types of commercial development inside the city's territorial jurisdiction, other than a type for which application or permit fees are not allowed by law, the city is eligible to charge an applications fee for deployments under this article. Unless there is a change in law, the fees shall be assessed consistently with Chapter 284, as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended, which currently are based on the number of poles and or network nodes contained in an application at the following rates, which rates are subject to adjustment as provided in Chapter 284. 
(1)  Permit and application fees. 
a.  Transport facilities: five hundred dollars ($500.00) per application, up to five (5) network nodes per application then an additional two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional network node per application; 
b.  Network nodes: five hundred dollars ($500.00) per application for the first five (5) network nodes, then an additional two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional network node per application; and 
c.  Node support poles: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per application for each pole. 
(2)  Rent from network providers. 
a.  Network nodes and support poles. The annual public right-of-way rental rate as set in Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.053) shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per network node site, with annual CPI adjustment as provided for in Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.054). 
b.  Transport facility. The annual transport facility rental rate as set in Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.055). shall be twenty-eight dollars ($28.00) monthly for each network node site, unless an equal or greater amount is paid the city, e.g., under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 283 or V.T.C.A., Utilities Code Ch. 66. 
(b)  Adoption of the fees in this article shall not been seen as a finding by the city that the fees are greater than or equal to the actual, direct, and reasonable costs the city determines are incurred in granting or processing an application that are reasonably related in time to the time the costs of granting or processing an application are incurred. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-54. - Prohibited and restricted locations of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment. 
(a)  A network provider is prohibited or restricted from locating micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment, except with a separate city agreement or subject to concealment conditions, as follows: 
(1)  Municipal parks and residential areas. In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.104(a)), a network provider may not install a node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent pursuant to subsection (b) of this section if the public right-of-way is in a municipal park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than fifty (50) feet wide of paved street surface, being the area measured as the shortest distance between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area measured as the shortest distance between the two (2) parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(2)  Historic districts and design districts. In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105), a network provider must obtain advance written approval from the city in accordance with subsection (b) of this section before collocating network nodes or installing node support poles in a design district with decorative poles or in an area of the city zoned or otherwise designated as a design district or historic district. 
a.  As a condition for approval of network nodes or node support poles in design districts with decorative poles or in a historic district, the network provider must use reasonable design or concealment measures for the network nodes or node support poles to comply with the design and aesthetic standards of the district. Therefore, any request for installations in a design district with decorative poles or in a historic district, must be accompanied with proposed concealment measures in the permit applications. 
b.  A network provider must explore the feasibility of using camouflage measures to improve the aesthetics of the network nodes, node support poles, or related ground equipment, or any portion of the nodes, poles, or equipment, to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in design districts or in an historic district. 
c.  Network providers must comply with and observe all applicable city, state, and federal historic preservation laws and requirements. 
d.  The city council may designate an area as a historic district or a design district under Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105), at any time. 
e.  Currently designated design districts are the following: 
1.  Downtown Streetscapes Design Manual which is bordered by Oyster Creek Drive, Circle Way, Oak Drive, and State Highway 288. 
f.  The failure to designate an area in this section shall not mean that such an area is not within a defined district, if so designated by the city council. Future areas may be designated as one of these districts at any time. Such a designation does not require amendment of this article. 
(3)  Compliance with undergrounding requirements. In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.107), a network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. 
a.  The city may designate areas from time to time as underground requirement areas in accordance with filed plats, and or conversions of overhead to underground areas, as may be allowed by law. 
b.  The failure to designate an area in this section shall not mean that such an area is not within an underground requirement area, if so designated by the city council. Future areas may be designated as an underground requirement area at any time. Such a designation does not require amendment of this article. 
(b)  In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.104(b)), a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of-way described in subsection (a) must comply with the following: 
(1)  A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way pursuant to subsections (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section without a variance. 
a.  To apply for a variance, the applicant must submit: 
1.  A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant in the city. The design plan shall include: (a) use of the most recent technological designs available; (b) a demonstrated need for network node or node support pole; and (c) reasons why design alternatives cannot be used to accomplish the applicant's goals. 
2.  An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or co-locate the applicant's network node facilities on existing support structures owned by other persons located within a three-hundred-foot radius of the proposed site. Copies of written requests for collocation and responses shall be provided. 
b.  Statements or drawings from an engineer that must show that the proposed network node or node support pole cannot be installed or co-located on another support structures owned by other persons located within a three-hundred-foot radius of the proposed site; 
c.  Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the network node or node support pole with a photo-realistic representation of the network node or node support pole as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and parks. 
1.  Disapproval of the plan shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence. 
d.  Criteria for approval for network node or node support pole. In order for the city council to grant a variance, the applicant must show that: 
1.  No location meeting the preferences in section 95-55 is technically feasible; 
2.  The granting of the variance will comport with the purpose of this chapter and will not be materially detrimental to the adjacent property, surrounding area, or to the public in general; and 
3.  The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to afford relief. 
e.  City council shall render its decision within one hundred fifty (150) days of the filing of the application. 
(2)  A network provider may not collocate on an existing pole or install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section without a variance granted in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-55. - Preferred and discouraged locations of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment. 
(a)  The following locations are least preferable locations for network nodes: 
(1)  Historic landmarks. A network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or node support pole within three hundred (300) feet of a historic site or structure or historic landmark recognized by the city, state or federal government (see, for example, and not limited to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 442.001(3), and 16 U.S.C. § 470), as of the date of the submission of the permit. 
(2)  Residential areas and parks. A network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or a node support pole in a public right-of-way without written consent from the city council if the public right-of-way is located in or adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is adjacent to a municipal park or single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
a.  In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.104(b)), a network provider installing a network node or a node support pole in a public right-of-way must comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(3)  Historic districts and design districts. A network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or a node support pole in the public right-of-way in any area designated by the city as a design district or in an area of the city zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district unless such network node or new node support pole is camouflaged. 
(b)  The following locations are most preferable locations for network nodes: 
(1)  Industrial areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
(2)  Highway rights-of-way areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
(3)  Retail and commercial areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
(c)  The following constitute the city's order of preference regarding network node attachment to existing facilities and new node support poles: 
(1)  Existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles. Micro network nodes shall only be lashed on existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), with notice to the pole owner as required by the Federal Pole Attachment Act, and not placed on utility poles, node support poles or service poles. 
(2)  Existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), shall be the preferred support facility for network nodes and related ground equipment. 
(3)  Municipal service poles: 
a.  Non-decorative street lights with a height of more than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Traffic signal structures when such installation will not interfere with the integrity of the facility and will not interfere with the safety of public, and in accordance with an agreement as allowed by Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 284.056 and 284.101(a)(3), and (b)). 
c.  Street signage shall be a low priority use for attachment of a network node. 
d.  Other municipal service pole use is discouraged. 
(4)  New node support poles shall be the least preferred type of allowed facility for attachment of network nodes. 
(5)  Ground equipment must be minimal and the least intrusive. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-56. - Guidelines on placement, generally; penalty. 
(a)  General prohibitions. In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.102), a network provider must construct and maintain network nodes and node support poles in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the city's right-of-way management ordinance or this article. 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.); 
(6)  Interfere with city safety communication networks, public safety radio systems, traffic signal light systems, traffic signal preemption systems, SCADA, smart meter systems other city safety communications components. 
Failure to comply with this section is a violation of the City's Code and shall be subject to all remedies available under law and subject to application of the penalties outlined in section 95-57. 
(b)  General requirements. A network provider must construct and maintain network nodes, node support poles, ground equipment and related equipment in a manner that complies with the following: 
(1)  Size and height limits. Network providers shall comply strictly with the limitations as set forth in Chapter 284, including but not limited to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.002, size of a micro network node, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.003, size of network nodes, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103, maximum pole height. 
(2)  State and federal rights-of-way permit. If the project lies within a highway right-of-way, provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal government. 
(3)  Non-interference. Wireless facilities must be installed in a manner that does not cause any interference with public safety radio infrastructure or signals, safety communication networks, traffic signal light systems, traffic signal preemption systems, SCADA, smart meter systems other city safety communications components. Network nodes shall not be allowed on city's public safety radio infrastructure. 
(4)  Design manual. Network providers shall comply with the design requirements in this article and with any additional requirements for the installation and construction of network nodes and new node support poles in the public right-of-way that do not conflict with Chapter 284. 
(c)  Underground requirement areas. 
(1)  In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.107), a network provider shall, in relation to installation for which the city approved a permit application pursuant to this article, comply with applicable nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. 
(2)  If a location is designated by the city to be an underground requirement area, then a network provider's permit for the location of the micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment at such location will be revoked ninety (90) days after the designation and the network provider must remove all equipment located under the revoked permit at such location in accordance with the designation or as otherwise reasonably allowed by the city for the transition of other overhead facilities. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-57. - Penalty for improperly located network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment. 
(a)  Failure to comply with section 95-56 shall be subject to all remedies available under law and subject to application of the penalties outlined in the following subsections. 
(b)  Improperly located network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right-of-way, or otherwise be inconsistent with the requirements of this article. If any network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment is installed in a manner that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the city or impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply otherwise with the right-of-way management ordinance or renders the right-of-way noncompliant with applicable laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then network provider shall promptly remove the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment. 
(c)  Notice to remove unauthorized facilities and relocate and penalty. After thirty (30) days' notice to remove of network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment that is located in the incorrect permitted location, if not relocated the network provider shall be subject to a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day penalty until the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment is relocated to the correct area within the permitted location, regardless of whether or not the network provider's contractor, subcontractor, or vendor installed the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment in strict conformity with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordnances concerning improperly located facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-58. - Guidelines on placement—Specific requirements. 
(a)  Network node facilities placement. 
(1)  Right-of-way. Network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment must be placed, as much as possible, within two (2) feet of the outer edge of the right-of-way line to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way. 
(2)  Height above ground. Network node attachments to a pole must be installed at least eight (8) feet above the ground in accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.108), and if a network node attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet above the ground. 
(3)  Protrusions. In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 284.003(a)(1)(C), 284.003(a)(2)(C) and 284.003(a)(3)(B)), no protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole shall be more than two (2) feet. 
(4)  Limit on number of network nodes per pole. There shall be no more than one (1) network node on any one (1) pole without a variance granted in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection 95-54(b) and an agreement as allowed by Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.101(a)(3) and (b)). 
(b)  New node support poles. 
(1)  New node support pole spacing. New node support poles shall be spaced apart from existing utility poles or node support poles at the same as the spacing between utility poles in the immediate proximity, but no less than at a minimum three hundred (300) feet from a utility pole or another node support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on the area. 
(2)  Height of node support poles or modified utility pole. In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103), a node support pole or modified utility pole may not exceed the lesser of: 
a.  Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within five hundred (500) linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way; or 
b.  Fifty-five (55) feet above ground level. 
(c)  Ground equipment. 
(1)  Ground equipment near street corners and intersections. Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. In accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.102(1)), to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way, and in order to maximize the line of sight required to add to safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and in order to maximize that line of sight at street corners and intersections and to minimize hazards at those locations, ground equipment may not be installed within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a street corner or a street intersection. 
(2)  Ground equipment near municipal parks. For the safety of municipal park patrons, particularly small children, and to allow full line of sights near municipal park property, the network provider shall not install ground equipment in a right-of-way that is within a park or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundary line of a park, unless approved by the director in writing. 
(d)  Service poles. 
(1)  Installations on a service pole must be in accordance with an agreement as allowed by Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 284.056 and 284.101(a)(3) and (b)). 
(2)  Required industry standard pole load analysis. Installations on all service poles shall have an industry standard pole load analysis completed and submitted to the city with each permit application indicating that the service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load, in accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.108). 
(3)  Height of attachments. All attachments on all service poles shall be at least eight (8) feet above grade, in accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.108(a)(1)—(2)), and if a network node attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet above the ground. 
(4)  Installations on traffic signal or signage structures. Installations on all traffic signal or signage structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be in accordance with an agreement as allowed by Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 284.056 and 284.101(a)(3) and (b)). Installation of network node facilities on any traffic signal structures must comply with the following: 
a.  Any standards applicable to the proposed installation contained in the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices; 
b.  Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic light electronics; 
c.  Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal or signage structure; 
d.  Have a separate access point than the traffic signal structure; and 
e.  Not alter, puncture or drill into the city structure. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-59. - General design requirements. 
Wireless facilities must comply with the following aesthetic requirements. 
(1)  Concealment. 
a.  Network nodes and node support poles located in design districts with decorative poles and in historic districts pursuant to Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105) must be concealed consistent with the requirements of the district. 
b.  All new node support poles must be camouflaged, except those located in an area zoned or predominantly industrial area. 
c.  All new node support poles must comply with the city's pole attachment specifications to the extent those specifications are consistent with Chapter 284. 
(2)  Allowed colors. Colors in historic districts and design districts must be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-60. - Electrical supply. 
(a)  A network provider must obtain any required electrical power service to the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and ground equipment. The city shall not be liable to the network provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or network provider of the structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city. 
(b)  A network provider must not install, permit, use, or facilitate the presence or use of generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way in accordance with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.002(12)(B)(i)). 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-61. - Insurance, indemnity, bonding, and security deposits. 
(a)  To the extent consistent with Chapter 284, a network provider must provide insurance, bonds and security deposits in strict accordance with the requirements of the right-of-way management ordinance, any other applicable ordinances, and with the requirements of any agreement applicable to the wireless facility. In the event of a conflict, the requirement most protective of the city's interests prevails. 
(b)  The indemnification provisions of Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.302), as provided for in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057(a) and (b), apply to a network provider accessing a public right-of-way under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-62. - Installation and inspections. 
(a)  A network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(b)  The director or designee, may perform inspections of any micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment located in the right-of-way allowed in accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-63. - Relocation. 
Except as provided in state and federal law, a network provider shall relocate or adjust micro network nodes, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment in a public right-of-way in a timely manner and without cost to the city in the management of the public right-of-way and shall comply with the relocation requirements in the rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-64. - Removal, replacement, maintenance, and repair. 
(a)  A network provider must provide the city with five (5) days' advanced notice of any maintenance work conducted within the right-of-way and of any work to replace or upgrade a network node or pole, to install, place, maintain, operate, or replace micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles. 
(b)  A network provider must comply strictly with the requirements of the right-of-way management ordinance and other applicable ordinances, when installing, replacing, maintaining, repairing, upgrading, removing, relocating or operating micro network nodes, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.107), and except as provided in existing state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-65. - Abandonment. 
Abandoned or obsolete micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment shall be removed in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 95-66. - General provisions. 
(a)  A network provider's as built maps and records shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(b)  Network providers shall obey all city ordinances, including, but not limited to: chapter 78 (signs), chapter 86 (graffiti abatement), chapter 90 (trees and landscaping), and chapter 95 (use of rights-of-way). 
(c)  Network provider shall restore and repair the rights-of-way from any damage to the right-of-way, or any facilities located within the right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from network provider's activities in or near the right-of-way (or any other of network provider's activities hereunder) in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(d)  Network provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of network provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub-network provider's and subcontractors in connection with the installations of any micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as if such acts or omissions were network provider's acts or omissions in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 17-2143, § 2, 8-28-2017)  
Chapter 98 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Traffic commission, § 4-10. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 66; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Street railways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4008b; animal drives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.025; movement of certain manufactured housing and industrialized buildings on highways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701½; abandoned motor vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, § 5.01 et seq.; Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d; long-arm jurisdiction over nonresident motor vehicle operator in suit following collision, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 17.061 et seq.; municipal authority relating to parking, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001 et seq.; Traffic Safety Act of 1967, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701j-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 98-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  All terms used in this chapter, unless specifically defined otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the Texas Transportation Code. 
(b)  The following terms are specifically defined. 
All day school zone hours, K—4th grade, means from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
All day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade, means from the hours of 6:45 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
Commercial vehicle means a vehicle that is designed to carry primarily property behind its passenger area, and that either (1) has a gross combination weight rating that exceeds twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or (2) is a truck tractor or a combination truck tractor and semi-trailer. 
Downtown means the triangular area bounded by State Highway 332, Oyster Creek Drive, and Oak Drive. 
Electric personal assistive mobility device means a two-wheeled, self-balancing device that is propelled by an electric propulsion system with an average power of seven hundred fifty (750) watts or one (1) horsepower, i.e. Segways and electric bicycles. 
Motor assisted scooter means a self-propelled device with at least two (2) wheels in contact with the ground, a braking system, a gas or electric motor not exceeding forty (40) cubic centimeters, a deck designed to allow the operator to stand or sit, and the ability to be propelled by human power alone. 
Neighborhood electric vehicle means a vehicle that can attain a maximum speed of thirty-five (35) mph and complies with all federal motor vehicle safety laws. 
Passenger motor vehicle means a passenger car, light truck, sport utility vehicle, motorcycle, or passenger van designed to transport fifteen (15) or fewer passengers, including the driver. 
Pocket bike or minimotorbike means a self-propelled vehicle that is equipped with an electric motor or internal combustion engine having a piston displacement of less than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, is designed to propel itself with not more than two (2) wheels in contact with the ground, has a seat or saddle for the use of the operator, is not designed for use on a highway, and is ineligible for a certificate of title. 
Sidewalk means a paved area running parallel to a street or a paved area in a park that is intended for pedestrian use. 
Split day school zone hours, K—4th grade means from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
Split day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade means from the hours of 6:45 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 1, § 1, 6-30-44; Ord. No. 71-456, § 2, 12-20-71; Code 1958, § 23-1; Ord. No. 10-1944, § 1, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 12-1992, § 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 12-2002, § 1, 11-19-2012; Ord. No. 16-2093, § 1, 3-7-2016; Ord. No. 16-2110, § 1, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 16-2120, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 1—20M.  
Sec. 98-2. - Violations, penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation made in compliance herewith shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 9, § 1, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-9) 
State Law reference— Penalties for misdemeanors, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 143.  
Sec. 98-3. - Authority of police and other officers—Direction of traffic. 
It shall be the duty of the department of police of this city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Officers of the department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that upon a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire department may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 2, § 2, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-2) 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27.  
Sec. 98-4. - Same—Making and enforcing rules and regulations by chief. 
The chief of police is hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 2, § 2, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-3) 
State Law reference— Accidents, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 38 et seq.  
Sec. 98-5. - Applicability of chapter—Government vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the U.S. Government, the state, the county or the city, and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or to fail to comply with the rules and regulations herein, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this section are subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter or state law with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 2, § 4, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-6) 
State Law reference— Applicability of state traffic laws, to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 25.  
Sec. 98-6. - Same—Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions granted under subsections (a) and (b) of this section to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle apply only when the driver of the vehicle is making use, at the discretion of the driver, in accordance with policies of the state department of public safety or the local government that employs the driver, of audible or visual signals meeting the requirements of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 124, except as provided by subsection (e) of this section and except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  A police officer who is the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle used for law enforcement purposes may operate without using the emergency warning devices required by this subsection only when the officer is: 
(1)  Responding to an emergency call or when the officer is in pursuit of a suspected violator of the law and the officer has probable cause to believe that: 
a.  Knowledge of the presence of the officer will cause the suspect to destroy or lose evidence of a suspected felony; 
b.  Knowledge of the presence of the officer will cause the suspect to cease a suspected continuing felony before the officer has acquired sufficient evidence to establish grounds for arrest; 
c.  Knowledge of the presence of the officer will cause the suspect to evade apprehension or identification of the suspect or the suspect's vehicle; 
d.  Traffic conditions on a multilaned roadway are such that movements of motorists in response to the emergency warning devices may increase the potential for a collision or may unreasonably extend the duration of the pursuit; or 
(2)  In compliance with written regulations relating to the use of emergency warning devices adopted by the state department of public safety or by the local government that employs the officer. 
(e)  The exemptions granted by subsection (a) of this section apply to a private vehicle operated as an authorized emergency vehicle by a volunteer firefighter only when the vehicle is making use of visual signals meeting the standards of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 124. 
(f)  This section shall not, however, protect the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others, or of the property of others. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 2, § 5, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24.  
Sec. 98-7. - Improper riding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion of any vehicle not designated or intended for the use of passengers when such vehicle is in motion. This provision does not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of his duty nor to persons riding within truck bodies intended for merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 8, § 13, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-8)  
Sec. 98-8. - Producing unnecessary noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the city limits of Lake Jackson, Texas, any engine brake or compression brake designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle (commonly referred to as "jake braking") that results in excessive, loud, unusual, explosive, or unmuffled noise from the vehicle. 
(c)  Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency purposes are exempt from this section. 
(d)  Emergency use of the engine brake or compression brake shall be allowed in the event that the vehicle loses normal means to slow down or stop the vehicle. 
(e)  This provision is not intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with engine brakes or compression brakes, but rather to prohibit the use of such within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 8, § 6, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-44; Ord. No. 08-1881, § 1, 4-21-2008) 
Cross reference— Noise generally, § 38-51 et seq. 
State Law reference— Horns and warning devices, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 133; mufflers, prevention of noise, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 134.  
Sec. 98-9. - Roller skates, in-line skates, street skates and skateboards. 
(a)  For the purposes of this ordinances "skateboard" shall mean and include a single platform which is mounted on wheels and used to propel a person or persons along a surface or through the air while the person is standing (by foot or by hand) on the platform, and the device is moved by human power or a combination of human and motor power. 
(b)  Roller skates and in-line skates shall be allowed in residential areas. 
(c)  No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, or street skates on any street, sidewalk, public parking lot, alley, ditch, way, drive, driveway, esplanade, park or parkway in all of Area J, (known as the original downtown area). No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skateboard, on any street, sidewalk, public parking lot, alley, ditch, way, drive, driveway, esplanade, park or parkway in any business or commercial zone in the city. Roller skates and in-line skates are permitted in business and commercial zones outside Area J. 
(Ord. No. 88-1090, §§ 1, 2, 12-5-88; Code 1958, § 14-32; Ord. No. 97-1424, § 1, 7-7-97)  
Sec. 98-10. - Driving areas, in general. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle, neighborhood electric vehicle, motor assisted scooter, or electric personal assistive mobility device on drainage or utility easements or on the grass or shoulder area of a street, except as permitted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-1739, § 1, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 10-1944, § 2, 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-11. - Downtown. 
No person shall operate or ride a motor assisted scooter or electric personal assistive mobility device on any sidewalk, alley, ditch, esplanade, park or parkway in downtown Lake Jackson. 
(Ord. No. 03-1739, § 2, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 10-1944, § 2, 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-12. - Motor assisted scooters. 
(a)  A person may only operate a motor assisted scooter on a sidewalk. 
(b)  Exception: 
(1)  A person may operate a motor assisted scooter upon a street if the street has a speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour or less and: 
a.  The person is merely crossing the street in a crosswalk; or 
b.  The person has been directed to do so by an official traffic control device or police officer. 
(c)  A person operating a motor assisted scooter must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 10-1944, § 2, 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-13. - Electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
(a)  A person may only operate an electric personal assistive mobility device on a sidewalk. 
(b)  Exception: 
(1)  A person may operate an electric personal assistive mobility device upon a street if the street has a speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour or less and: 
a.  The person is merely crossing the street in a crosswalk; or 
b.  The person has been directed to do so by an official traffic control device or police officer. 
(c)  A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 10-1944, § 2, 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-14. - Neighborhood electric vehicles. 
No person may operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on a sidewalk, or upon a street with a speed limit in excess of forty-five (45) miles per hour, unless the person is merely crossing a street with a speed limit in excess of forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 10-1944, § 2, 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-15. - Pocket bikes. 
It is unlawful for a person to operate or ride a pocket bike on any street, sidewalk, or public property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-1944, § 2, 8-16-2010)  
Secs. 98-16—98-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Texas Traffic Safety Act of 1967, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701j-1; driver education, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 21.102. 
 
Sec. 98-31. - Established; composition; qualifications, compensation of members. 
There shall be established and maintained a traffic commission of the city consisting of seven (7) voting members, who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve without compensation, and three (3) ex officio members. 
(Ord. No. 72-468, § 1, 6-19-72; Ord. No. 78-655, § 1, 5-1-78; Code 1958, § 23-9.76)  
Sec. 98-32. - Appointment of members; terms of office; ex officio members. 
Seven (7) members of the traffic commission shall be appointed by the city council, four (4) such members to be appointed in each even-numbered year, and three (3) such members to be appointed in each odd-numbered year, the appointments to be made each year within thirty (30) days following the regular election. The term of office of each such member shall be two (2) years. The three (3) ex officio members of the traffic commission shall be a city councilman, to be designated by the city council, the chief of police and the city attorney. Ex officio members shall serve the commission in an advisory capacity but shall have no voting rights, and shall attend meetings as requested by the council or the traffic commission. 
(Ord. No. 72-468, § 2, 6-19-72; Ord. No. 78-655, § 1, 5-1-78; Code 1958, § 23-9.77)  
Sec. 98-33. - Chairman; rules and procedures. 
The commission shall annually elect one of its number as chairman and shall establish its own rules and procedures which shall include the following: 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members of the commission and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, the chairman being entitled to vote upon questions. 
(2)  Meetings shall be held not less than once each month, shall be open to the public, and a record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 72-468, § 4, 6-19-72; Code 1958, § 23-9.79)  
Sec. 98-34. - General powers and duties. 
The traffic commission shall be and is hereby vested with the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the operation and parking of vehicles within the city, including private property used for public purposes. 
(2)  Recommend to the city council for adoption, policies regarding the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the city by causing to be erected or placed proper signs or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  Recommend to the city council the location of all necessary signs or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part thereof when the commission shall deem the same necessary. 
(4)  Initiate studies on all vehicular and pedestrian traffic problems within the city, and hold public hearings as necessary with regard to these studies. 
(5)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the city council shall from time to time authorize. 
(Ord. No. 72-468, § 5, 6-19-72; Code 1958, § 23-9.80)  
Secs. 98-35—98-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SIGNS AND SIGNALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Local traffic-control devices, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 31. 
 
Sec. 98-56. - Designation of type and location by council; placement and maintenance by chief of police. 
(a)  The city council shall determine and designate by resolution the character or type of all official traffic signs and signals, and shall designate the location where same shall be installed; provided, however, that the chief of police is hereby empowered to erect traffic signs and signals of a temporary nature when emergencies or special conditions exist. 
(b)  Subject to this section, the chief of police is hereby authorized, and it shall be his duty, to place and maintain or cause to be placed and be maintained all official traffic signs and signals. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 3, § 1, 6-30-44; Ord. No. 71-456, § 3, 12-20-71; Code 1958, § 23-10) 
State Law reference— Signs giving notice of one-way traffic, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 59.  
Sec. 98-57. - Presumption of legality of traffic control devices. 
Proof that a traffic control sign, signal or device exists or existed at a specific location within the city shall constitute prima facie evidence of its official and lawful installation. In the prosecution of any person for having disobeyed a traffic control sign, signal or device, it shall not be necessary for the state to prove the authority under which such traffic sign, signal or device was installed. 
(Ord. No. 71-449, § 1, 9-7-71; Code 1958, § 23-10.1)  
Secs. 98-58—98-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-81. - Driving through processions. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or by police officers. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 8, § 1, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-38)  
Sec. 98-82. - U-turns prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not make a U-turn on any street within the city, except at intersections and at designated turning areas. In this connection, it shall be considered that the driver has made a U-turn when a vehicle is parked in a street central parking area and thereafter the vehicle is driven forward out of the parking area. 
(b)  There shall be no U-turns: 
(1)  In the driveway of the Lake Jackson Recreation Center and MacLean Park (91 Lake Road); and 
(2)  On Lake Road from Canna Lane to Oak Drive between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days. 
(Ord. No. 65-316, § 1, 4-19-65; Code 1958, § 23-42.1; Ord. No. 09-1920, § 2, 11-16-2009)  
Sec. 98-83. - Driving through a street central parking area. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive a motor vehicle through a street central parking area within the city. 
(Ord. No. 68-371, § 1, 4-1-68; Code 1958, § 23-42.2)  
Sec. 98-84. - Commercial vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial vehicle upon any street, street right-of-way, street dedication or alley within the city except on the following designated truck routes: 
(1)  F.M. 2004. 
(2)  Old Angleton Road. 
(3)  North Dixie Drive. 
(4)  Highway 332. 
(5)  Highway 288. 
(6)  Oak Drive, from Highway 288/332 to Oyster Creek Drive. 
(b)  An operator of a commercial vehicle is allowed to travel on a street that is not a designated truck route for the purpose of arriving at a destination that is within the City of Lake Jackson city limits. When accessing such a destination, the operator must leave a designated truck route at the intersection that is nearest to his/her destination, proceed by the most direct route, and then return to the nearest designated truck route using the most direct route. The operator must need to reach the destination for the purpose of making a delivery, receiving goods, or performing a service. 
(c)  The following types of vehicles are exempt from this section: emergency, public utility, and government vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 71-445, § 1, 7-6-71; Ord. No. 77-608, § 1, 1-17-77; Ord. No. 88-1076, § 2, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 90-1134, § 1, 9-17-90; Code 1958, § 23-42.3; Ord. No. 96-1389, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 16-2093, § 2, 3-7-2016)  
Sec. 98-85. - Ready-mixed concrete trucks. 
Weight limits on ready-mixed concrete trucks allowed to travel public roads shall be thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds for a tandem axle and twelve thousand (12,000) pounds for a single axle, not to exceed forty-eight thousand (48,000) pounds gross total, thus exempting the city from the weight limits established by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-12, § 1. 
(Ord. No. 77-631, § 1, 8-1-77; Ord. No. 88-1076, § 3, 6-20-88; Code 1958, § 23-42.4)  
Sec. 98-86. - Speed limits, generally. 
No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speeds for compliance with the above, or except as otherwise ordered by the city council, the limits specified in this section shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limit specified in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful: 
(1)  In the central business district, twenty (20) miles per hour. As herein used, "central business district" is defined as that portion of area "J" within the city limits bounded by and enclosed within, but not including, Oyster Creek Drive on the north, Oak Drive on the east, and SH 332 on the south and west. 
(2)  Outside the central business district, in all areas not included in subsection (3) of this section or as otherwise provided by the council, thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(3)  When passing an elementary or middle school building or the grounds thereof on days when school is in session, during all day school zone hours, twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 8, § 4, 6-30-44; Ord. No. 71-456, § 5, 12-20-71; Ord. No. 72-472, § 1, 8-7-72; Ord. No. 85-990, § 1, 11-4-85; Code 1958, § 23-43; Ord. No. 07-1833, § 1, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 12-2992, § 2, 8-6-2012) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 51; authority of municipal governing bodies to alter maximum prima facie speed limits, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 169.  
Sec. 98-86.1. - Speed limits at specific locations. 
Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, the following prima facie speed limits hereafter indicated for vehicles are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe; and such speed limits are hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling upon the named streets and highways, on either side, or parts thereof, described as follows: 
(1)  State Highway 332: 
a.  Along SH 332 from the west city limit to the point of five hundred ninety-seven (597) feet east of Lake Road, a distance of approximately 0.719 mile, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
b.  Along SH 332 from the point of five hundred ninety-seven (597) feet east of Lake Road to the intersection of the bridge under SH 288, a distance of approximately 0.460 mile, the speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
c.  Along SH 332 Main Lane from its junction with State Highway 288 to the east city limit, a distance of approximately 3.343 miles, the speed limit shall be sixty (60) miles per hour. 
d.  Along SH 332 Frontage Road from its junction with State Highway 288 to the east city limit, a distance of approximately 3.343 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(2)  On County Road 288 from its crossing of Oyster Creek north to a point five hundred (500) feet north of its intersection with Willow Drive, a distance of approximately 1.0 mile, forty (40) miles per hour. 
(3)  FM 2004: 
a.  Along FM 2004 from the north city limit to one thousand four hundred fifteen (1,415) feet north of SH 332, a distance of approximately 2.782 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour. 
b.  Along FM 2004 from one thousand four hundred fifteen (1,415) feet north of SH 332 to one thousand fifty-six (1,056) feet south of SH 332, a distance of approximately 0.468 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
c.  Along FM 2004 from one thousand fifty-six (1,056) feet south of SH 332 to south city limit, a distance of approximately 2.660 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
(4)  State Highway 288: 
a.  Along SH 288 east frontage road from three thousand sixty-two (3,062) feet north of FM 2004 to one thousand four hundred twenty-five (1,425) feet south of FM 2004, a distance of approximately 0.852 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
b.  Along SH 288 east frontage road from one thousand five hundred eighty-four (1,584) feet north of SH 332 to six hundred thirty-four (634) feet south of SH 332, a distance of approximately 0.408 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
c.  Along SH 288/SH 332 east frontage road from six hundred thirty-four (634) feet south of SH 332 to one thousand eight hundred eighty-five (1,885) feet south of SH 332, a distance of approximately 0.357 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
d.  Along SH 288 west frontage road from two thousand three hundred seventy-six (2,376) feet north of FM 2004 to one thousand four hundred twenty-five (1,425) feet south of FM 2004, a distance of approximately 0.773 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
e.  Along SH 288 west frontage road from one thousand five hundred eighty-four (1,584) feet north of SH 332 to six hundred thirty-four (634) feet south of SH 332, a distance of approximately 0.408 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
f.  Along SH 288/SH 332 west frontage road from six hundred thirty-four (634) feet south of SH 332 to one thousand eight hundred eighty-five (1,885) feet south of SH 332, a distance of approximately 0.357 miles, the speed limit shall forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
g.  Along SH 288 main lanes from one thousand four hundred seventy-eight (1,478) feet north of FM 2004 to two thousand six hundred ninety-two (2,692) feet south of FM 2004, a distance of approximately 0.800 miles, the speed limit shall be sixty (60) miles per hour. 
h.  Along SH 288 main lanes from two thousand six hundred ninety-two (2,692) feet south of FM 2004 to six hundred thirty-four (634) feet south of SH 332, a distance of approximately 0.488 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour. 
i.  Along SH 288/SH 332 main lanes from six hundred thirty-four (634) feet south of SH 332 to centerline of This Way, a distance of approximately 0.369 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour. 
(5)  Dixie Drive: 
a.  On all of that portion of Dixie Drive that lies between Oyster Creek Drive on the north and Plantation Drive on the south, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(6)  On that portion of Plantation Drive from its intersection with Magnolia to its intersection with Dixie Drive, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(7)  On all of that portion of Lake Road between FM 2004 on the west to This Way Street on the east, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(8)  On Oyster Creek Drive between Old Angleton Road (Old County Road 288) on the east and State Highway 288 on the west, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(9)  Along Oyster Creek Drive from a point 120 feet west of Jasmine to a point 120 feet east of Jasmine, a school speed zone, 20 miles per hour during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade. 
(10)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, 7—8th grade, on all that portion of Oyster Creek Drive from 200 feet east of the intersection of Oyster Creek Drive and Circle Way to 125 feet west of the intersection of Oyster Creek Drive and Oak Drive, 20 miles per hour. 
(11)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, 7—8th grade, on that portion of Circle Way from Oyster Creek Drive to 300 feet south of Winding Way, 20 miles per hour. 
(12)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, 7—8th grade, on that portion of Circle Way northerly from Oyster Creek Drive to Oak Drive, 20 miles per hour. 
(13)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours 7—8th grade, on that portion of Oak Drive from its northern intersection with Circle Way to 125 feet south of the intersection of Oyster Creek Drive and Oak Drive, 20 miles per hour. 
(14)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Willow Drive that lies between 220 feet south of Buttercup on the south to a point 200 feet north of the Willow Drive Baptist Church on the north, 20 miles per hour. 
(15)  On days when school is in session, on all that portion of Yaupon that lies: 
a.  Between Azalea and Center Way, from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., 20 miles per hour. 
b.  Between Center Way and Magnolia, during all day school zone hours, K—6th grade, 20 miles per hour. 
c.  Between Magnolia and 100 feet north of the Oyster Creek bridge from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., 20 miles per hour, 20 miles per hour. 
d.  Between 250 feet either side of its intersection with Crocus Street, 20 miles per hour, from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., 20 miles per hour. 
(16)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Magnolia that lies between Yaupon and Winding Way, 20 miles per hour. 
(17)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Winding Way that lies between Magnolia on the south and Grapevine on the west, 20 miles per hour. 
(18)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Center Way that lies 440 feet east of its intersection with Lilac to 425 feet west of its intersection with Lilac, 20 miles per hour. 
(19)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Sycamore that lies 240 feet north of its intersection with Ligustrum to 330 feet south of its intersection with Mulberry, 20 miles per hour. 
(20)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of That Way that lies between Linden Lane and Anchusa, 20 miles per hour. 
(21)  On days when school is in session during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Oak Drive that lies 380 feet east of the intersection with That Way to 230 feet west of the intersection with That Way, 20 miles per hour. 
(22)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade on all that portion of Daffodil 200 feet on either side of the intersection of Daffodil and Crocus, 20 miles per hour. 
(23)  On days when school is in session, during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Sycamore that lies between a point that is 245 feet north of Post Oak on the north and 160 feet south of Balsam on the south, 20 miles per hour. 
(24)  On days when school is in session during split day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Plantation Drive that lies 435 feet west of its intersection with Post Oak to 440 feet east of Cedar, 20 miles per hour. 
(25)  On days when school is in session, during all day school zone hours, K—6th grade, on all that portion of Lake Road that lies between Canna Lane and Oak Drive South, 20 miles per hour. 
(26)  On days when school is in session, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all that portion of Post Oak that lies between Sycamore and Cedar, 20 miles per hour. 
(27)  On days when school is in session, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all that portion of Balsam that lies between Sycamore and Post Oak Street, 20 miles per hour. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby directed to place and maintain, or to cause to be placed and maintained, the appropriate signs as authorized by the uniform sign manual at the location hereinabove designated. 
(c)  Any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity that violates this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1, 3-18-63; Ord. No. 63-294, § 1, 7-1-63; Ord. No. 63-295, § 1, 7-15-63; Ord. No. 71-438, § 1, 6-7-71; Ord. No. 72-472, § 2, 8-7-72; Ord. No. 74-530, § 1, 4-8-74; Ord. No. 75-590, §§ 1, 2, 6-7-76; Ord. No. 77-622, § 1, 3-21-77; Ord. No. 82-871, § 1, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 83-909, § 2, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 84-845, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 85-990, § 2, 11-4-85; Ord. No. 86-1025, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 88-1074, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 88-1076, §§ 4, 5, 6, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 88-1081, § 1, 8-1-88; Ord. No. 89-1116, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 90-1123, § 1, 3-19-90; Ord. No. 90-1126, § 1, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 91-1158, § 1, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 92-1187, § 1, 1-6-92; Ord. No. 92-1217, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 92-1223, § 1, 12-7-92; Code 1958, § 23-43.1; Ord. No. 92-1268, § 1, 12-16-93; Ord. No. 94-1289, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 94-1297, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 95-1356, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 96-1375, §§ 1, 2, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 96-1391, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 97-1436, § 1, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 97-1442, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 98-1552, § 1, 3-17-98; Ord. No. 98-1553, § 1, 3-17-98; Ord. No. 98-1554, § 1, 3-17-98; Ord. No. 84-953, § 1, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 00-1628, § 1, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 00-1640, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 01-1646, § 1, 1-25-2001; Ord. No. 03-1723, § 1, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 03-1732, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-1733, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 06-1818, § 1, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 06-1832, § 1, 12-4-2006; Ord. No. 07-1833, §§ 2—4, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 09-1913, § 1, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-1916, § 1, 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 10-1936, § 1, 5-3-2010; Ord. No. 11-1953, § 1, 1-3-2011; Ord. No. 12-1988, § 1, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 12-1991, § 1, 7-16-2012; Ord. No. 12-1992, § 3, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 13-2013, § 1, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 13-2016, § 1, 8-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-2110, § 3, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— At the city's request, Ord. No. 84-953, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 1984 was placed in § 98-86.1(12).  
Sec. 98-86.2. - Speed limits for school zones. 
(a)  The following streets shall have a speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour on days when school is in session: 
(1)  Along FM 2004, from one hundred seventy-five (175) feet north of Northwood Drive to two hundred eleven (211) feet south of Deerwood Drive, a distance of approximately 0.280 miles, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(b)  The following streets shall have a speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour on days when school is in session: 
(1)  Along Oyster Creek Drive from a point one hundred twenty (120) feet west of Jasmine to a point one hundred twenty (120) feet east of Jasmine, during split day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade. 
(2)  On all of that portion of Oyster Creek Drive from two hundred (200) feet east of the intersection of Oyster Creek Drive and Circle Way to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet west of the intersection of Oyster Creek Drive and Oak Drive, during split day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade. 
(3)  On that portion of Circle Way from Oyster Creek Drive to three hundred (300) feet south of Winding Way, during split day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade. 
(4)  On that portion of Circle Way northerly from Oyster Creek Drive to Oak Drive, during split day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade. 
(5)  On that portion of Oak Drive from its northern intersection with Circle Way to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet south of the intersection of Oyster Creek Drive and Oak Drive, during split day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade. 
(6)  On all of that portion of Willow Drive that lies between two hundred twenty (220) feet south of Buttercup on the south to a point two hundred (200) feet north of the Willow Drive Baptist Church on the north, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(7)  On all of that portion of Yaupon that lies: 
a.  Between Azalea and Center Way, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
b.  Between Center Way and Magnolia, during all day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
c.  Between Magnolia and one hundred (100) feet north of the Oyster Creek bridge, during split day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade. 
d.  Between two hundred fifty (250) feet either side of its intersection with Crocus Street, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(8)  On all of that portion of Magnolia that lies between Yaupon and Winding Way, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(9)  On all of that portion of Winding Way that lies between Magnolia on the south and Grapevine on the west, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(10)  On all of that portion of Center Way that lies four hundred forty (440) feet east of its intersection with Lilac to four hundred twenty-five (425) feet west of its intersection with Lilac, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(11)  On all of that portion of Sycamore that lies two hundred forty (240) feet north of its intersection with Ligustrum to three hundred thirty (330) feet south of its intersection with Mulberry, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(12)  On all of that portion of That Way that lies between Linden Lane and Anchusa, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(13)  On all of that portion of Oak Drive that lies three hundred eighty (380) feet east of the intersection with That Way to two hundred thirty (230) feet west of the intersection with That Way, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(14)  On all of that portion of Daffodil two hundred (200) feet on either side of the intersection of Daffodil and Crocus, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(15)  On all of that portion of Sycamore that lies between a point that is two hundred forty-five (245) feet north of Post Oak on the north and one hundred sixty (160) feet south of Balsam on the south, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(16)  On all of that portion of Plantation Drive that lies four hundred thirty-five (435) feet west of its intersection with Post Oak to four hundred forty (440) feet east of Cedar, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(17)  On all of that portion of Lake Road that lies between Canna Lane and Oak Drive South, during all day school zone hours, 5th—8th grade. 
(18)  On all of that portion of Post Oak that lies between Sycamore and Cedar, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade. 
(19)  On all of that portion of Balsam that lies between Sycamore and Post Oak Street, during split day school zone hours, K—4th grade 
(Ord. No. 16-2110, § 2, 8-8-2016)  
Sec. 98-87. - Following emergency vehicles. 
No person shall follow in a motor vehicle any ambulance or police car which is traveling on a public street in response to a report of an automobile collision or accident. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 25-6, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 24A-6)  
Sec. 98-88. - Changing one-way streets and alleys to two-way. 
The following streets, avenues, drives, and alleys are hereby established to be two-way for the portions and limits as listed in this section: 
(1)  The entire alley that runs between and parallel to Circle Way and Parking Way. 
(Ord. No. 11-1957, § 1, 2-22-2011)  
Secs. 98-89—98-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ON PARK, SIDEWALK OR EASEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-1904, § 1, adopted April 20, 2009, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 98-101—98-106, pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 98-101. - Operation of motor powered vehicles in parks. 
(a)  A person may only operate a motor vehicle or neighborhood electric vehicle in a park on paved roads. 
(b)  A person may only operate a motor assisted scooter or electric personal assistive mobility device in a park on sidewalks. 
(c)  Exceptions: 
(1)  If there is no road or sidewalk, the operator of a motor vehicle, neighborhood electric vehicle, motor assisted scooter, or electric personal assistive mobility device may drive in a straight uninterrupted line to a facility and immediately park the vehicle. To exit the park, the operator must drive in a straight uninterrupted line to the park's exit. 
(2)  A person may operate a motor vehicle, neighborhood electric vehicle, motor assisted scooter, or electric personal assistive mobility device on grassy areas if the director of parks and recreation or his designee determines that overflow parking on the grassy areas is needed for a special event. 
(3)  A person may operate a motor vehicle, neighborhood electric vehicle, motor assisted scooter, or electric personal assistive mobility device on grassy areas for the purposes of park maintenance or delivery of equipment. 
(4)  At no time may a person park a motor vehicle or a neighborhood electric vehicle within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a playground area. 
Areas Allowed for Operation of Mobility Devices 
(see ordinance for details) 
	Downtown 
Sidewalks 	Other 
Sidewalks 	Downtown 
Streets 	Other 
Streets 	Easements 
and 
Shoulders 	Parks 
Motor Assisted Scooters 	No 	Yes 	No 	If street is 30 mph or less and crossing street or directed to do so 	No 	Sidewalks only 
Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device 	No 	Yes 	No 	If street is 30 mph and crossing street or directed to do so 	No 	Sidewalks only 
Neighborhood Electric Vehicles 	No 	No 	Yes 	If speed limit is 45 mph or less 	No 	Paved roads 
only 
Pocket Bikes 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 
 
(Ord. No. 75-560, § 1, 5-19-75; Ord. No. 85-966, § 1, 2-19-85; Code 1958, § 23-61; Ord. No. 07-1836, § 3, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-1904, § 1, 4-21-2009; Ord. No. 10-1944, § 3, 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-102. - Speed limits in parks. 
For the operation of all motor vehicles upon any street that is within a park a speed limit of ten (10) miles per hour is hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and prudent, and any rate of speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour shall constitute prima facie evidence that the speed was not reasonable and prudent and therefore unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 75-560, § 1, 5-19-75; Ord. No. 77-627, § 1, 7-11-77; Code 1958, § 23-66; Ord. No. 09-1904, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-1904, § 1, adopted April 21, 2009, renumbered former § 98-106 as § 98-102. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to regulate the speed of vehicles in public parks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(5).  
Secs. 98-103—98-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-126. - Owner of illegally parked vehicle presumed to be violator. 
When an unattended motor vehicle is parked, stopped, or left standing on a public street or upon public property within the city in any manner constituting a violation of this chapter or of any applicable law or regulation of this state, proof that such motor vehicle was, at the time of the alleged offense, owned by the person charged with such offense, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such motor vehicle was parked, stopped, or left standing by the owner thereof at the place alleged. 
(Ord. No. 71-450, § 1, 9-7-71; Code 1958, § 23-15.1)  
Sec. 98-127. - Loading and unloading, parking time limit. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or for the loading, unloading, delivery or pickup of materials, in any place marked as a loading zone. In no case shall the stop for loading and for unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 2(b), 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-16)  
Sec. 98-128. - Method of parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway free for movement of vehicular traffic, except on streets on which no parking is allowed during the actual unloading or loading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a police officer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to park a vehicle within an alley in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to park any vehicle within six hundred (600) feet of any burning building or structure or thing where firefighting apparatus is being used for the purpose of extinguishing same, except under the direction of the chief or other officer of the fire department, or a police officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 6, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-20) 
State Law reference— Where parking is permitted, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 96.  
Sec. 98-129. - Parking time limits; obedience thereto, erecting signs, resolution designating. 
The operator or driver of any vehicle shall not park such vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day within the district or streets designated by the city council by resolution, except in accordance with the time limit specified on the official signs and signals and other provisions of this chapter; Sundays and legal holidays excepted. Signs shall be placed or erected and maintained in each block designating the provisions of this section upon the passage of such resolution. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 7, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-21) 
State Law reference— Obedience to and required traffic control devices, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 32.  
Sec. 98-129.1. - No stopping, standing, parking, loading and unloading zones. 
(a)  No parking zones designated. 
Anchusa, on the north side, from That Way to Royal Oak Circle, from the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days. 
Abner Jackson Parkway. 
Arrow Wood, from the 304/306 lot line and the 305/307 lot line on Arrow Wood to its intersection with Anchusa during split day school zone hours, K—4th. 
Azalea Street, on the south side, from its intersection with Yaupon Street, one hundred fifty (150) feet easterly. 
Azalea Street, on the north side, from its intersection with Yaupon Street, five hundred (500) feet easterly to the drainage ditch, on Sundays. 
Center Way, north side, along the Jasmine Hall property. 
Center Way, from its intersection with Grapevine Turn to Oak Drive. 
Circle Way, west side, from Oyster Creek Drive to four hundred (400) feet north of Oyster Creek Drive. 
Circle Way, parkway side, thirty (30) feet from the corner on all intersections along Circle Way from Oyster Creek Drive to Oak Drive. 
Circle Way, both sides, from Winding Way to Oyster Creek Drive 
Grapevine Turn, both sides, entire street. 
Indigo Street, both sides, from State Highway 332 to Silverbell Circle. 
Ligustrum, north side, from Ash Lane to Narcissus Street, from the hours of 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days. 
Mimosa, both sides, easterly from South Oak Drive to the west property line of first house on Mimosa. 
Narcissus, east side, across from the Jasmine Hall property. 
Nasturtium, west side, across from Beutel School property. 
Silverbell Circle, from Caraway Common to Chervil Common's northwestern intersection with Silverbell Circle. 
South Parking Place, from the west end of the street at the brick paver crosswalk to the east end of the street at the brick paver crosswalk near the Alden Dow building, during the dates and hours shown on the posted special event parking signs, unless authorized by the event holder. 
State Highway 332, both sides, within the city limits. 
Tanager Lane. 
That Way Street: 
East side, from the drainage easement north of Mistletoe to the drainage easement south of Bougainvillea Street. 
East side, for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet immediately south of the exit lane of the circular drive in front of Bess Brannen Elementary School. 
West side, from Oyster Creek Drive to a point two hundred (200) feet north of Oyster Creek Drive. 
West side, from FM 2004 to Anchusa Street. 
Winding Way Street, between Ney Elementary and First Baptist Church between the entrance and exit of the circular drive at the Baptist church. 
Yaupon Street, east side, between Winding Way and Center Way, during school hours of Ney Elementary. 
(b)  No parking within seventy-five (75) feet of intersection. There is hereby designated a no parking zone within seventy-five (75) feet of the point of intersection of the following specific intersecting roadway: 
Center Way and West Magnolia Street intersection. 
(c)  No stopping, standing, parking, and/or loading or unloading passenger zones designated. 
(1)  In the driveways or parking lot areas of the Lake Jackson Recreation Center and MacLean Park (91 Lake Road) except for areas designated for parking and marked loading and unloading areas. 
(2)  On the southbound side of Lake Road from Oak Drive to Canna Lane. 
(3)  On the northbound side of Lake Road from the northern most exit of Grady Rasco Middle School to Oak Drive. 
(4)  On the northbound side of Lake Road from Canna Lane to the northern most exit of Grady Rasco Middle School except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days. 
(5)  The sections of Oak Drive and Oyster Creek Drive that are in front of the entrance and exit to Lake Jackson Fire Station #1 and Fire Station #2. 
(6)  The intersection of That Way and the bus entrance near FM 2004 at Bess Brannen Elementary School. 
(d)  No loading-unloading zones designated. There are hereby designated no loading-unloading of passenger zones in the following areas: 
Oyster Creek Drive, from Circle Way to the Lake Jackson Intermediate School circular drive entrance on Oyster Creek Drive. 
(Code 1958, § 23-21.1; Ord. No. 80-763, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-80; Ord. No. 81-777, §§ 1, 2, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 83-909, § 1, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 84-915, § 2, 2-20-84; Ord. No. 88-1076, § 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 92-1203, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. 92-1267, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 93-1269, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 94-1287, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 94-1301, § 1, 7-18-94; Ord. No. 94-1313, § 1, 10-3-94; Ord. No. 95-1355, § 1, 11-6-95; Ord. No. 96-1370, § 1, 3-4-96; Ord. No. 96-1385, §§ 1—3, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 98-1568, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 99-1618, § 1, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 02-1697, § 1, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-1711, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-1714, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 05-1790, § 1, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 06-1826, § 1, 10-2-2006; Ord. No. 08-1890, § 1, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-1920, § 1, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 13-2007, § 1, 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 15-2071, § 1, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 15-2072, § 1, 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 16-2094, § 1, 3-21-2016; Ord. No. 16-2097, § 1, 4-4-2016; Ord. No. 16-2104, § 1, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 16-2115, § 1, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 16-2123, § 1, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 17-2128, § 1, 3-20-2017; Ord. No. 19-2191 , § 1, 12-16-2019)  
Sec. 98-129.2. - Time limited parking zones designated. 
(a)  The following is hereby designated as a time limited parking zone: 
Circle Way, north side, in downtown Lake Jackson, one (1) space in front of Lake Jackson Flowers and Gifts (26 Circle Way, Lot 13, Block 9, Area J, Brazoria County, Lake Jackson, Texas) with parking limited to periods no greater than fifteen (15) minutes during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. 
Circle Way, north side, in downtown Lake Jackson, one (1) parking space in front of Champagne Appliances (30 Circle Way, Lots 15 and 16, Block 9, Area J, Brazoria County, Lake Jackson, Texas) with parking limited to periods no greater than fifteen (15) minutes during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. 
Center Way, south side, in downtown Lake Jackson, two (2) spaces in front of ABC Realty with parking limited to periods no greater than thirty (30) minutes during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to park or stand his vehicle in the aforementioned parking place for a period of time longer than the time limit specified. 
(Ord. No. 96-1390, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 96-1397, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 96-1403, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 97-1429, § 1, 9-18-97; Ord. No. 01-1658, § 1, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-1756, §§ 1, 2, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 10-1948, § 1, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 17-2140, § 1, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 98-129.3. - No turn zones designated. 
(a)  It shall be illegal for a driver to turn left onto That Way from the exit lane of the circular drive in front of Bess Brannen Elementary School from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days. 
(b)  It shall be illegal for a driver to turn left from south bound That Way into the circular drive of Bess Brannen Elementary School. 
(Ord. No. 07-1871, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-1890, § 2, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 16-2122, § 2, 11-7-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1871, § 1, adopted November 19, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as section 98-129.2. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as section 98-129.3.  
Sec. 98-129.4. - Right turn only zones designated. 
The following are designated as right turn only lanes: 
The right lane of east bound Oyster Creek Drive at its intersection with North Dixie Drive from the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Monday through Friday. 
The right lane of north bound Yaupon Street at its intersection with FM 2004. 
The right lane of west bound Plantation at its intersection with Oleander. 
(Ord. No. 11-1965, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 11-1977, § 1, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 16-2113, § 1, 9-19-2016)  
Sec. 98-129.5. - Left turn only zones designated. 
The following are designated as left turn only lanes: 
The left and middle lanes of north bound Yaupon Street at its intersection with FM 2004. 
The left lane of west bound Plantation at its intersection with Oleander. 
South bound That Way into the circular drive of Bess Brannen Elementary School. 
(Ord. No. 11-1977, § 1, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 16-2113, § 1, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 16-2115, § 2, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 16-2122, § 1, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 98-130. - Disabled parking zones. 
(a)  The city or any political subdivision or any person that owns or controls property used for parking may designate one (1) or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. 
(b)  The penalties contained in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, § 10 shall apply to any person who parks a vehicle in any parking space or area for the disabled on public or private property designated in compliance with the identification requirements referred to in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, § 6A(a) when the person does not properly display the special device designating disabled persons. 
(Ord. No. 84-948, § 1, 10-1-84; Code 1958, § 23-21.2)  
Sec. 98-130.1. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to implement a program under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.010 to successfully train and appoint eligible citizens to file a charge or charges against a person or persons who commit an offense under §§ 681.009 or 681.011 by parking a vehicle in a parking space reserved, by the city or by a private owner, for persons with disabilities. A citizen who is appointed under this section must: 
(1)  Be a United States citizen of good moral character who has not been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  Take and subscribe to the same oath of office as other city officials; 
(3)  Successfully complete a training program of at least four (4) hours in length developed by the city administration. 
(b)  A person appointed under this section: 
(1)  Is not a peace officer; 
(2)  Has no authority under this section to enforce a law other than disabled parking ordinances; 
(3)  May not carry a weapon while performing duties under this section; 
(4)  Is not entitled to compensation for performing duties under this section, or to indemnification from the city or the state for injury or property damage the person sustains or liability the person incurs in performing duties under this section, and the city is not liable for any damages arising from an act or omission of a person appointed in performing duties under this section. 
(c)  A person who is successfully trained and appointed under this section shall have the authority to file a charge under the provisions of this section and section 98-130. 
(d)  Any person who violates section 98-130 or this section (98-130.1) shall be subject to a penalty for each violation of one hundred dollars ($100.00) up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) as set out in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, § 681.011(g)—(l). 
(Ord. No. 99-1604, § 1, 7-6-99)  
Sec. 98-131. - Extended parking for passenger motor vehicles. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to passenger motor vehicles and motorcycles. For the parking of boats, trailers, commercial vehicles, or recreational vehicles, see section 98-152 et seq. 
(b)  Nonresidential areas. Passenger motor vehicles may not be parked on streets in nonresidential areas for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours. 
(c)  Residential areas. The following restrictions apply to parking on streets in residential areas: 
(1)  A passenger motor vehicle may be parked for up to seventy-two (72) consecutive hours on that portion of the street that lies alongside residential property the owner or operator of the vehicle owns or occupies. 
(2)  A passenger motor vehicle may be parked for up to seventy-two (72) consecutive hours on that portion of the street that lies alongside residential property if the owner or operator of the vehicle has permission to park from the owner or occupant of said residential property. 
(3)  Disabled passenger motor vehicles may be parked on a street for no more than forty-eight (48) hours if such motor vehicle is protected by flares or other approved signal devices. 
(4)  A passenger motor vehicle may not be parked on that portion of the street that runs alongside residential property that person does not own or occupy or does not have permission to park on from the owner or occupant of said property except for once every seven (7) days for no more than twenty (20) consecutive hours. 
(5)  Passenger motor vehicles on all other areas of residential streets may not be parked for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. 
(6)  Passenger motor vehicles may not be parked in a manner that causes any part of the passenger motor vehicle to extend over a sidewalk. On a residential lot with no sidewalk, no passenger motor vehicles shall be parked within a five-foot setback from the curb edge (that edge of the curb closest to the house). 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 8, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-22; Ord. No. 94-1276, § 1, 1-3-94; Ord. No. 11-1963, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 16-2120, § 2, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 98-132. - Angle parking. 
The city council shall determine by resolution upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall, at the time of such determining, provide for the marking or signing of such streets. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 9, 6-30-44; Ord. No. 71-456, § 4, 12-20-71; Code 1958, § 23-23)  
Sec. 98-133. - Displaying vehicle for sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street any vehicle displayed for the purpose of selling same. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 10, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-24)  
Sec. 98-134. - Displaying for purpose of advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park on any street any vehicle for the primary purpose of displaying advertising. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 11, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-25)  
Sec. 98-135. - Prohibited parking in any private area, unless invited; prohibited parking in fire lanes and fire hydrant zones. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a trespass for any person to park a motor vehicle upon any private parking area within the city unless expressly or implicitly invited to do so by the proprietor of such private parking area. The parking of a motor vehicle so as to block the passage of another motor vehicle from leaving the premises or gaining entry thereto, or parking the vehicle in lanes that are designated as traffic or fire lanes will conclusively negate an implied invitation by the proprietor to park within such private parking area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a trespass for any person to park a motor vehicle upon any private parking area within the city in an area designated and identified as a fire hydrant zone. 
(Ord. No. 67-353, § 1, 7-3-67; Ord. No. 77-633, § 1, 8-1-77; Code 1958, § 23-26.1)  
Sec. 98-136. - Removal of illegally stopped vehicles. 
(a)  Any commissioned member of the state department of public safety or a peace officer listed under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. Art. 2.12 is hereby authorized to remove, or to require the driver or other person in charge of a vehicle to remove, a vehicle from city property or from a highway, street, or road to the nearest garage or other place of safety, to a garage designated or maintained by the governmental agency by which the officer is employed, or to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of the highway, street, or road, when: 
(1)  Any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)  Any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway; 
(3)  Any vehicle is found upon a highway or city property and report has previously been made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon issued charging that such vehicle has been stolen; 
(4)  Any such officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has been abandoned for more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(5)  A vehicle upon a highway, street, or road or city property is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the owner or person in charge of the vehicle is incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other reason to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or is not in the immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle; 
(6)  A vehicle upon a highway, street, or road is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the owner or person in charge of the vehicle does not designate a particular towing company or storage company; 
(7)  An officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is by law required to take the person arrested into custody; or 
(8)  In the opinion of the officer, the vehicle constitutes a hazard, or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency, or by reason of any catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstance the safety of such vehicle is imperiled. 
(b)  Any law enforcement agency other than the state department of public safety removing an abandoned vehicle in an unincorporated area shall notify the county sheriff. 
(c)  The owner of a vehicle that is removed or stored under this section is liable for all reasonable towing and storage fees incurred in the removal or storage, and any vehicle removed under provisions of this section to any storage facility may not be reclaimed except upon proof of ownership and payment of towing fees and cost of storage. 
(d)  In this section: 
(1)  Towing company means any person who is engaged in the business of towing vehicles on a public highway for compensation or with the expectation of compensation for the towing or storage of vehicles. The term includes the owner, operator, employee, or agent of a towing company. 
(2)  Storage company means any person who is engaged in the business of storing or repairing vehicles for compensation or with the expectation of compensation for the storage or repair of vehicles. The term includes the owner, operator, employee, or agent of a storage company. 
(Ord. No. 71-452, § 2, 10-11-71; Code 1958, § 23-26.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 94.  
Secs. 98-137—98-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUS STOPS; TAXICAB STANDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 106. 
 
Sec. 98-146. - Establishment. 
The city council shall have the right to establish bus stops and taxicab stands on such public streets in such places and in such number as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop and taxicab stand so established shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 3, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-17)  
Sec. 98-147. - Use by other vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator or driver of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or park in an officially designated bus stop, or for the operator or driver of any vehicle other than a taxicab to stand or park in an officially designated taxicab stand, except that the operator or driver of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in any such stop or stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 4, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-18)  
Sec. 98-148. - Use required of buses and taxicabs. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bus or taxicab to stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. No. 13, art. 5, § 5, 6-30-44; Code 1958, § 23-19)  
Secs. 98-149—98-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING OF BOATS, TRAILERS, RECREATIONAL OR COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-2161, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2018, changed the title of Div. 3 from "Parking of Recreational or Commercial Vehicles in Residential Areas" to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 98-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambulance means a specialized vehicle for emergency or non-emergency care and transportation of the sick and/or injured, with a driver compartment and a patient compartment, carrying all equipment and supplies needed to provide emergency medical technician-basic level emergency care at the scene and enroute to an appropriate medical facility, whether or not an emergency may exist. 
Boat or watercraft means any motorized vehicle, registered or unregistered, used for recreation or commercial use on any body of water, river, or stream. 
Bus means any commercial vehicle designed to carry twelve (12) or more persons on streets, roads, or highways. 
Commercial vehicle means any vehicle designed or used primarily for transportation of persons, goods, property, or services for, or in connection with, a business, school, or church. 
Converted bus means a bus that has been converted to transport property or a service. 
Driveway means a private roadway leading from a public street or right-of-way to a garage, carport or parking space. 
Dwelling means a building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping. 
Fire apparatus means any of various large trucks that carry firemen and equipment to the site of a fire, including fire trucks, ladder trucks, hook and ladder trucks, and aerial ladder trucks. The term does not include suburban utility vehicles or pick-up trucks. 
Lease means a conveyance of a commercial vehicle for a specified term and for a specified rent at the fair market value for that particular vehicle. 
Motor vehicle means any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act. 
Park or parking means to stop or stand an occupied or unoccupied vehicle. 
Parking space means an area of a driveway that is at least nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long. 
Passenger vehicle means any vehicle which can carry one (1) or more passengers for transportation over a street or highway, including, but not limited to automobiles, trucks, SUVs, vans, or buses. The definition excludes recreational vehicles, golf carts, vehicles with less than four (4) wheels, and vehicles that are not self-propelled. 
Recreational vehicles means any unit primarily designed as a living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use which either contains its own motor power as in the case of, but not limited to, motor homes, motor coaches, mini-motor homes, or recreational vans; can be temporarily or permanently mounted on a vehicle such as a coach, camper shell, truck camper or pickup camper; or is pulled by a motorized vehicle such as in the case of a "pop-up" camper. 
Trailer means any unpowered vehicle or device designed for carrying property, material, or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, as in the case, but not limited to utility trailer, boat or watercraft trailer, livestock trailer, cargo trailer, horse trailer, barbecue trailer, heavy equipment trailer, and car trailer. 
Truck-tractor means a motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing another vehicle and is not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load to be drawn, such as tractor trailer rigs and ten-wheel tractors. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn or otherwise transported upon a street or highway, except a device which is designed to be exclusively moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term "vehicle" shall include, but is not limited to, passenger vehicle, boat or watercraft, trailer, recreational vehicle, truck, motor vehicle, motorized vehicular home, motor coach, bus, converted bus, truck-tractor, and wrecker. 
Wrecker means any motor vehicle used or designed for the purpose of towing or removing disabled or wrecked vehicles. 
Wrecker business means the business of towing or removing disabled or wrecked vehicles, regardless of whether or not the purpose in towing such vehicle is to remove, repair, wreck, store, trade or purchase such disabled or wrecked vehicle. 
Wrecker company means any person engaged in the wrecker business. 
Wrecker rotation list means the rotation list of companies prepared and used as provided in section 106-123. 
(Ord. No. 06-1827, § 1, 12-18-2006; Ord. No. 18-2161, § 2, 9-17-2018)  
Sec. 98-152. - Boats and trailers. 
(a)  No boat or trailer may be parked on a residential street for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, equipment, or materials. In no case shall the boat or trailer be parked on the residential street for more than four (4) hours. 
(b)  Boats and trailers may not be parked in a manner that causes any part of the boat or trailer to extend over a sidewalk. On a residential lot with no sidewalk, no vehicles shall be parked within a five-foot setback from the curb edge (that edge of the curb closest to the house). 
(c)  To the extent of conflict of any other parking ordinances in the city code, this section is intended to prevail. 
(Ord. No. 06-1827, § 1, 12-18-2006; Ord. No. 16-2120, § 4, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 98-153. - Recreational vehicles. 
Recreational vehicles shall be parked, kept or stored behind a line that is twenty (20) feet forward toward the street from the front building line (set back line as established by zone or plat) of the lot in E-1 and R-1 zoned subdivisions, and shall be parked, kept or stored with all the parts of the vehicle behind the sidewalk in R-2 and R-2a zoned subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 06-1827, § 1, 12-18-2006)  
Sec. 98-154. - Commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Commercial vehicles not owned, leased, or driven by the resident, shall not be parked or left standing on a residential lot except for the purpose of making a delivery, providing a service, or in connection with a house renovation or repair project that concerns the lot and then only during time of delivery, service, or during actual hours of renovation work. 
(b)  In any event, unless during actual hours of delivery, service or renovation work, the following commercial vehicles shall not be parked on a residential lot or in the street in a residential subdivision: 
(1)  Truck-tractors; 
(2)  Trailers designed to be drawn by truck-tractors; 
(3)  Wreckers; 
(4)  Limousines; 
(5)  Public or private buses, including school, church, greyhound, coach or tour buses; 
(6)  Converted buses; 
(7)  Heavy construction equipment, to include but not be limited to: graders, dozers, rollers, cement mixers, backhoes, dump trucks, and the like; 
(8)  Public or private ambulances; 
(9)  Fire apparatuses; and 
(10)  Any commercial vehicle exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 06-1827, § 1, 12-18-2006)  
Sec. 98-155. - Truck-tractor exception. 
(a)  Any owner or operator of a truck-tractor that parks his or her truck-tractor on his or her residential lot as of the date of final passage of the ordinance from which this division derives and who has resided at that residential lot for at least six (6) months may apply for a residential parking permit to continue parking that truck-tractor on that same residential lot. 
(1)  All permit applications and proof of residency must be received by the city manager's office within thirty (30) days after passage of this division. No applications will be accepted after the thirty (30) days have expired. 
(2)  The applicant shall write the truck-tractor's license plate number and vehicle identification number on the permit application. 
(3)  The applicant shall be charged a fee not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00). 
(4)  The original permit shall be kept on file with the police department and a copy of the permit shall be given to the permit holder. The permit holder does not need to display the permit. 
(5)  The permit cannot be transferred to a different: 
a.  Owner or operator; or 
b.  Residential lot. 
(6)  The permit holder must notify the police department within seven (7) days of receiving a new truck-tractor. 
(b)  The permit holder must: 
(1)  Park or cause the truck-tractor to be parked on a concrete pad; 
(2)  Park or cause the truck-tractor to be parked: 
a.  Behind the sidewalk, and 
b.  Not closer than ten (10) feet from a dwelling on an adjacent lot. 
(c)  The permit may be revoked if: 
(1)  The permit holder gave false or misleading information on his or her application; 
(2)  The permit holder or other individual parks the truck-tractor on a residential street; 
(3)  The permit holder or other individual parks the truck-tractor on a residential lot that is not on his or her permit; 
(4)  The permit holder or other individual does not park the truck-tractor on a concrete pad; 
(5)  The permit holder or other individual operates the truck-tractor in a manner that violates state law or this Code while the truck-tractor is on the permitted residential lot; or 
(6)  At least five (5) people who own property within five hundred (500) feet of the lot line of the residential lot where the truck-tractor is permitted to be parked file a sworn affidavit stating that the permit holder is operating the truck-tractor or allowing the truck-tractor to be operated in such a manner that it is a nuisance. The affiants must state specific facts that cause them to believe that the truck-tractor is a nuisance. No more than two (2) people from each household may file the affidavit. 
(d)  Notice of revocation shall be sent to the permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the reason for the revocation and advising the permit holder of the right to an appeal. The permit holder may appeal the revocation decision to the city council by filing with the city secretary a written request for a hearing, setting forth the objections to the revocation, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing stays the action until a final decision on the appeal is made. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day limit, the revocation is final. The city council shall hear the appeal. At the hearing the formal rules of evidence do not apply and the council shall render a decision based upon the preponderance of the evidence. The city council shall make its decision within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed. If a decision is not rendered within thirty (30) days, the revocation is rescinded. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 06-1827, § 1, 12-18-2006)  
Sec. 98-156. - Wrecker exception. 
(a)  A wrecker company may allow one driver per night to park a wrecker at the driver's residential lot if the wrecker company obtains a residential parking permit from the city and if the residential lot is listed on the permit. 
(1)  Only wrecker companies that are on the city's rotation list may receive a residential parking permit. 
(2)  The city will issue one permit per company. 
(3)  Only wrecker drivers that work for wrecker companies that have a residential parking permit may park a wrecker on a residential lot. 
(b)  Residential parking permit application. 
(1)  A wrecker company can acquire a residential parking permit by filing an application with the city manager. 
(2)  The applicant shall be charged a fee not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00). 
(3)  The permit application shall contain a list of all of the Lake Jackson residential lots where a wrecker will or may be parked. 
(4)  Notice of the permit application shall be sent to the owners of real property lying within five hundred (500) feet of the lot line of the residential lots listed on the application. The owners shall have ten (10) calendar days to give notice, in writing, to the city manager of any objections they have to the wrecker driver parking the wrecker at the residential lot. If at least one of the property owners state that they object to having the wrecker park at said location, then the application will be denied. The wrecker company may appeal this denial in the manner provided for in subsection (g). If no property owners state that they have an objection, then the residential lot shall be listed on the permit. 
(c)  Permit. 
(1)  The permit cannot be transferred to a different wrecker company. 
(2)  The original permit shall be kept on file with the police department and a copy of the permit shall be given to the wrecker company. The wrecker driver does not need to display the permit. 
(3)  Each permit must be renewed annually. The wrecker company must submit the renewal application at least thirty (30) days before the permit expires. If the wrecker company submits the application less than thirty (30) days before the permit expires, the expiration date of the permit will not be affected. The city will follow the notification and objection procedures in subsection (b)(4). 
(4)  If the wrecker company wishes to add a new residential lot to their permit, the wrecker company must notify the city manager in writing. The city manager will then give notice and follow the procedures in subsection (b)(4). 
(5)  The wrecker company must give notice to the police department when a residential lot is no longer qualified to be listed on the permit. 
(d)  Parking the wrecker on a residential lot. A wrecker driver: 
(1)  Shall not park a wrecker that exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in length; 
(2)  Shall only park the wrecker on the residential lot on the days that he or she is on call; 
(3)  Shall only park the wrecker on the residential lot when the wrecker company he or she works for directs the wrecker driver to do so; 
(4)  Shall not park the wrecker on the residential lot more than fifteen (15) days a month; 
(5)  Shall not tow any vehicle to the residential lot; 
(6)  Shall back the wrecker in or park the wrecker behind a fence; 
(7)  Shall park the wrecker on a concrete pad; 
(8)  Shall not park the wrecker closer than ten (10) feet from a dwelling on an adjacent lot; and 
(9)  Shall park the wrecker: 
a.  Behind a line that is twenty (20) feet forward toward the street from the front building line (set back line as established by zone or plat) of the lot in E-1 and R-1 zoned subdivisions; and 
b.  Completely behind the sidewalk in R-2 and R-2a zoned subdivisions. 
c.  On a residential lot with no sidewalk, the wrecker owner or operator shall not park the wrecker within a five-foot setback from the curb edge (that edge of the curb closest to the house). 
(e)  Striking of a residential lot from the residential parking permit. The city will strike a residential lot from the permit if the following occurs: 
(1)  The wrecker driver or other individual parks the wrecker on a residential street; 
(2)  The wrecker driver or other individual parks the wrecker on a residential lot that is not on the residential parking permit; 
(3)  The wrecker driver or other individual operates the wrecker in a manner that violates state law or this Code while the wrecker is on the residential lot; or 
(4)  At least two (2) people who own property within five hundred (500) feet of the lot line of the residential lot where the wrecker is permitted to be parked file a sworn affidavit stating that the wrecker driver is operating the wrecker or causing the wrecker to be operated in such a manner that it is a nuisance. The affiants must state specific facts that cause them to believe that the wrecker is a nuisance. No more than one person from each household may file the affidavit. 
After receiving the affidavits, the city will give the wrecker driver and the wrecker company a written warning and place the wrecker driver on probation. If the city receives another two (2) complaints within one year, the city will strike the residential lot from the permit. The procedures for appeal of the probation and striking are set forth in subsection (g). 
(f)  Revocation of residential parking permit. The permit will be revoked if: 
(1)  The wrecker company gave false or misleading information on its application; 
(2)  Two (2) of the residential lots listed on the residential parking permit are stricken within one year; or 
(3)  The wrecker company violates any section of this subsection. The city will give the wrecker company a written warning and place the wrecker company on probation upon the first violation. If the wrecker company commits a violation within one year from the written warning, the city will revoke the residential parking permit. The procedures for appeal of the probation and revocation are set forth in subsection (g). 
(g)  Notice of a residential lot denial, probation, striking or revocation shall be sent to the wrecker company by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the reason for the action and advising the wrecker company of the right to appeal. The wrecker company may appeal to the city council by filing with the city secretary a written request for a hearing, setting forth its objections, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing stays the action until a final decision on the appeal is made. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day limit, the action is final. The city council shall hear the appeal. At the hearing the formal rules of evidence do not apply and the council shall render a decision based upon the preponderance of the evidence. The city council shall make its decision within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed. If a decision is not rendered within thirty (30) days, the action is rescinded. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 06-1827, § 1, 12-18-2006)  
Sec. 98-157. - Parking in residential yards. 
(a)  This section applies only to private residentially zoned property areas that are visible from the right-of-way, including multifamily properties. 
(b)  The parking of a passenger vehicle in an area of private residentially zoned property that is visible from the right-of-way and that is not a driveway, parking space, carport or garage is an offense. It is presumed that the registered owner of the passenger vehicle is the person who committed the offense. However, the owner, lessee, or person in charge of the residential property is also responsible for an offense under this sub-section. 
(c)  The owner, lessee, and person in charge of the residential property are required to ensure that: 
1.  Parking spaces and driveways are graded and paved with an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphaltic concrete, gravel or crushed stone. 
2.  If the parking spaces or driveway are paved with loose material such as gravel, the loose material is compacted and the driveway has a border that prevents the loose material from being scattered. 
3.  The driveway has at least two (2) parking spaces that are behind the sidewalk. 
4.  There is sufficient space from the street to the required parking spaces so that motor vehicles can access the required parking spaces. 
5.  The required parking spaces only contain motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 18-2161, § 3, 9-17-2018)  
Sec. 98-158. - Same—Exceptions. 
(a)  The following activities are exceptions to section 98-157(b). The exception applies only when the listed activity is occurring. Passenger vehicles may not be parked in the yard in anticipation of the activity or after the activity ceases for the day. 
(1)  Loading and unloading of the passenger vehicle; 
(2)  Activities such as construction, remodeling, and landscaping; and 
(3)  Washing of the passenger vehicle. 
(b)  Passenger vehicles may also be parked in the yard for special events, such as parties or overnight guests. The special event may not last more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
(Ord. No. 18-2161, § 4, 9-17-2018)  
Secs. 98-159—98-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SIGNAL ENFORCEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, adopted August 20, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as article VI, §§ 98-156—98-163. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated as subsection 98-156, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as article VI, §§ 98-166—98-173. 
 
Sec. 98-166. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Department shall mean the police department of the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
Intersection shall mean the place or area where two (2) or more streets intersect. 
Owner shall mean the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country. 
Photographic traffic signal enforcement system shall mean a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a camera system installed to work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic-control signal; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing at least two (2) recorded images that depicts the license plate attached to the rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic-control signal. 
Recorded image means an image recorded by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system that depicts the rear of a motor vehicle and is automatically recorded on a photograph or digital image. 
System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic signal enforcement system is directed and in operation. 
Traffic control signal shall mean an electronically operated traffic-control device that displays alternating red, amber and green lights that directs traffic when to stop at or proceed through an intersection. 
(Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 98-167. - Imposition of civil penalty for violations. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), the owner of a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) if while facing only a steady red signal displayed by an electronically operated traffic-control signal located within the city, the vehicle is operated in violation of the instructions of that traffic-control device, as specified in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d). 
(b)  An owner who fails to pay the civil penalty within the time specified in the notice of violation shall be subject to a late payment penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(c)  Failure to pay a civil penalty to contest liability in a timely manner, or to appear at an administrative adjudication hearing as provided for in this article is an admission of liability in the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation, and is a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 98-168. - Enforcement; procedures. 
(a)  The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article. 
(b)  In order to impose a civil penalty under this article, the department shall mail or cause to be mailed a notice of violation to the owner of the motor vehicle liable for the civil penalty not later than the 30th day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred to: 
(1)  The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(c)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the violation alleged; 
(2)  The date, time, and location of the violation; 
(3)  A copy of a recorded image of the vehicle, including the registration number of the license plate, involved in the violation; 
(4)  The amount of the civil penalty to be imposed for the violation; 
(5)  The date by which the civil penalty must be paid and the address to which the payment should be mailed; 
(6)  A statement that the person named in the notice of violation may pay the civil penalty in lieu of appearing at an administrative adjudication hearing; 
(7)  Information that informs the person named in the notice of violation: 
a.  Of the right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty in an administrative adjudication; 
b.  Of the manner and time in which to contest the imposition of the civil penalty; and 
c.  That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability is an admission of liability and a waiver of the right to appeal the civil penalty; 
(8)  A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil penalty; 
(9)  A statement that failure to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed shall result in the imposition of a late penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00); 
(10)  A statement that, if at the time and place of the violation the vehicle was being operated by a person other than the owner, the owner may transfer liability for the violation to the person who was operating the vehicle at the time and place if the owner submits to the city by affidavit, on a form provided by the city, or under oath at an administrative adjudication hearing, the name and current address of the person: 
a.  Operating the vehicle at the time and place of the violation; 
b.  Who was the lessee of the vehicle at the time of the violation, if the vehicle was rented or leased from a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles at that time; or 
c.  Who was the subsequent owner of the motor vehicle, if ownership of the vehicle was transferred by the owner before the time of violation; and 
(11)  Any other information deemed necessary by the department. 
(d)  A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received on the fifth day after the date of notice of violation is mailed. 
(e)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may mail a warning notice to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 98-169. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice of violation may contest the imposition of the civil penalty by requesting in writing an administrative adjudication of the civil penalty within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of violation. Upon receipt of a timely request, the department shall notify the person of the date and time of the hearing on the administrative adjudication. The administrative adjudication hearing shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  The civil penalty shall not be assessed if after a hearing, the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability. 
(c)  In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proved at the hearing by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(d)  The following evidence is admissible in the administrative adjudication hearing: 
(1)  An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system attesting to the reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the violation; 
(2)  An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that describes a violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image; and 
(3)  The recorded image upon which the violation is based. 
(e)  A person who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing or who requests an administrative adjudication hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing is liable for administrative hearing costs in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in addition to the amount of the civil penalty assessed for the violation. 
(f)  A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the civil penalty and costs within ten (10) days of the hearing. 
(g)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the imposition of civil liability under this article, to be proven by a preponderance of the evidence, that: 
(1)  The traffic-control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person; 
(2)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a police officer; 
(3)  The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic-control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle; 
(4)  The motor vehicle was being operating as an authorized emergency vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 546 and that the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter; 
(5)  The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner; 
(6)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued; 
(7)  The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed and would make compliance with this article more dangerous under the circumstances than non-compliance; 
(8)  The person who received the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor-vehicle at the time of the violation; or 
(9)  The vehicle was being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle. 
(h)  To demonstrate that at the time of the violation the motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle or the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle was a stolen plate, the owner must submit proof acceptable to the hearing officer that the theft of the vehicle or license plate had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(i)  Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, a person who fails to pay the amount of a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing on the violation if: 
(1)  The person files an affidavit with the hearing officer stating the date on which the person received the notice of violation that was mailed to the person; and 
(2)  The person requests an administrative adjudication hearing, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the date stated in the affidavit. 
(Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 98-170. - Order. 
(a)  The hearing officer at any administrative hearing under this article shall issues a signed and dated order stating: 
(1)  Whether the person charged with the violation is liable for the violation; and 
(2)  The amount of any civil penalty, late penalty, and administrative adjudication cost assessed against the person. 
(b)  The orders issued under subsection (a) shall be filed with the city secretary. The orders may be recorded using microfilm, microfiche, or data processing techniques. 
(Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 98-171. - Appeal from administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  A person who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing may appeal that finding of civil liability to the municipal court by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the municipal court. The notice of appeal and payment of court costs must be filed not later than the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of civil liability. Unless the person, on or before the filing of the notice of appeal, files a notarized statement of personal financial obligation amount of the civil penalty and any late fees, an appeal does not stay the enforcement of the civil penalty. 
(b)  An appeal shall be determined by the municipal court by trial de novo. The affidavits submitted under subsection 98-169(d) shall be admitted by the municipal judge in the trial de novo, and the issues must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 98-172. - Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy. 
(a)  The imposition of a civil penalty under this article is not a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(b)  A civil penalty may not be imposed under this article on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of the vehicle was arrested for or was issued a citation and notice to appear by a peace officer for the same violation that was recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(c)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit or cause suit to be filed to enforce collection of a civil penalty imposed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 98-173. - Traffic safety fund. 
The penalties and fees collected from the imposition of civil liability under this article shall be deposited in a separate traffic safety fund account. Funds from the traffic safety fund may be expended only for the costs of automated signal enforcement under this article, public traffic or pedestrian safety programs, traffic enforcement and intersection improvements. 
(Ord. No. 07-1860, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Chapter 102 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities, § 2.01; sanitary sewer and water system, § 3.07(n); power of city council to require connections with sanitary sewer systems, § 4.06(d)(5); franchises and public utilities, art. 10. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; solid waste, condition and use of premises, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Plumbing and sewers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.011 et seq.; municipal utilities, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1106 et seq. and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 401.001 et seq.; water, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 1.001 et seq.; public utilities, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1416 et seq.; Public Utility Regulatory Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1446c; authority for municipal public services and utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.002; water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 102-1. - Schedules. 
The following rates per month shall be charged for commercial and multi-family utility services: 
		Commercial & 
Multi-Family 	Residential 
(1) 	Water rates: 
(Senior citizen discount 40% of base rate) 	
	a. First 2,000 gallons, base rate 	$27.00 	$13.50 
	b. Over 2,000 through 20,000 gallons, per 1,000 	$ 4.30 	$ 4.30 
	c. All over 20,000 gallons, per 1,000 	$ 4.80 	$ 4.80 

(2) 	Brazoria County Water Conservation District: 	
	a. Pass thru of fees, all over 2,000 gallons per 1,000 	$0.03 	$0.03 

(3) 	Sewer charges per month: 
(Senior citizen discount 40% of base rate) 	
	a. Base rate of 2,000 gallons 	$27.30 	$13.65 
	b. All over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 	$ 4.60 	$ 4.60 
	No residential service shall be charged for over 15,000 gallons 		
 
(4)  Service deposits. 
a.  Residential .....$100.00 
b.  Residential, senior citizen (65 years or over) .....35.00 
c.  Commercial, minimum .....100.00 
Or such larger sum as may be determined by the city manager or his designee based upon estimated usage. 
Service deposit for residential service may be waived if an immediate family member, who is a current city utility customer and who has had two continuous years of service, signs a letter of guaranty. To qualify to sign a letter of guaranty the cosigner can have had no delinquent bills or insufficient checks six months prior to signing the guaranty agreement, nor ever been disconnected for nonpayment of his city utility bill. 
If the guarantor or cosigner leaves the city or discontinues city utility service prior to completion of a three-year period from the date of service connection for whom they cosigned, the customer may be required to pay the standard service deposit for the remainder of the three-year period. 
(5)  Water and sewer tap fees. The following tap fees shall be charged by the city for water and sewer taps in areas where water and sewer lines have not been installed by the city. 
a.  Water tap fee. Inspections for water taps .....$150.00 
1.  ¾-inch water service .....1,100.00 
2.  1-inch water service .....1,675.00 
3.  2-inch water service .....3,800.00 
Additional costs such as removing and replacing sidewalks, roadways and driveways will also be charged. 
b.  Sewer tap fees. Inspections for sewer taps .....$150.00 
1.  4-inch sewer service .....1,000.00 
2.  6-inch sewer service .....1,150.00 
3.  8-inch sewer service .....1,200.00 
4.  10-inch sewer service .....1,500.00 
(6)  Residential garbage, recycling and trash rates. 
a.  Residential garbage service includes twice weekly pickup of household garbage placed at the curb in bags and twice monthly pickup of large trash not to exceed 4 cubic yards, per month .....$17.35 
b.  Recycling service includes one weekly pickup of specified comingled recyclables placed at the curb in a blue bag, per month .....2.50 
c.  Residential special pickup fee for trash or yard waste greater than 4 cubic yards: 
1.  Trash—per cubic yard with a $30.00 minimum .....19.25 
2.  Brush—per cubic yard with a $30.00 minimum .....14.05 
(7)  Apartments and multi-family garbage, recycling and trash rates per individual family unit per month. 
a.  Garbage .....$17.35 
b.  Recycling .....1.50 
(8)  Commercial. 
a.  For 3 and 4 yard dumpsters serviced a specified number of times per week 
Size 	Pick-ups per week 
	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
3-yard 	$75.70 	$113.40 	$151.30 	$189.15 	$226.90 
4-yard 	$100.85 	$151.30 	$201.70 	$252.10 	$302.55 
 
b.  Shared dumpsters—2 or more businesses sharing a 4 yard dumpster 
1.  Small business (beauty shop, cleaners, single purpose office, medical, insurance, miscellaneous small retail) .....$27.90 
2.  Medium business (banks, auto shop with light mechanical repairs, miscellaneous medium retail) .....36.35 
3.  Large business (pharmacy, auto parts, car wash, medical clinics with multiple professionals) .....44.80 
c.  Recycling dumpsters - one 4 yard dumpster serviced one a week .....50.30 
(9)  Roll offs and compactors. 
Initial placement .....$75.00 
Relocation .....50.00 
Trip charge when unable to service .....100.00 
Each time serviced (user must call for service) or if container goes one month unserviced. 
a.  Roll offs uncompacted. 
1.  20 yard .....$305.20 
2.  30 yard .....457.80 
3.  40 yard .....536.60 
b.  Compactors. 
1.  20 yard .....$328.55 
2.  30 yard .....492.90 
3.  40 yard .....582.75 
4.  Any size cardboard only .....582.90 
5.  Cleaning fee as deemed necessary by city .....100.00 
(10)  Tree and landscape services. 
a.  Commercial tree and landscape services disposing of yard waste at the mulch site, per cubic yard .....$7.00 
(Ord. No. 197, § 1, 2-21-56; Ord. No. 242, § 1, 9-8-59; Ord. No. 288, § 1, 3-18-63; Ord. No. 67-354, § 1, 8-21-67; Ord. No. 70-419, § 1, 10-5-70; Ord. No. 72-460, § 1, 1-17-72; Ord. No. 73-491, § 1, 4-9-73; Ord. No. 74-539, § 1, 9-16-74; Ord. No. 76-603, §§ 1—3, 9-8-76; Ord. No. 77-619, § 1, 3-7-77; Ord. No. 77-639, § 1, 11-7-77; Ord. No. 79-714, § 1, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 80-756, § 1, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 12-15-80; Ord. No. 81-818, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 82-873, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 82-878, § 1, 10-18-82; Ord. No. 83-900, § 1, 9-19-83; Ord. No. 87-1057, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 89-1093, § 1, 1-9-89; Ord. No. 91-1173, § 1, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 92-1214, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 92-1216, § 1, 10-5-92; Code 1958, § 24-1; Ord. No. 93-1227, §§ 1, 2, 1-18-93; Ord. No. 93-1257, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 94-1304, § 1, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 94-1308, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 95-1351, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 96-1363, § 1, 2-20-96; Ord. No. 97-1432, § 1, 9-18-97; Ord. No. 98-1578, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 03-1737, § 1, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 04-1760, § 1, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 06-1825, § 1, 9-18-2006; Ord. No. 07-1868, § 1, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 08-1888, § 1, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-1910, § 1, 9-21-2009, eff. 10-1-2009; Ord. No. 11-1972, § 1, 9-19-2011; Ord. No. 12-1994, § 1, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 13-2019, § 1, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 14-2053, § 1, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 15-2070, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-2015; Ord. No. 15-2079, § 1, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 16-2114, § 1, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 17-2146, § 1, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 18-2163, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 17-2146, adopted Sept. 18, 2017, provides that said ordinance shall affect the billings for the items in said ordinance on Oct. 1, 2017.  
Sec. 102-2. - Prorated charges. 
Charges made for use of water and sewer services for periods of less than one (1) month shall be charged on the basis of one-thirtieth ( 1/30 ) of the effective water and sewer rate schedule for each day of such period. 
(Ord. No. 69-392, § 1, 2-17-69; Code 1958, § 24-1.1)  
Sec. 102-3. - Due date of payment, discontinuance of service, charges. 
Bills for charges under this article shall be due and payable eighteen (18) days following the billing date. If not paid by that due date they shall become delinquent and a ten (10) percent late penalty assessed. If they remain unpaid fourteen (14) days after the due date they shall be processed for cutoff and a twenty dollar ($20.00) processing fee charged. Services may be resumed only upon payment of all delinquent charges. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 2, 2-21-56; Ord. No. 242, § 2, 9-8-59; Ord. No. 288, § 1, 3-18-63; Ord. No. 69-392, § 1, 2-17-69; Ord. No. 78-675, § 1, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 81-818, § 2, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 91-1174, § 1, 9-30-91; Code 1958, § 24-2; Ord. No. 93-1227, § 3, 1-18-93)  
Sec. 102-4. - Permit to reconnect after cut off for nonpayment. 
If any premises in the city are disconnected or cut off from the water and sewer systems, or either of them, for nonpayment of rentals for such services, under existing ordinances of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect the premises to such systems or either of them by any means, without first having paid the delinquent rental and secured a permit from the city authorizing such reconnection. Such reconnection, if permissible hereunder, shall not be made, however, except in full conformity with the ordinances of the city requiring inspection, and prescribing the method and manner of and materials for such reconnection. 
(Ord. No. 28, § 1, 6-8-45; Code 1958, § 24-3)  
Sec. 102-5. - Uniformity and basis; charges for connection and repairing pavement. 
(a)  All rates for water service shall be uniform and equal as they apply to separate classes of service and no free service shall be granted. 
(b)  Charges for water connections to the city water system shall be based on the size of such meter connection and are set by the city council. 
(c)  Rates for water consumed are based on the water consumed as registered by each consumer's meter and shall be as set by the city council. 
(d)  The city council may assess, in addition to the service connection, the estimated cost of breaking and replacing pavement necessary to make such connections; such assessment to be paid with such service charge, and the difference between assessment and actual cost of such breaking and replacing shall be refunded to the patron when such work has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 13, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-4)  
Sec. 102-6. - Reports and disposition of proceeds by city manager. 
All sums of money arising from the utility system of the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city. Monthly reports shall be made to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 12, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-5)  
Sec. 102-7. - Bill not necessary for liability. 
Failure of any patron to receive a bill for water used shall be no excuse for nonpayment, and shall in no way operate to extend the payment period provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 15, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-6)  
Sec. 102-8. - Estimation where meter reader cannot gain access. 
If a meter reader is, in the opinion of the city water department, unable to procure a reading of the meter owing to the building being locked or vacant or the occupant not permitting entrance, or entrance to the premises is made precarious by a vicious dog or otherwise, or easy access to meter is obstructed in any manner whatsoever, the charges may be estimated for the amount not to exceed double the normal charge. It is further provided that in case the consumer does not remedy the condition and should he further refuse to pay the estimated bill, the city water department shall have the right to discontinue the service without further notice and service shall not be resumed until the conditions complained of have been remedied and all charges for water service paid. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 17, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-7)  
Sec. 102-9. - Estimation where meter out of order. 
If a meter fails to register the water actually consumed by reason of the register or meter getting out of order, the city water department may estimate the charge by the normal consumption, taking into consideration the season of the year. This estimation may be based on the consumption either before or after the period that the meter fails to register the water consumed. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 18, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-8)  
Sec. 102-10. - Testing meter. 
If a patron complains of the charges for water supplied him and if he demands that the meter supplying his premises be tested, the city water department may remove and test the meter provided that the consumer or his representative shall witness such test, and, if it is found that the meter does not register in error more than two (2) percent fast, the consumer shall pay the amount of two dollars ($2.00) for making the test and no adjustment of the charges shall be made. If, however, the meter should register more than two (2) percent fast, the consumer shall pay no fee for such test and the city water department shall make appropriate adjustment in the water service charges. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 19, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-9)  
Sec. 102-11. - Sewer and water lines outside of city—Authority to contract; requirements. 
The city may contract to provide sewer and water service to residents outside of the city limits and within five (5) miles of the city, but only if: 
(1)  The developer or residents will pay all costs of emplacement of the necessary sewer and water lines, provide the necessary sewer and water lines to the city treatment facilities and maintain the lines; and 
(2)  The developer or residents will pay a per-unit monthly charge of at least one and three-fourths (1¾) times the rate paid by the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 75-572, § 1, 11-3-75; Ord. No. 82-883, § 1, 1-3-83; Code 1958, § 24-10.1)  
Sec. 102-12. - Same—Limitation on contract authority. 
The authority of the city to contract to provide utility services for those residing outside of the city shall not authorize the city to incur any debt or incumbrance that may be a liability to the taxpayers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 75-572, § 1, 11-3-75; Code 1958, § 24-10.2)  
Sec. 102-13. - Water supply and sanitary sewage system; flood damage control measures. 
All new or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the systems into the floodwaters, and all on-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 71-458, § 3, 12-20-71; Code 1958, § 24-32)  
Sec. 102-14. - Well location. 
(a)  In this section, well means a public well constructed and operated by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed, within fifty (50) feet of a water well a tile or concrete sanitary sewer, sewerage appurtenance, septic tank, storm sewer, or cemetery. Sanitary or storm sewers constructed of ductile iron or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe meeting American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards, having a minimum working pressure of one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch (psi) or greater, and equipped with pressure type joints may be located at distances of less than fifty (50) feet from a well site, but in no case shall the distance be less than ten (10) feet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, within fifty (50) feet of a water well, livestock in pastures. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a water well septic tank perforated drainfields, absorption beds, evapotranspiration beds, improperly constructed water wells, or underground petroleum and chemical storage tanks or liquid transmission pipelines. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to irrigate an area within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a well by a low dosage, low angle spray on-site sewage facility. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, within three hundred (300) feet of a water well, to construct or cause to be constructed a sewage wet well, sewage pumping station, or a drainage ditch which contains industrial waste discharges or the wastes from sewage treatment systems. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person, within five hundred (500) feet of a water well, to construct or cause to be constructed a sewage treatment plant. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person, within one-quarter-mile of a water well, to locate or cause to be located abandoned or inoperative wells (unused wells that have not been plugged) and other hazards such as landfill and dump sites, animal feedlots, military facilities, industrial facilities, wood-treatment facilities, liquid petroleum and petrochemical production, storage, and transmission facilities, Class 1, 2, 3, and 4 injection wells, and pesticide storage and mixing facilities. 
(Ord. No. 10-1923, § 1, 1-4-2010)  
Secs. 102-15—102-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code generally, § 14-156 et seq. 
State Law reference— Water systems in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.017. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-61. - Scope of city's obligations to furnish water. 
In the sale of water by the city to any person and in the supply of water for municipal use for the protection of property against fires, the city does not agree, nor is the city bound to furnish water of any special or specific analysis, or in any special or specified amount, but only undertakes to furnish such water and the amount of water that may be supplied from the wells of the city, or such other sources as the city may select, and in an amount within the capacity of the city's pumping plants. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 1, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-11)  
Sec. 102-62. - Patrons agree to abide by regulations; and assume risk for items placed in water easement. 
(a)  All patrons of the water system of the city before being furnished water by the city must agree and do agree to comply with the rules and regulations of the city council, as well as all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All private water sprinkler systems and any and all other objects that are placed in, on, under, within or along utility easements are subject to being disrupted, damaged or destroyed should the city need to use the easement for extensions, maintenance or repair. The city shall in no wise be liable for damages by reason of such disruption, damage or destruction. All risk, responsibility and liability for loss shall be on the party that places water sprinklers or other objects in, on, under, within or along city utility easements. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 2, 12-13-48; Ord. No. 86-999, § 1, 3-3-86; Code 1958, § 24-12)  
Sec. 102-63. - Liability of city for failure of water supply. 
Upon accident by reason of which the city may become unable to supply water to the patrons of the city, within or without the city, or to the city for the prevention or suppression of fire, the city will in no way be liable for damages by reason of any failure to any patron of the water system, or to any person whose property may have been destroyed by fire or otherwise damaged. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 3, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-13)  
Sec. 102-64. - Relevant authority and duty of city manager. 
The city manager shall, under the direction of the city council, have full charge of the waterworks system of the city, and all property, fixtures, appurtenances and supplies belonging thereto. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 5, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-14)  
Sec. 102-65. - Control of extensions. 
All pipes or mains for the extension of the waterworks system of the city shall be laid under the management and control of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 8, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-15)  
Sec. 102-66. - Maps and plats to be on file. 
The city manager shall keep in his office maps and plats of the city showing all mains and pipes laid or belonging to the city, giving the size of same, and showing the locations of all valves and fire hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 9, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-16)  
Sec. 102-67. - Enforcing payment for service—Duty of city manager. 
The city manager shall see that all patrons of the city water system of the city, and all persons using water, have paid for the same, and for this purpose shall keep a list of all patrons. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 10, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-17)  
Sec. 102-68. - Same—Permits for service, receipt stubs, roll of patrons, report to council. 
All permits for the use of water shall be issued by appropriate employees of the city, who shall collect the proper amount as per rate established, such permits to be granted only upon request to such employees. Such applicant by such request for the use of water must agree and obligate himself to comply with all of the rules and regulations of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 11, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-18)  
Sec. 102-69. - Cross connections between city and private supply systems. 
(a)  Cross connection between piping receiving water from city water mains and piping receiving water from any other source or storage is positively forbidden, and the city reserves the right when it discovers the existence of any such cross connection to immediately and without further notice disconnect the service connecting such piping with the city mains. Anyone desiring to use water from some other source in addition to the city connection may do so by using a storage tank and delivering the city water supply into the tank four (4) inches above the overflow line and through a pipe having at least a four-inch air space between its discharge end and the surface of the water in the tank. The water from the other source may then be piped into the tank and the service lines taken from the tank in any manner desired. 
(b)  If the inflow city water main to a swimming pool or other storage of water is below overflow level a cross connection exists. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 21, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-19)  
Sec. 102-70. - Right of entry, shutting off water for repair. 
(a)  Every patron of the waterworks system must agree, and does agree, that the city manager, or anyone acting under the direction of the city council, shall, at reasonable times, be permitted to enter any premises or building in which water is used. 
(b)  It is expressly agreed and must be understood that the city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in the mains for the purpose of repairing the same, making connections or extensions to the same for the purpose of cleaning same, and in so doing the city shall not be liable in any manner for damages. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 22, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-20)  
Sec. 102-71. - Tapping—Permitting without consent of city manager. 
No patron of the waterworks system of the city shall permit any person to tap any waterpipe leading into his premises without the consent of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 20, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-21)  
Sec. 102-72. - Same—Persons authorized. 
No plumber or other person, except the city manager or other person acting under the direction of the city council, shall be allowed to tap any city main or any service pipe. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 23, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-22)  
Sec. 102-73. - Same—Separation of taps. 
In no case shall taps in the city water mains be closer than twelve (12) inches apart. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 29, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-23)  
Sec. 102-74. - Size and quality of service lines, installing stops. 
(a)  All service lines shall be of Mueller's copper service pipe, or copper pipe of similar construction and equal in quality, or of cast iron. In no case shall any wrought iron, steel pipe or malleable fittings be used in a service line in a street or alley. 
(b)  The city waterworks system shall cause to be placed in each service line, a stop. 
(c)  Where the service line is of a size one and one-quarter (1¼) or larger, such stop shall be a gate valve. 
(d)  All stops shall be for the exclusive use of the city and shall be under the exclusive control of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 24, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-24)  
Sec. 102-75. - Position of connections to mains—On side of mains. 
All connections to the city waterworks mains shall be made on the side of the mains and not on the top of the mains, and the service pipe shall be laid not less than eighteen (18) inches below the surface of the street and gutter. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 25, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-25)  
Sec. 102-76. - Same—Distance from joints. 
All connections made to the water mains of the city shall be at least two (2) feet from any joint in such water mains. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 26, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-26)  
Sec. 102-77. - Same—Copper service pipe. 
In all cases where copper service pipe is used, such pipe, at the point of connection to the city water main, shall be bent in the form of a gooseneck and connected to the city water main with a ground joint corporation stop. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 27, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-27)  
Secs. 102-78—102-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - METERS 
 
Sec. 102-91. - Service separate. 
Each meter installed at any premises shall constitute a separate service and must be paid for as such. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 31, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-28)  
Sec. 102-92. - Buildings metered separately. 
Each individual residence or building making connection with the city water system shall have a separate meter, and no new connection shall be made by the city unless such individual residence or building is separately metered. Offices in the same building under one (1) piping system may have a single meter. Retail and wholesale business establishments in the same building shall have separate meters. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 32, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-29)  
Sec. 102-93. - Billing where existing single meter. 
In existing cases where more than one (1) building is served by a single meter, the entire amount of water consumed and registered through such meter shall be billed to the building nearest the meter and shall include an additional minimum for each other building served by such meter, and such procedure shall continue until such buildings are separately metered. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 33, 12-13-48; Code 1958, § 24-30)  
Secs. 102-94—102-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY AND WATER CONSERVATION PLANS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-1929, adopted Feb. 1, 2010, amended Art. II, Div. 3, by changing the title from "drought contingency plans" to "drought contingency and water conservation plans." 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-1608, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 16, 1999 amended Div. 3, §§ 102-106—102-115 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 102-106—102-115 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1958 Code, §§ 24-75—24-80; Ord. No. 87-1042, §§ 1(A)—1(F), adopted Oct. 19, 1087; Ord. No. 87-1054, §§ 1(B), 1(C), 1(E), adopted Oct. 19, 1987. 
Cross reference— Use of plumbing fixtures for water conservation, § 14-191. 
 
Sec. 102-106. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water, to be known as the drought contingency plan. Further, to ensure that the city's water is used efficiently in order to conserve as much water as possible, the city herby adopts the water conservation plan. A copy of the water conservation plan is hereby adopted by reference and can be obtained from the city secretary. 
Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 102-113 [and section 102-116] of this plan. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 10-1929, § 1, 2-1-2010)  
Sec. 102-107. - Public involvement. 
(a)  Public input. Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the plan was provided by the city by means of newspaper, and public notice postings. 
(b)  Public education. The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of city newsletter, newspaper, and city webpage. 
(c)  Coordination with regional water planning groups. The service area of the city is located within the Houston Region and the city has provided a copy of this plan to the Houston Region. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 102-108. - Authorization. 
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The city manager or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 102-109. - Application. 
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 102-110. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply: 
Aesthetic water use means water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
Commercial and institutional water use means water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
Conservation means those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
Customer means any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city. 
Capacity means the distribution system capacity, which is the lessor of total available booster pump capacity or the total available water supply (rated groundwater capacity plus purchased water). 
Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
Even number address means street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and locations without addresses. 
Industrial water use means the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
Landscape irrigation use means water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
Nonessential water use means water uses that are not essential or required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
(9)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than fire fighting. 
Odd numbered address means street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Water related recreation/amusement facility means a heavy user of water for a recreation or amusement facility. Examples of such facilities would include public or private golf course, private water related amusement park or like facility. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 14-2054, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Sec. 102-111. - Triggering criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan. Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of newspaper, and webpage. 
The triggering criteria described below are based on capacity. Other factors including, but not limited to, special regulatory directives or supplier restrictions may also be considered in addition to the specified triggers. 
(1)  Stage 1—Mild water shortage conditions. 
Requirements for initiation customers shall be required to comply with the restrictions on certain nonessential water uses defined in section 102-110 of this plan when total daily water demand equals or exceeds sixty five (65) percent of capacity for three (3) consecutive days or seventy (70) percent of capacity on a single day. 
Requirements for termination stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. 
(2)  Stage 2—Moderate water shortage conditions. 
Requirements for initiation customers shall be required to comply with the restrictions on certain nonessential water uses for stage 2 of this plan when total daily water demand equals or exceeds seventy (70) percent of capacity for three (3) consecutive days or eighty (80) percent of capacity on a single day. 
Requirements for termination stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. 
(3)  Stage 3—Severe water shortage conditions. 
Requirements for initiation customers shall be required to comply with the restrictions on certain nonessential water uses for stage 3 of this plan when total daily water demand equals or exceeds eighty (80) percent of capacity for three (3) consecutive days or ninety (90) percent of capacity on a single day. 
Requirements for termination stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. 
(4)  Stage 4—Critical water shortage conditions. 
Requirements for initiation customers shall be required to comply with the restrictions for stage 4 of this plan when the city manager, or his/her designee: 
Determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
a.  Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
b.  Natural or manmade contamination of the water supply source(s). Requirements for termination stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 14-2054, § 2, 9-15-2014)  
Sec. 102-112. - Drought response stages. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 102-111 of the plan, shall determine that a mild, moderate, severe, or critical condition exists and shall implement the following actions upon publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation: 
Stage 1—Mild water shortage conditions. 
Goal: Reduce daily water use to less than seventy (70) percent of capacity. 
Supply management measures: Reduced flushing of water mains, reduced irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
Water use restrictions. The following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
(1)  Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas to alternate days. Even numbered addresses are allowed to water on Sundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays while odd numbered addresses are allowed to water on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at any time if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or drip irrigation system. 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash, commercial service station, and automobile dealerships or automobile rental agencies that must wash cars for immediate sale or rental. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
(3)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days. 
(4)  Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting, related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the city. 
(5)  Use of water for the irrigation of a water related recreation/amusement facility is prohibited except on designated watering days. However, if the facility utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city, the facility shall not be subject to these regulations. 
(6)  The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited: 
a.  Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
b.  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
c.  Use of water for dust control; 
d.  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; and 
e.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a forty-eight (48) hour period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
Stage 2—Moderate water shortage conditions. 
Goal: Reduce water usage to less eighty (80) percent of capacity. 
Supply management measures: Reduced flushing of water mains, reduced irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
Water use restrictions. Under the threat of penalty of violation, all requirements of stage 1 shall remain in effect and become mandatory during stage 2 except: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(2)  The use of water for irrigation of water related recreation/amusement facility is prohibited, unless the facility utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city. 
(3)  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
Stage 3—Severe water shortage conditions. 
Goal: Reduce water usage to less than ninety (90) percent of capacity. 
Supply management measures: Discontinued flushing of water mains, discontinued irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 1 and 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3 except: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems are prohibited at all times. 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial car wash and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. Vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations is permitted but shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
(4)  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
Stage 4—Critical water shortage conditions. 
Goal: Reduce water usage to less than seventy (70) percent of capacity or to a level as dictated by supplier restrictions and/or regulatory directives that may be issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
Supply management measures: Cease all nonessential water uses. 
Water use restrictions. All requirements of [stages] 1, 2, and 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4 except: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited. 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited, except at commercial car washes or commercial service station between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99; Ord. N. 14-2054, § 3, 9-15-2014)  
Sec. 102-113. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by city manager, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan. 
(b)  Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that one (1) or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three (3) or more distinct violations of this plan, the city manager shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, hereby established at one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city manager that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(c)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(d)  Any police officer, or other person designated by the city manager, may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this division. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, the offense charged, and shall direct him/her to appear in municipal court on the date shown on the citation for which the date shall not be less than three (3) days nor more than five (5) days from the date the citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over fourteen (14) years of age who is a member of the violator's immediate family or is a resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in municipal court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of this plan. If the alleged violator fails to appear in municipal court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in municipal court before all other cases. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 102-114. - Variances. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one (1) or more of the following conditions are met. 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this division shall file a petition for variance with the city within five (5) days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city manager, or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s). 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this division. 
(5)  Description of the relief requested. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date. 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city manager or his/her designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 102-115. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this division are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this plan shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this plan, since the same would not have been enacted by the city without the incorporation into this plan of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
It is also noted that a private well must not be connected to a house or building that is furnished water by the city without prior approval from, or review by the city. Also, no private water source or well may be connected in any fashion to the city's potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 1, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 102-116. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity that violates this division shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation per day. 
(Ord. No. 99-1608, § 2, 8-16-99)  
Secs. 102-117—102-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code generally, § 14-156 et seq.; sewer connections required, § 14-167; sewage disposal in mobile home park zone, § 58-55. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-131. - Individually owned lines. 
All individually owned sewer lines must be maintained and kept in sufficient repair to preclude infiltration of storm waters into the sewer lines or sewer system. Upon written notification by the city to the owner that his individually owned sewer line is in need of repair, the owner of the sewer line shall within ninety (90) days after receipt of such notification either: 
(1)  Repair the individually owned sewer line to the satisfaction of the city plumbing inspector; or 
(2)  Make payment in advance payable to the city secretary to cover the city's estimated cost for city repair of the lines. If the job is accomplished for an amount under the value of the advance payment, the city shall refund the difference to the owner. If the owner has been sent a bill for the city's repair of liens and he does not pay the bill within ninety (90) days of receipt of such bill, the city may discontinue his water services for as long as the bill is unpaid; or 
(3)  Upon mutual agreement of the city and the owner, enter into an agreement with the city for the city to contract to repair or replace the individually owned sewer line and assess the cost against the property on which the line is located in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Water code, provided that: 
a.  The subject property is owner-occupied single family residential; and 
b.  The agreement specifies that the city offers no warranties for the contracted work; and 
c.  The agreement specifies that the principal amount assessed shall accrue interest at a rate not to exceed three (3) percent a year, from the date of assessment until paid in full; and 
d.  If the property owner does not pay the assessment within a five-year period, the city may enforce the lien on the property in the same manner in which it is authorized by law to enforce liens for paving or other assessments. 
(Ord. No. 77-612, § 1, 2-7-77; Code 1958, § 24-10.3; Ord. No. 05-1785, § 1, 6-6-2005)  
Sec. 102-132. - Distribution of sewer costs to users. 
(a)  When the city builds a lift station or other sewer facility, developers or owners of the land it serves shall, upon connection with the facility, be liable for a pro rata share of the cost. If payment is not made to the city within three (3) years of the date on which the city completes such lift station or other sewer facility the developer shall, in addition, be liable for eight (8) percent interest per year on the pro rata share beginning on the first day after the end of the third year from the date on which the city completes such station or other facility. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to grant variances to the terms in this section, in cases of unusual or hardship circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 79-723, § 1, 1-7-80; Code 1958, § 24-32.1)  
Secs. 102-133—102-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Disposal system rules, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.176. 
 
Sec. 102-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees Celsius. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
City means the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
COD (chemical oxygen demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Generator means any person, company, or business that owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor, or whose act or process produces grease trap waste. 
Grease means the organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon triglyceride molecules. This shall include but not be limited to fats, oils, and greases. 
Grease trap/interceptor means a device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids generated by and from food preparation, prior to water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, as distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than two hundred (200) mg/l and BOD is not more than two hundred (200) mg/l. 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
Person includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust partnership associate, and any other legal entity. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter. 
Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Storm water means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
Superintendent means the water superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or other obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than ten (10) mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determinations as specified in standard methods. 
Waste means rejected unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means a combination of the watercarried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-33; Ord. No. 06-1805, § 1, 1-17-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions pertaining to water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001.  
Sec. 102-147. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable as provided in section 1-5 for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-58)  
Sec. 102-148. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-34)  
Sec. 102-149. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than one (1.0) mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 102-148(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than six (6.0) or higher than nine and five-tenths (9.5), or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-35)  
Sec. 102-150. - Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of hazardous metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods, are: 
mg/l, Not to Exceed 
Metal 	Average 	Daily 
Composite 	Grab 
Sample 
Arsenic 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 
Barium 	1.0 	2.0 	4.0 
Cadmium 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 
Chromium 	0.5 	1.0 	5.0 
Copper 	0.5 	1.0 	2.0 
Lead 	0.5 	1.0 	1.5 
Manganese 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 
Mercury 	0.005 	0.005 	0.01 
Nickel 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 
Selenium 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 
Silver 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Zinc 	1.0 	2.0 	6.0 
 
(c)  No other heavy or hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited hazardous metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony. 
(2)  Beryllium. 
(3)  Bismuth. 
(4)  Cobalt. 
(5)  Molybdenum. 
(6)  Tin. 
(7)  Uranylion. 
(8)  Rhenium. 
(9)  Strontium. 
(10)  Tellurium. 
(11)  Herbicides. 
(12)  Fungicides. 
(13)  Pesticides. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Ord. No. 79-713, § 1, 9-17-79; Code 1958, § 24-36)  
Sec. 102-151. - Garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (¾) horsepower (seventy-six-hundredths (0.76) hp metric) or greater. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-37)  
Sec. 102-152. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act (V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 26 et seq.) and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-38)  
Sec. 102-153. - Temperature. 
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-39)  
Sec. 102-154. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-40)  
Sec. 102-155. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l including but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than six hundred (600) mg/l including but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Underground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-41)  
Sec. 102-156. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids; or 
(4)  Unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the state natural resource conservation commission, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet. 
(2)  Watercourse. 
(3)  Storm sewer. 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-42)  
Sec. 102-157. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-43)  
Sec. 102-158. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-44)  
Sec. 102-159. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
a.  Design of trap shall be made in accordance with good engineering practice and with consideration of waste type, quantity, rate of flow, and temperature. Site plans, along with data and calculations must be submitted to the city building official or review prior to issuance of a permit and/or any construction. 
b.  The city building official prior to installation must approve the design of grease traps, separators, oil separator, or grit traps. 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
a.  Generators of above described waste materials must provide devices approved by the governing authority, to prevent the discharge of such waste materials such as but not limited to, grease traps, grease separators, oil separators, and grit traps. 
1.  An approved service company and waste hauler must service the devices on regular intervals as determined by the city, and in no case less than quarterly. 
A.  The generator shall maintain a record log of all service and shall supply the city with a copy of each service within ten (10) working days of the service. 
B.  The use of additives such as but not limited to surfactants, solvents, or emulsifiers are forbidden without prior approval of the City of Lake Jackson. 
C.  The temperature of the effluent exiting the grease trap shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Generators shall be responsible for the maintenance, service, and repair of any and all equipment described within this section or any cleanup as a result of improper maintenance, repair, design, or other malfunction. 
1.  The city or their appointed representative have the right at any time to inspect, service, repair, remove waste, or any cleanup required by a malfunction caused by improper design, insufficient service or maintenance creates a condition which can cause damage to a city service or which could affect the health and safety of the community. 
A.  The city has the right to recover any and all expenses or costs incurred during the service, repair, removal of waste, or clean up caused by the malfunctions. 
(i)  It shall be the generator responsibility upon notification by the city to remit to the city any and all costs within thirty (30) days of notification. 
(ii)  Failure to comply could result in further action including but not limited to: discontinuance of city services, revocation of any license, certificates, or permits issued by the city, and/or liens for said amounts assigned to the property on which the violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-45; Ord. No. 06-1805, § 2, 1-17-2006)  
Sec. 102-160. - Requirements for building sewers. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-46)  
Sec. 102-161. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property. 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this division shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling. 
(d)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids. 
(e)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-47)  
Sec. 102-162. - Payment and agreement required. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-48)  
Sec. 102-163. - Industrial waste charge and added costs. 
(a)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does not cause overloading to the sewage collection, treatment, or disposal facilities of the city, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the schedule of charges. 
(b)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires that wastewater collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste. 
(c)  The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste. 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense. 
(d)  Amortization shall be completed in a fifteen-year period and payment shall include all debt service costs. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-49)  
Sec. 102-164. - Schedule of charges. 
Industrial waste charges shall be calculated by the following formula: 
Ci = kW (BOD/200 + SS/200) 
Ci 	= 	charge to industrial users 
k 	= 	percent (expressed as a decimal fraction) 
W 	= 	water charge in dollars 
BOD 	= 	Total amount of BOD in mg/l 
SS 	= 	Total amount of SS in mg/l 
 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-50)  
Sec. 102-165. - Adjustment of charges. 
(a)  The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of sampling and testing. 
(b)  Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two (2) billing periods and shall continue for six (6) billing periods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased. 
(c)  The city shall review at least biannually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience. 
(d)  The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer charges. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-51)  
Sec. 102-166. - Savings clause. 
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 72-479 may continue without penalty so long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge, without permission of the approving authority; 
(2)  Has discharged the industrial waste at least twelve (12) months prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 72-479; and 
(3)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of Ordinance No. 72-479. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-52)  
Sec. 102-167. - Conditions of permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of section 102-166 provided that the person: 
(1)  Submit an application within ninety (90) days after the effective date of Ordinance No. 72-479 on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this division and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-53)  
Sec. 102-168. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter, at any reasonable time, all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. 
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-54)  
Sec. 102-169. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-55)  
Sec. 102-170. - Notice. 
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this division with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-56)  
Sec. 102-171. - Failure to pay. 
In addition to sanctions provided for by this division, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-59)  
Sec. 102-172. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
No person may continue discharging in violation of this division beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 72-479, § 1, 10-16-72; Code 1958, § 24-57)  
Secs. 102-173—102-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRIC SERVICE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical distribution system in mobile home park zone, § 58-56. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 102-196—102-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATE SCHEDULES RS-2, MGS-2 
 
Sec. 102-206. - Approved and adopted. 
The city council hereby approves and adopts the rate schedule for Houston Lighting & Power Company, a public utility, doing business under franchise in the city, which schedules shall be known as Schedule RS-2 and Schedule MGS-2, such schedules being attached to the ordinance from which this section derives and marked Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B" and made a part hereof by reference as if fully copied in this division. 
(Ord. No. 279, § 1, 7-6-62; Code 1958, § 8A-1) 
Editor's note— Exhibits A and B are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city secretary.  
Secs. 102-207—102-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RATE SCHEDULES RS-1, MGS-1, FC, CDS, MSL 
 
Sec. 102-216. - Approved and adopted. 
The city council hereby approves and adopts as maximum charges to residential and small commercial users for electricity and electric service the rate schedules of Houston Lighting & Power Company, a public utility doing business under franchise in the city, which schedules shall be known as Schedule RS-1 dated May, 1976, Schedule MGS-1 dated May, 1976, Schedule FC dated May, 1976, Schedule COS dated May, 1976, and Schedule MSL dated July, 1965, such schedules being attached to the ordinance from which this section derives and marked Exhibit "A," Exhibit "B," Exhibit "C," Exhibit "D" and Exhibit "E," and made a part hereof by reference as if fully copied in this division. 
(Ord. No. 63-292, § 1, 7-1-63; Ord. No. 71-426, § 1, 2-1-71; Ord. No. 73-511, § 1, 10-1-73; Ord. No. 76-589, § 1, 5-17-76; Code 1958, § 8A-3) 
Editor's note— Exhibits A—E are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city secretary.  
Sec. 102-217. - Adjustments for fuel cost and cost of service. 
(a)  Within fifteen (15) days after the expiration of each month, Houston Lighting & Power Company shall file with the city secretary a statement of: 
(1)  Its estimated cost of fuel for the succeeding month, showing the calculation of the weighted average cost of fuel, adjusted for the variation between the estimated cost and the actual cost of fuel in prior months, and the tentative adjustment under Rider FC of the rate schedules, showing the calculation of such adjustment; and 
(2)  Its cost of service adjustment for the succeeding month showing the sum of the twelve (12) months' costs and operating revenues exclusive of cost of service revenues less fuel revenue which would have been derived from associated fuel costs adjusted for the variation between the estimated cost and the actual cost of fuel in the second preceding month, and the tentative adjustment under Rider COS of the rate schedules, showing the calculation of such adjustment. 
(b)  Each such tentative fuel cost adjustment and cost of service adjustment shall become effective for bills rendered on and after the first day of the next billing month unless, within fifteen (15) days after the filing of such statement, the city council shall have disapproved such tentative adjustment by motion or resolution. If any such tentative adjustment or change in the fuel cost or the cost of service shall be disapproved by the city council, such schedule shall continue to be adjusted by the last previous adjustment for prior changes in fuel costs and/or cost of service not so disapproved, until another adjustment shall have taken effect hereunder. Within the fifteen-day period provided for its approval or disapproval of any such tentative adjustment, the city council shall have the right and power to order the filing of any additional or supplemental information or statements deemed necessary in the public interest or to order a public hearing with regard to the approval or disapproval of such tentative adjustment. Furthermore, the total of the cost of service adjustment for any month shall not exceed sixteen hundredths of a cent ($0.0016) per kilowatt hour without approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 76-589, § 3, 5-17-76; Code 1958, § 8A-5)  
Sec. 102-218. - Accounting changes. 
For purposes of determining the cost of service adjustment the following policies and procedures cannot be changed without prior approval of the city council: 
(1)  Depreciation rates applied to plant and equipment. 
(2)  Policies regarding the capitalization of allowance for funds used during construction, including the rate used. 
(3)  The policy of maintaining that portion of capitalization represented by preferred stock at ten (10) percent or less of total capitalization. 
(Ord. No. 76-589, § 4, 5-17-76; Code 1958, § 8A-6)  
Secs. 102-219—102-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GAS SERVICE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of public utilities, art. 10; regulation of rates and charges, § 10.11. 
Cross reference— Fuel supply and storage in mobile home park zone, § 58-60. 
State Law reference— City regulation, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1120, 1123; municipal utility systems, general powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001; certain public services and utility systems in home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.002. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 102-241—102-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES 
 
Sec. 102-251. - Prescribed. 
Entex, Inc., shall place in effect as its maximum monthly rates and charges for the distribution and sale of natural gas in the city, such sums as prescribed from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 2, 4-13-53; Ord. No. 77-623, § 1, 5-16-77; Code 1958, § 11-1) 
Editor's note— The Houston Natural Gas Corporation, the natural gas franchisee designated by Ord. No. 138, § 2, adopted April 13, 1953, was purchased in 1975 by Entex, Inc., the franchisee designated by Ord. No. 77-623, § 1, adopted May 16, 1977.  
Sec. 102-252. - Payment time, gross rates apply thereafter. 
Rates prescribed under this division shall be net rates and shall apply to all bills paid within ten (10) days of date of rendition. If bills are not paid within ten (10) days, gross rates shall apply, which rates shall be the above net rates plus one cent ($0.01) per Ccf of gas consumed per month. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 3, 4-13-53; Code 1958, § 11-2)  
Sec. 102-253. - Effective until changed. 
Rates prescribed under this division shall be effective and applicable to distribution and sale of natural gas during all monthly billing periods unless and until such rates shall be changed in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 4, 4-13-53; Code 1958, § 11-3)  
Sec. 102-254. - Posting; special contract rate schedules. 
The company shall establish and post in its office rate schedules providing monthly billing rates complying with rate ordinances, and may, in addition, establish special contract rate schedules for large volume commercial or industrial use providing other rates and charges. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 5, 4-13-53; Code 1958, § 11-4)  
Secs. 102-255—102-265. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STREET RENTAL FOR PIPES AND OTHER FIXTURES AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 102-266. - Report of gross receipts. 
All persons using or maintaining any gas pipelines, pipes and other fixtures in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other places within the city shall, on or before February 1 of each and every year, file with the city secretary a sworn report showing the gross receipts from the sale of gas to consumers for residential, commercial and industrial purposes within the corporate limits of the city for the next preceding year ending December 31. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 1, 9-14-45; Ord. No. 75-562, § 1, 6-16-75; Code 1958, § 11-5)  
Sec. 102-267. - Examination of books. 
The city council may, when it may see fit, have the books and records of the person rendering the statement required in section 102-266 examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether such statement is accurate, but nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any other method. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 2, 9-14-45; Code 1958, § 11-6)  
Sec. 102-268. - Amount. 
On or prior to February 1 of each and every year, every person occupying or using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places in the city with gas pipelines, pipes or other fixtures or structures shall, as a condition to such further occupancy, pay to the city annually for such privileges a rental equal to two (2) percent of the annual gross receipts received by such person from the sale of gas to consumers for residential, commercial and industrial purposes within the city (representing gas sold to such consumers residing within the city) for the preceding year ending December 31. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 3, 9-14-45; Ord. No. 75-562, § 1, 6-16-75; Code 1958, § 11-7)  
Sec. 102-269. - Receipt, authority conferred. 
Upon receipt of the above rental by the city, the city manager shall deliver to the person paying the same a receipt for such rental, which such receipt shall authorize such person to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public ways of the city in carrying on its business for twelve (12) months from January 1 to December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 4, 9-14-45; Code 1958, § 11-8)  
Sec. 102-270. - Not a tax, additional to all taxes. 
The rental for the privileges of using the streets, alleys, highways, easements, and public places of the city provided for in this division is not charged as a tax but is made for the privilege now enjoyed and to be enjoyed by such persons of using the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways of the city in the conduct of their respective businesses, and such charges are additional to all ad valorem and franchise taxes and to all taxes of every nature whatsoever against the persons mentioned in this division. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 5, 9-14-45; Code 1958, § 11-9)  
Sec. 102-271. - Examination and inspection, remedying unsafe conditions. 
The city fire marshal, building official, electrical inspector, city police officers and such other persons designated by the city shall have the right to examine and inspect from time to time, on reasonable notice and under reasonable rules and regulations, all gas pipe lines, pipes and other fixtures and structures in the streets, alleys, and public places within the city for the purpose of seeing that all of same are in a safe and suitable condition, and whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining same shall be notified and required to place same in a safe and suitable condition within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 9, 9-14-45; Code 1958, § 11-13)  
Sec. 102-272. - Additional restrictions and removal of equipment may be required. 
The city hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other reasonable restrictions and regulations as to the erection and maintenance of gas pipe lines, pipes and/or other appurtenances in the streets, easements, alleys and public ways of the city, and from time to time require such gas pipe lines, pipes and/or other property, equipment and fixtures as it may deem proper to be removed and to make such other reasonable regulations as may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 8, 9-14-45; Code 1958, § 11-12)  
Sec. 102-273. - Division not a franchise; privileges may be cancelled. 
This division does not grant a franchise to any utility or person to use the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways and shall never be so construed by the courts or otherwise, and the city reserves the right to cancel the privileges granted under this division and refund the unearned rentals paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 7, 9-14-45; Code 1958, § 11-11)  
Sec. 102-274. - Compliance with other laws not affected. 
Nothing in this division is intended to relieve any person of any condition, restriction or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 6, 9-14-45; Code 1958, § 11-10)  
Secs. 102-275—102-295. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TELEPHONE SERVICE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of public utilities, art. 10. 
State Law reference— Certain public services and utility systems in home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.002; telecommunications utilities, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1446c, § 18. 
 
Sec. 102-296. - Rates. 
(a)  Southwestern Bell Telephone Company shall place in effect rates and charges for services performed for subscribers of such company in the city as prescribed from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)  Nothing in section 102-296 shall in anywise be construed as limiting the right, power and duty of the city to regulate rates and charges of Southwestern Bell Telephone Company. 
(Ord. No. 179, § 4, 5-17-55; Code 1958, §§ 22-1, 22-2)  
Secs. 102-297—102-315. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CABLE COMMUNICATION SERVICE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises and public utilities, art. 10. 
State Law reference— Offenses pertaining to television or cable descrambling, decoding or interception devices, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 31.12, 31.13; installation and maintenance of community antenna or cable television equipment, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9021; action to restrain or enjoin unauthorized use of television decoding and interception devices, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, §§ 128.001, 128.002; "cable television service" defined for purposes of sales, excise and use tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 151.0033. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-316. - Operation and service standards under cablevision franchise. 
The cablevision franchisee shall: 
(1)  Maintain a sufficiently competent staff from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. each day to adequately service all of the equipment which it furnishes for telecast distribution and provide the capability for emergency repairs as needed. 
(2)  Provide a twenty-four-hour telephone service to handle complaints concerning equipment, service or malfunctions. 
(3)  Maintain a log of complaints that specifies: 
a.  When the complaint was received. 
b.  How the complaint was received. 
c.  Who made the complaint. 
d.  What was the subject of the complaint. 
e.  How the complaint was resolved. 
f.  When the complaint was resolved. 
(4)  File a monthly report signed by the franchisee's manager with the city manager by the fifteenth of the month showing the following: 
a.  Number of complaints. 
b.  Total number of complaints not resolved. 
c.  Average minimum and maximum time to resolve complaints for the month and year to date. 
d.  Complaints filed on the phone after hours: 
1.  Number of people who were called back by the end of the next business day. 
2.  Number not called back by the end of the next business day. 
3.  Number not called back by the end of the reporting period. 
e.  Number of complaints for which a repair item is needed, but was not in stock, and: 
1.  Date when ordered. 
2.  Date of expected installation. 
3.  Date persons notified of delay for needed repair item. 
f.  Number of orders for new hookups for month and year to date. 
g.  Number of hookups for month and year to date. 
h.  Number of orders for hookups outstanding. (Hookup means you can see a picture of not less than eight (8) channels). 
i.  Number of disconnections at month's end. 
j.  Number of connections at month's end. 
(5)  On the customer's request the monthly bill shall be adjusted when service is interrupted on all channels for more than six (6) hours. Basis of adjustment shall be at the rate of the monthly rate per day when no service is received. The total adjustment shall not exceed the total bill. 
(6)  Respond to all complaints by the end of the next business day and if the complaint or problem cannot be resolved by the end of the next business day, the customer shall be notified by telephone or written response by the end of the next business day as to the reason for delay, the proposed solution and the projected time required to resolve the complaint or problem. All action by the franchisee's manager should be reduced to writing and made part of the record of the company. 
(Ord. No. 82-849, § 1, 3-15-82; Code 1958, § 5-1)  
Secs. 102-317—102-319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 102-320. - Short title. 
This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Lake Jackson Cable Television Franchise Ordinance," hereinafter "division." 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-321. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
Affiliate means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in a grantee; (ii) each person in which the grantee has, directly or indirectly, a controlling Interest; (iii) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with a grantee; provided that "affiliate" shall in no event mean any creditor of a grantee solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with a grantee. 
Basic service means the lowest priced cable service tier provided by the grantee that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast stations, and public, educational and governmental access channels. 
Cable Act means Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
Cable system means a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and distributing audio, video, and other forms of electronic, electrical or optical signals, which includes cable service and which is located in the city. The definition shall not include any such facility that serves or will serve only subscribers in multiple unit dwellings, and which does not use city streets. 
Cable service means (1) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and (2) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a video programming service. 
City means the City of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
Control and/or controlling interest shall mean actual working control of a cable system in whatever manner exercised. control or controlling interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one (1) person. 
Converter means an electronic device that converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view signals delivered by the cable system at designated converter dial locations. 
Franchise means the initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, to construct and operate a cable system. 
Franchise area means all of the present geographic area within the City of Lake Jackson, Texas, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected governmental successor. 
Grantee means a person to whom or which a franchise under this division is granted by the city, along with the lawful successors or assigns of such person. 
Gross revenue means any and all revenue received by a grantee from the operation of the cable system to provide cable service to subscribers in the franchise Area, including franchise fees collected from subscribers. For purposes of paying franchise fees, gross revenue does not include bad debt, returned check charges, franchise fees collected from subscribers, retail sales, and unrecovered equipment replacement charges. Gross revenue includes an allocated portion of all revenue derived by a grantee from advertising, home shopping, or other similar cable services delivered over the cable system in the franchise area. 
Installation means the connection of a cable system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminals. 
May is permissive. 
Normal business hours as applied to a grantee shall mean those hours during which similar businesses in the city are open to serve subscribers. In all cases, normal business hours shall include some evening hours at least one (1) night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
Normal operating conditions shall mean those service conditions that are within the control of a grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of a grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of a grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Shall is mandatory. 
Service interruption and/or outages shall mean the loss of either picture or sound or both for a single or multiple subscriber(s). 
Street means the surface of and all rights-of-way and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which shall, within their proper use and meaning entitle a grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable system. 
Subscriber shall mean any person lawfully receiving cable service from grantee. 
User means a person utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-322. - Rights and privileges of a grantee. 
Any franchise granted by the city shall grant to the grantee the right and privilege to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, and along, across, above, over and under the streets in the franchise Area now in existence and as may be created or established during its terms, any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a cable system. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-323. - Agreement and incorporation of application by reference. 
Upon adoption of any franchise and execution thereof by the grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein, except as noted in the franchise. 
Any grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in its application, if any, and by its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise. In the event of a conflict between such application and the provisions of this division, that provision which provides the greatest benefit to the city, in the opinion of the city, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-324. - Franchise territory. 
All franchises granted under this division will include both the right and the obligation to provide cable service within the present territorial limits of the city and for any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise by annexation or other legal means, subject to the density restrictions set forth in section 19(b)(1)(b) [of said Act]. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-325. - Duration and acceptance of franchise. 
The franchise and the rights, privileges and authority granted shall take effect and be in force as set forth in the franchise and shall continue in force and effect for a term of no longer than ten (10) years, provided that within thirty (30) days after the date of final passage of the franchise the grantee shall file with the city its acceptance of the franchise subject to applicable law and promise to comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms and conditions. Such acceptance and promise shall be in writing duly executed and sworn to, by, or on behalf of the grantee before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths. Such franchise shall be nonexclusive and revocable according to the terms and provisions in section 102-354. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-326. - Franchise renewal. 
The city and all grantees shall conduct any proceedings that relate to the renewal of the grantee's franchise in accordance with the provisions of section 626 of the Cable Act, unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision under federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-327. - Police powers. 
Any franchise granted hereunder is subject to the lawful police power of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances of general applicability which are necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and all grantees shall agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power. 
In the event of a conflict between a franchise and this division or any other enabling ordinance, law or regulation in effect at the time of this division or adopted thereafter, the terms and conditions of the franchise shall be controlling. If the franchise is silent, this division and/or any applicable federal and state statutes shall govern. The city may from time to time amend this division pursuant to its lawful police powers, provided, however, such amendments shall not serve to impair the contractual rights or increase the obligations of the grantee pursuant to the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-328. - Franchise required, equal protection. 
No cable system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the city for cable system installation and maintenance purposes, or be allowed to operate, without a franchise granted pursuant to this division. 
The city shall not authorize or permit any person to enter into the city's streets for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the franchise area on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to such person than those applied to other grantees operating pursuant to this division, in order that one (1) operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-329. - Use of grantee facilities. 
Subject to any applicable state or federal regulation or tariffs, the city shall have the right, during the life of the franchise, to install and maintain upon the poles of the grantee located in the public way, provided that: (a) such use of any wire or pole fixtures by the city does not unreasonably interfere with a current or future use of the grantee; (b) the city shall indemnify and hold harmless the grantee from any and all claims, demands, costs, or liabilities of every kind and nature that might arise due to or as a result of the city's use; (c) such use by the city is restricted to noncommercial municipal purposes; (d) the city does not use the poles for any purpose that is in competition with the grantee's use; and (e) at the grantee's sole discretion, the city may be required either to pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate the grantee for the use of such poles, provided, however, that the grantee agrees that such compensation or charge shall not exceed those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole attachment agreement, or other authorization, relating to the franchise area. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-330. - Initial franchise costs. 
Costs to be borne by the grantee shall include any requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the initial franchise including, but shall not be limited to, all costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting provided for pursuant to this division, and any costs not covered by application fees incurred by the city in its study, preparation of proposal documents, evaluation of all applications, and examinations of the applicants' qualifications. These costs do not apply to any grantee who already holds a franchise with the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-331. - Notices. 
All notices from a grantee to the city pursuant to this division shall be to the city manager's office. Each grantee shall maintain with the city, throughout the term of its franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. Each grantee shall maintain a central office to address any issues relating to operating under this division. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-332. - Letter of credit/security deposit. 
(a)  Unless otherwise set forth in the franchise, within thirty (30) days after the award of an initial franchise, the grantee shall deposit with the city either an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution or a security deposit in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The form and content of such letter of credit or security deposit shall be approved by the city Attorney, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. These instruments shall be used to insure the faithful performance of the grantee of all provisions of its franchise; and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens, and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system. 
(b)  The letter of credit or security deposit shall be maintained at the amount established by the city for the entire term of the franchise, and shall be replenished within thirty (30) days if amounts have to be withdrawn. 
(c)  If the grantee fails to pay to the city any compensation within the time fixed herein; or fails after fifteen (15) days written notice to pay to the city any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the city within fifteen (15) days any damages, costs or expenses which the city is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise, or fails, after thirty (30) days written notice of such failure by the city to comply with any provision of the franchise which the city reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the letter of credit or security deposit, the city may immediately request payment of the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the letter of credit or security deposit. The grantee has the right to appeal such demand by the city to the city council, who shall hear the matter in a public meeting and allow the grantee to be heard and present evidence of compliance. 
(d)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this division or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such letter of credit shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(e)  The letter of credit or security deposit shall be non-cancelable, except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the city. 
(f)  If an existing letter of credit or security deposit is to be canceled, grantee shall provide evidence of a replacement letter of credit or security deposit to the city fifteen (15) days prior to the cancellation date. Failure to provide evidence of replacement surety shall be construed as a default granting the city the right to call on the bank for the initial security deposit or letter of credit. 
(g)  The city at any time during the term of this division may waive grantee's requirement to maintain a letter of credit or security deposit. The invitation to waive the requirement can be initiated by the city or grantee. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-333. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Unless otherwise set forth in the franchise, within thirty (30) days after the award of an initial franchise, the grantee shall file with the city a performance bond in the amount of not less than fifty (50) percent of costs to install the system contained in the new application in favor of the city. This bond shall be maintained throughout the construction period and until such time as determined by the city. 
(b)  If the grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or resolution governing the franchise, or fails to well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise as it relates to the conditions relative to the construction of the cable system, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, including the city's legal staff and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. This section shall be an additional remedy to those outlined in section 102-332. 
(c)  The city may, upon completion of construction of the cable system, waive or reduce the requirement of the grantee to maintain the bond. However, the city may require a performance bond to be posted by the grantee for any construction subsequent to the completion of the initial cable system, in a reasonable amount and upon such terms as determined by the city. 
(d)  The bond shall be non-cancelable, except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the city. If an existing bond is to be canceled, grantee shall provide evidence of a replacement bond to the city fifteen (15) days prior to the cancellation date. Failure to provide evidence of a replacement bond shall be construed as default granting the city the right to call in the bond. 
(e)  The city at any time during the term of the franchise may waive a grantee's requirement to maintain a performance bond. The invitation to waive the requirement can be initiated by the city or grantee. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-334. - Liability and insurance. 
(a)  A grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of a franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, liability insurance insuring the city (as additional insured) and the grantee in the minimum amount of: 
(1)  One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage to any one (1) person; 
(2)  One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage in any one (1) accident; 
(3)  One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury to any one (1) person; and 
(4)  One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury in any one (1) accident. 
(b)  A certificate of insurance obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section shall be filed and maintained with the city during the term of the franchise. 
(c)  Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder shall be construed to or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages. 
(d)  Such coverage shall be non-cancelable, except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-335. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Disclaimer of liability. The city shall not at any time be liable for injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition or dismantling of a grantee's cable system, except in circumstances where the injury or damage was caused by the negligence and/or willful misconduct of the city, or the negligence and/or willful misconduct of the city in conjunction with another person. 
(b)  Indemnification. The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold harmless the city, all associated, affiliated, allied and subsidiary entities of the city, now existing or hereinafter created, and their respective officers, boards, commissions, employees, agents, attorneys, and contractors (hereinafter referred to as "indemnities"), from and against: 
(1)  Any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnities by reason of any act or omission of the grantee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, tradename, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any person, which may arise out of grantee's construction, installation, operation, maintenance or condition of its cable system, its subcontractors or agents, or the grantee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation. 
(c)  Assumption of risk. The grantee undertakes and assumes for its officers, agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees, all risk of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any city owned or controlled property, including streets. 
(d)  Defense of indemnities. In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought against the indemnities by reason of any matter for which the indemnities are indemnified hereunder, the grantee shall not admit liability in any such matter on behalf of the Indemnities without the written consent of the city. The city must afford grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement, resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding for which the grantee is providing indemnification. The city will also fully cooperate in the defense of any such claim and make available to grantee all such information under its control relating thereto. 
(e)  Notice cooperation and expenses. The city shall give the grantee prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. No recovery by the city of any sum under the letter of credit or security fund shall be a limitation upon the liability of the grantee to the city under the terms of this section, except that any sum so received by the city from the letter of credit or security fund shall be deducted from any recovery which the city might have against the grantee under the terms of this section. 
(f)  Nonwaiver of statutory limits. Nothing in this division is intended to express or imply a waiver of the statutory provisions, of any kind or nature, as set forth in Texas Statues, including the limits of liability of the city as exists presently or may be increased from time to time by the legislature. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-336. - Rights of individuals. 
(a)  A grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, Users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, income or sex. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination. 
(b)  The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, and applicable state and local regulations. 
(c)  The grantee shall, at all times, comply with the privacy requirements of state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-337. - Public notice. 
Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to this division shall be made as prescribed by applicable state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-338. - System construction. 
(a)  New construction timetable. The requirements of this subsection (a) do not apply to any grantee who already holds a franchise with the city and has completed construction of its cable system. 
(1)  Within two (2) years from the date of the award of the initial franchise, the grantee must make cable service available to every dwelling unit within the franchise area, subject to the density requirements of section 102-338(b)(1)(b). 
a.  The grantee must make cable service available to at least twenty (20) percent of the dwelling units within the franchise area within six (6) months from the date of the award of the franchise. 
b.  The grantee must make cable service available to at least fifty (50) percent of the dwelling units within the franchise area within one (1) year from the date of the award of the franchise. 
(2)  The grantee, in its application if any, may propose a timetable of construction which will make cable service available in the franchise area sooner than the above minimum requirements, in which case the said schedule will be made part of the franchise, and will be binding upon the grantee. 
(3)  Any delay beyond the terms of this timetable, unless specifically approved by the city, will be considered a violation of the franchise for which the provisions of section 102-354 shall apply, as determined by the city. 
(4)  In special circumstances the city can waive one hundred (100) percent completion within the two-year timeframe provided substantial completion is accomplished within allotted timeframe, substantial completion construed to be not less than ninety-five (95) percent and justification for less than one hundred (100) percent must be submitted subject to the satisfaction of the city. 
(b)  Line extensions: 
(1)  A grantee shall only be required to construct and extend its cable system pursuant to the following requirements: 
a.  No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. To expedite the process of extending the cable system into a new subdivision, the city will forward to the grantee an approved engineering plan of each project. Subject to the density requirements set forth below, the grantee shall commence the design and construction process upon receipt of the final engineering plan. Upon notification from the city that the first home in the project has been approved for building permit, the grantee shall have a maximum of three (3) months to complete the construction/activation process within the project phase. 
b.  The grantee must extend and make cable service available to all areas having at least thirty (30) dwelling units per street mile, as measured from the existing cable system. 
c.  The grantee must extend and make cable television service available to any residence in the franchise area requesting connection at the standard connection charge, if the connection to the isolated resident would require no more than a standard one hundred twenty-five-foot drop line. For connections greater than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, grantee may charge the potential subscriber the appropriate published nonstandard installation fee. 
(2)  Early extension. In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of service, the grantee shall provide, upon the request of a potential subscriber desiring cable service, an estimate of the costs required to extend cable service to the subscriber. The grantee shall then extend cable service upon request of the potential subscriber. The grantee may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the grantee. The amount paid by subscribers for early extensions shall be nonrefundable, and in the event the area subsequently reaches the density required for mandatory extension, such payments shall be treated as consideration for early extension. 
(c)  Annexations. Nothing herein shall be construed to require a grantee to extend its cable system into an area annexed into the franchise area which is currently served by another grantee. 
(1)  The grantee, in its application, may propose a line extension policy which will result in serving more residents of the city than as required above, in which case the grantee's policy will be incorporated into the franchise, and will be binding on the grantee. 
(2)  The violation of this section shall be considered a breach of the terms of this division for which the provisions of section 102-354 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-339. - Construction and technical standards. 
(a)  Compliance with construction and technical standards. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all FCC technical standards. In addition, the grantee shall provide the city, upon written request, with a written report of the results of the grantee's most recently conducted semiannual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements. 
(b)  Additional specifications: 
(1)  Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
(2)  A grantee shall at all times comply with: 
a.  National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); 
b.  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
c.  Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction (if applicable); and 
d.  Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations. 
(3)  In any event, the cable system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area. 
(4)  Any antenna structure used in the cable system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structures required by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(5)  All working facilities and conditions used during construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall comply with the standards of the occupational safety and health administration. 
(6)  The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for headend and transport system for a minimum of two (2) hours. 
(7)  In all areas of the city where the cables, wires, and other like facilities of all public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground. 
(8)  Upon receiving reasonable advance notice from the city, the grantee shall remove any abandoned portion of the cable system which poses a safety or health hazard in the opinion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-340. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Interference with persons and improvements. The grantee's cable system shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or unreasonably interfere with the lives of persons or unreasonably interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, or interfere with any improvements the city may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets or public property. 
(b)  Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, landscaping, driveway or other surfacing by the grantee, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street disturbed, in as good condition as immediately before the work was commenced and in accordance with any generally applicable ordinances of the city. Approval by the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(c)  Erection, removal and common uses of poles: 
(1)  No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, types, and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(2)  Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing for use in serving the city are available for use by the grantee, but it does not make arrangements for such use, the city may require the grantee to use such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and reasonable. For purposes of this section, the city shall consider the terms of use to be just and reasonable only if they are comparable to established state and/or federal standards. 
(3)  In the absence of any governing federal or state statute, where the city or a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee, but agreement thereof with the grantee cannot be reached, the city may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the city shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the city determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations. For purposes of this section, just and reasonable terms of use shall be those comparable to established state and/or federal standards. 
(d)  Relocation of the facilities. If at any time during the period of this franchise the city shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, the grantee, upon reasonable written notice by the city, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense unless the utilities are compensated, in which case the grantee shall be similarly compensated. 
(e)  Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than five (5) business days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)  Tree trimming. The grantee shall comply with any generally applicable ordinances of the city related to the trimming of trees and other shrubbery in or overhanging the streets or public property. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-341. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The grantee shall put, keep and maintain all parts of the cable system in good condition throughout the entire franchise period. 
(b)  Upon the reasonable request for cable service by any person located within the franchise Area, the grantee shall, within thirty (30) days, furnish the requested service to such person subject to the line extension policy set forth in section 102-338(b)(1)(b) of this division, and payment of any reasonable deposits and advance fees required by the grantee. 
(c)  The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum system use. 
(d)  The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of subscribers or persons not served by the grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents within the confines of the city nor shall other utilities interfere with the grantee's system. 
(e)  The grantee shall maintain a local, tollfree, or collect call telephone access line which will be available to subscribers twenty-four (24) hours per day and seven (7) days per week. Trained representatives of the grantee will be available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries during normal business hours, as defined herein. After normal business hours, an access line will be available to be answered by an answering service or automated response system, including a phone answering system. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained representative of the grantee on the next business day. 
(f)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds from when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time will not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time under normal operating conditions, as measured on a quarterly basis. 
(g)  Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will receive a busy signal less than three (3) percent of the time. This standard shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time as measured on a quarterly basis. 
(h)  Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. A standard installation is one that is within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of the existing distribution system. 
(i)  Excluding those situations outside of normal operating conditions, the grantee will respond to any service interruption promptly and in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours from the time the interruption becomes known to grantee. All other regular service requests will be responded to within thirty-six (36) hours during the normal business hour for the cable system under normal operating conditions. The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will not exceed a four-hour "window" during normal business hour for the cable system, or at a time that is mutually acceptable. The grantee may schedule supplemental hours during which appointments can be scheduled based on the needs of the community. If at any time an installer or technician is running late, an attempt to contact the subscriber will be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time that is convenient to the subscriber. 
(j)  Customer service centers and bill payment locations will be open for walk-in customer transactions a minimum of eight (8) hours a day Monday through Friday unless there is a need to modify those hours because of the location or customers served. The grantee and city by mutual consent will establish supplemental hours on weekdays and weekends if it would fit the needs of the community. At least one (1) walk-in customer service center shall be located in either Lake Jackson, Clute, Freeport, Richwood, or within ten (10) miles of the municipal boundary of any of these cities. 
(k)  For service interruptions and/or outages of over four (4) hours, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a prorated credit of the affected cable service. 
(l)  The grantee will provide written information in each of the following areas at the time of installation and at any future time upon the request of the subscriber: 
(1)  Product and services offered. 
(2)  Prices and service options. 
(3)  Installation and service policies. 
(4)  How to use the cable services. 
(m)  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable, with all cable services itemized. 
(n)  Credits will be issued promptly, but no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the resolution of the request and the return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if cable service has been terminated. 
(o)  Subscribers will be notified a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of any rate or programming channel change, provided that the change is within the control of the grantee. 
(p)  The grantee shall maintain and operate its cable system in accordance with the rules and regulations as are incorporated herein or may be lawfully promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission, the United States Congress, or the State of Texas. 
(q)  The grantee shall keep a monthly service log which will indicate the nature of each subscriber contact made in the last twelve (12) months which results in a service call, the date and time it was received, the disposition of said service call, and the time and date thereof. This log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the city, pursuant to section 102-347 of this division and subscriber privacy rights under section 631 of the Cable Act. 
(r)  All personnel of the grantee contacting subscribers or potential subscribers outside the office of grantee must be clearly identified as associated with the grantee. 
(s)  The grantee shall not terminate cable service for nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the grantee provides initial notice of the delinquency and impending termination at least ten (10) days prior to the proposed termination. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the subscriber to whom the service is billed. This notice shall not be sent until the twenty-eighth day after the initial bill for service was mailed to the subscriber. The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing statement. This section does not apply to subscribers disconnected due to NSF checks. 
(t)  Refund checks shall be issued within thirty (30) days following the subscriber's request or thirty (30) days following the return of the grantee's equipment by the subscriber, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-342. - Continuity of cable service mandatory. 
(a)  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. This does not require the grantee to provide service to subscriber who are abusive to the employee of the grantee. If the grantee elects to over build, rebuild, modify or sell the cable system, or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted cable service regardless of the circumstances. For purposes of this section, "continuous and uninterrupted" does not include service interruptions and outages of cable service experienced by subscribers during the regular course of business. 
(b)  If there is a change of franchise, or if a new operator acquires the cable system, the grantee shall cooperate with the city, new franchisee or operator in maintaining continuity of cable service to all subscribers. During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services until it no longer operates the cable system. 
(c)  If the grantee fails to operate the cable system for thirty (30) consecutive days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the cable system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the cable system received by the city that are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-343. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  The city manager is designated as having primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchises and implementation of procedures for handling subscriber complaints against the grantee received by the city. 
(b)  During the term of any franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain a central office for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters. The office must be reachable by a local, tollfree telephone call. The grantee will use its good faith efforts to arrange for one (1) or more payment locations in a central location where subscribers can pay bills or conduct other business activities. 
(c)  At the time of installation, the grantee shall furnish information to subscribers concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent of the grantee to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed. 
(d)  When there have been similar complaints made, or where there exists other substantial evidence, which, in the judgment of the city, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, the city shall have the right and authority to require the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the city in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within thirty (30) days after notice. Such report shall include the following information: 
(1)  The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special tests; 
(2)  What cable system component(s) were tested; 
(3)  The equipment used and procedures employed in testing; 
(4)  The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved; 
(5)  Any other information pertinent to the tests and analysis which may be required. 
The city may require that tests be supervised, by an independent person of the city's choice. This person should sign all records of special tests and forward to the city such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken. Should such a test prove that the grantee substantially failed to meet the technical standard, the grantee shall bear the reasonable cost of the test. If the test should prove that the grantee met the technical standards, or if the failure is not substantial, the city shall bear the cost of the test. 
The city's right under this section shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the city has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable service. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-344. - Grantee rules and regulations. 
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, and to assure uninterrupted cable service to each and all of its subscribers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the lawfully enforceable provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. For purposes of this section, "uninterrupted" does not include service interruptions and outages experienced during the regular course of business. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-345. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  For the reason that the streets of the city to be used by the grantee in the operation of its cable system within the boundaries of the city are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to the grantee to use the streets is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, the grantee shall pay to the city an amount equal to five (5) percent of the grantee's gross annual revenue received by the grantee from the operations of its cable system to provide cable services within the franchise area. If the statutory five (5) percent limitation on franchise fees is raised or the federal statute deletes the franchise fee limitation entirely, then the franchise fee may be subject to renegotiation. 
(b)  This payment shall be in addition to any other generally applicable tax or payment owed to the city by the grantee. 
(c)  The franchise fee shall be payable quarterly to the city within forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter, and shall be accompanied by a complete and accurate certified statement of all of the grantee's gross revenues for the period. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this division. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee by the city which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. 
(e)  The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be four (4) years from the date on which payment by the grantee is due. 
(f)  The grantee pay shall interest on any net franchise fee underpayment for the calendar year at the annual prime rate or the maximum rate allowed by law, whichever is less from forty-five (45) days after the end of the calendar year until the date the payment is received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-346. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  Except as may otherwise be provided in a franchise, the franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, other than to a person controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the grantee, without the prior written consent of the city. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. The proposed assignee must show financial responsibility as determined by the city and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise. The city shall have one hundred and twenty (120) days to act upon any request for approval of such a sale or transfer submitted in writing that contains or is accompanied by such information as is required in accordance with FCC regulations. The city shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer or assignment if its refusal to consent is not communicated in writing to the grantee within one hundred and twenty (120) days unless the requesting party and the city agree to an extension of time. The city shall not unreasonably withhold such consent to the proposed transfer. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be provided in a franchise, the grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other person of, control of the grantee. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. 
For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the qualification of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the city in such inquiry. 
(c)  The consent or approval of the city to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(d)  In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of an initial franchise prior to substantial completion of construction of the proposed cable system. 
(e)  In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-347. - Availability of books and records. 
(a)  The grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable times, and the city shall have the right to inspect where reasonably necessary to the enforcement of the franchise, books, records, maps, plans and other like materials of the grantee applicable to the cable system, at any time during normal business hour; provided where volume and convenience necessitate, the grantee may require inspection to take place on the grantee premises. The city agrees to treat any information disclosed by the grantee as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions of the franchise. The grantee shall not be required to provide subscriber information in violation of section 631 of the Cable Act. 
(b)  The grantee shall prepare and furnish, upon receipt of a written request from the city, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property as is reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of the city's rights, functions or duties under the franchise. The city shall consult with the grantee as to the form, detail, and due dates of the reports requested, and accept copies of reports generated by the grantee in the normal course of business whenever possible. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-348. - Other petitions and applications. 
Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports either submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable television operations authorized pursuant to the franchise or received from such agencies shall be provided to the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-349. - Fiscal reports. 
The grantee shall file annually with the city no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, a copy of a gross revenues statement certified by an officer or CPA of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-350. - Required services and facilities. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for in the franchise, each cable system shall offer a minimum of seventy-seven (77) full-time video programming services to subscribers. cable systems shall utilize fiber to the node architecture consistent with cable television industry standards in order to meet the FCC technical specifications. In addition, the average fiber node size shall be no greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) homes per node and the average amplifier cascade shall be no greater than twelve (12), with the longest amplifier cascade no greater than fifteen (15). For cable systems that were initially constructed prior to the effective date of this division, the timeline to incorporate fiber to the node shall be as noted in the franchise. Considering the rapid changes in cable system technology, a grantee may present for city approval an alternative architecture that results in comparable benefits to cable system picture quality and reliability as fiber to the node. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Such cable system shall have the technical capacity for "two-way" communications, provided however, that the return does not need to be activated, and the offering of two-way services is not required, until the grantee believes that such services are technically and economically feasible, and the grantee has obtained such additional regulatory consent as may be required by state or federal law to provide two-way services. 
(c)  At the city's request, unless otherwise designated in the franchise, the grantee shall maintain the following: 
(1)  At least one (1) specially-designated, noncommercial public access channel available on a first-come, nondiscriminatory basis; 
(2)  At least one (1) specially-designated, noncommercial channel for use by local educational authorities; 
(3)  At least one (1) specially-designated, noncommercial channel for local governmental uses; 
(4)  These uses may be combined on one (1) or more channels until such time as dedicated channels become necessary. Capital support for the purchase and/or replacement of equipment for public, educational and government access shall be separately incorporated into the franchise. 
(5)  Upon written request by the city, and provided that no regulatory consent is required from any state or federal authority for the provision of services requested by the city, grantee shall construct and make available an Institutional Network ("I-Net") of cable, optical, electrical or electronic equipment, used for the purpose of transmitting two-way signals between designated city buildings. Nothing contained herein should be construed as a requirement for the grantee to construct an Institutional Network without fair reimbursement from the city of the capital cost to provide such facilities, nor receive fair compensation for the maintenance and use of such network. 
(d)  The grantee shall incorporate into its cable system the capacity which will permit the city, in times of emergency, to override, by remote control, the audio of all channels simultaneously which the grantee may lawfully override. The grantee shall provide emergency broadcast capacity pursuant to FCC rules. The grantee shall cooperate with the city in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. The city shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the grantee's cable system in any manner that results in the inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the cable system. Except to the extent expressly prohibited by law, the city shall hold the grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the city, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees and costs. 
(e)  (1)  Sharing interconnections: The city may desire for the grantee to interconnect its cable system with other adjacent cable television systems for the purpose of sharing public, educational, and governmental access programming. Interconnections shall only be implemented upon agreement between grantee and the contiguous cable operator. 
(2)  Interconnection procedure: Upon receiving the directive of the city to interconnect, the grantee shall immediately initiate good-faith negotiations with the other affected system or systems in order that all costs may be shared equally among cable companies for both construction and operation of the interconnection link. 
(3)  Cooperation required: The grantee shall reasonably cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or city, county, state and federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the city. 
(f)  Grantee shall include in its cable service a broad range of programming. grantee shall take into account the programming preferences of its subscribers in making its programming decisions. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-351. - Rules and regulations. 
In addition to the inherent powers of the city to regulate and control its streets, the right and power is hereby reserved by the city to promulgate such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful powers and furtherance of the terms and conditions of this division; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-352. - Performance evaluation sessions. 
(a)  The city and the grantee may hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions within thirty (30) days of the third and sixth anniversary dates of the grantee's award or renewal of a franchise and as may be required by federal and state law. 
(b)  Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the city or the grantee. 
(c)  All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in accordance with the city's required legal notice. 
(d)  Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, service rate structures; franchise fee, penalties, free or discounted services; application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; programming offered; customer complaints; privacy; amendments to this division; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and grantee or city rules. 
(e)  Members of the general public may add topics either by working through the negotiating parties or by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid signatures of fifty (50) or more residents of the city, the proposed topic or topics shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the evaluation session. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-353. - Rate change procedures. 
The city may regulate rates for the provision of basic cable and equipment as expressly permitted by federal law. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-354. - Violations, forfeiture and termination. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city under this division or otherwise, the city reserves the right to forfeit and terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions. A substantial breach by the grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Violation of any material provision of the franchise or any material rule, order, regulation or determination of the city made pursuant to the franchise; 
(2)  Attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or practice any fraud or deceit upon the city or its subscribers; 
(3)  Failure to begin or complete cable system construction or cable system extension as provided under section 102-338; 
(4)  Failure to provide the cable services promised in the grantee's application if any as incorporated herein by section 102-323; 
(5)  Failure to restore cable service after ninety-six (96) consecutive hours of interrupted service to the entire cable system, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from the city; or 
(6)  Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of the franchise. 
(b)  The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the violation occurs but is without fault of the grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. The grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship or by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees. 
(c)  The city may make a written demand that the grantee comply with any such specific provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant to the franchise. If the violation by the grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may place the issue of the violation of the franchise before the city council. The city shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of the time, place and purpose of the meeting. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue(s) which the city is to consider. 
(d)  The city council shall hear and consider the issue(s), provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard, hear any other person interested therein, and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any violation by the grantee has occurred. 
(e)  If the city council shall determine the violation by the grantee was the fault of the grantee and was within its control to prevent, the council may, by resolution: 
(1)  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; 
(2)  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or 
(3)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be forfeited and terminated unless there is compliance within such period as the council may fix, such period shall not be less than sixty (60) days, provided no opportunity for compliance need be granted for fraud or misrepresentation. 
(f)  The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed upon the council agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The council then may terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the grantee has failed to achieve compliance or may further extend the period, in its discretion. 
(g)  The grantee may appeal such determination to terminate the franchise to an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction which shall have the power to review the city's decision de novo, and to modify or reverse such decision as justice may require. 
Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the determination of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-355. - Force majeure. 
Grantees shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provisions of the franchise or this division, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default (including termination, cancellation or revocation of the franchise), where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by strike, riot, war, earthquake, flood, tidal wave, unusually severe rain or snow storm, hurricane, tornado or other catastrophic act of nature, labor disputes, governmental, administrative or judicial order or regulation or other event that is reasonably beyond the grantee's ability to anticipate and control. This provision also covers work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their own utility poles on which the grantee's cable and/or equipment is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. 
It is not the city's intention to subject grantees to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the franchise for violations of the franchise or ordinance where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the subscribers within the franchise area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship to the grantee which outweigh the benefit to be derived by the city and/or subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-356. - Foreclosure. 
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the cable system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the cable system, the grantee shall notify the city of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of the franchise governing the consent of the city to such change in control of the grantee shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-357. - Right of acquisition by the city. 
Federal regulations as per section 627 of the Cable Act shall apply to the right of acquisition of the grantee's cable system by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-358. - Continuance of operation after revocation. 
In the case of a final determination of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at the grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, the grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. During such a period of time, grantee is authorized to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, the grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the city, the grantee and the city may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law; it being further agreed that the grantee's continued operation during the six-month period shall not be deemed a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the city or the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-359. - Receivership. 
The city shall have the right to cancel the franchise one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless: 
(1)  Within one hundred twenty (120) days after his/her election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this division and the franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder; and 
(2)  Such receiver or trustee, within the one hundred twenty (120) days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this division and the franchise granted to the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-360. - Compliance with state and federal laws, severability. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all lawful and generally applicable laws and regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof. 
(b)  If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, or any renewal or renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-361. - Landlord/tenant. 
(a)  Interference with cable service prohibited. Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive cable service, including, but not limited to, cable installation or maintenance from a cable system regulated by and lawfully operating under a valid and existing franchise issued by the city. 
(b)  Gratuities and payments to permit service prohibited. Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall ask, demand or receive any payment, service or gratuity in any form as a condition for permitting or cooperating with the installation of cable service to the dwelling unit occupied by a tenant or resident requesting cable service. 
(c)  Penalties and charges to tenants for service prohibited. Neither the owner or any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident, or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable service from a grantee operating under a valid and existing franchise issued by the city. 
(d)  Reselling service prohibited. No person shall resell, without the expressed, written consent of both the grantee and the city, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a cable system operating under a franchise issued by the city. 
(e)  Protection of property permitted. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning, and safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-362. - Applicant's bids for initial franchise. 
(a)  All bids received by the city from the applicants for an initial franchise will become the sole property of the city. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to reject any and all bids and waive informalities and/or technicalities where the best interest of the city may be served. 
(c)  All questions regarding the meaning or intent of this division or application documents shall be submitted to the city in writing. Replies will be issued by addenda mailed or delivered to all parties recorded by the city as having received the application documents. The city reserves the right to make extensions of time for receiving bids as it deems necessary. Questions received less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date for the opening of bids will not be answered. Only replies to questions by written addenda will be binding. All bids must contain an acknowledgment of receipt of all addenda. 
(d)  Bids must be sealed, and submitted at the time and place indicated in the application documents for the public opening. Bids may be modified at any time prior to the opening of the bids, provided that any modifications must be duly executed in the manner that the applicant's bid must be executed. No bid shall be opened or inspected before the public opening. 
(e)  Before submitting a bid, each applicant must: 
(1)  Examine this division and the application documents thoroughly; 
(2)  Familiarize himself/herself with local conditions that may in any manner affect performance under the Ordinance and a franchise; 
(3)  Familiarize himself/herself with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations affecting performance under the franchise; and 
(4)  Carefully correlate the bid with the requirements of this division and the application documents. 
(f)  The city may make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine the ability of the applicant to perform under this division, and the applicant shall furnish to the city all such information and data for this purpose as the city may request. The city reserves the right to reject any bid if the evidence submitted by, or investigation of, such applicant fails to satisfy the city that such applicant is properly qualified to carry out the obligations of this division and a franchise and to complete the work contemplated therein. Conditional bids will not be accepted. 
(g)  All bids received shall be placed in a secure depository approved by the city and not opened nor inspected prior to the public opening. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Sec. 102-363. - Financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure for initial franchises. 
(a)  No initial franchise will be granted to any applicant unless all requirements and demands of the city regarding financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure have been met. 
(b)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall fully disclose all agreements and undertakings, whether written or oral, or implied with any person, firm, group, association or corporation with respect to this franchise and the proposed cable system. The grantee of this franchise shall disclose all other contracts to the city as the contracts are made. This section shall include, but not be limited to, any agreements between local applicants and national companies. 
(c)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall submit all requested information as provided by the terms of this division or the application documents, which are incorporated herein by reference. The requested information must be complete and verified as true by the applicant. 
(d)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose the numbers of shares of stock, and the holders thereof, and shall include the amount of consideration for each share of stock and the nature of the consideration. 
(e)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application documents regarding other cable systems in which they hold an interest of any nature, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Locations of all other franchises and the dates of award for each location; 
(2)  Estimated construction costs and estimated completion dates for each cable system; 
(3)  Estimated number of miles of construction and number of miles completed in each cable system as of the date of this application; and 
(4)  Date for completion of construction as promised in the application for each cable system. 
(f)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application documents regarding pending applications for other cable systems, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Location of other franchise applications and date of application for each cable system; 
(2)  Estimated dates of franchise awards; 
(3)  Estimated number of miles of construction; and 
(4)  Estimated construction costs. 
(Ord. No. 98-1584, § 1, 11-16-98)  
Chapter 106 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of vehicles for hire, § 3.07(k). 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; signs, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; taxicab stands, § 98-146 et seq.; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Home rule powers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175; municipal regulation of taxicabs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.004; authority of municipal governing body to license, tax or otherwise regulate cabdrivers, bus drivers, etc., V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.029; driver's license, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6687b; municipal regulation of vehicles carrying passengers or freight for compensation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073; permit fee or street rental charge based on gross receipts, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6698. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 106-1—106-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2012, amended Art. II to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 106-26—106-51, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 148, §§ 1—12, 14, 15, adopted Dec. 1, 1953; Ord. No. 77-621, § 1, adopted Apr. 4, 1977; Ord. No. 81-818, § 6, adopted Sept. 8, 1981; Ord. No. 82-844, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1982; and Code 1958, §§ 21-1—21-13. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the chief of police or his designee. 
Manifest means a daily record of all trips made by a taxicab driver showing place of origin, destination, number of passengers, the amount of fare for passengers and the total number of hours driven. 
Overcrowd means that the driver is transporting a greater number of people in the vehicle than has been recommended by the manufacturer of the vehicle or that the vehicle does not have a manufacturer installed seatbelt for each occupant, including the driver. 
Passenger means an individual being transported in a taxicab for a fee. 
Taxicab means any and all vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Motor buses regularly operating on a fixed route or transporting customers to or from school or college; 
(2)  Ambulances; 
(3)  Vehicles rented or leased for operation by the person actually driving the same, unless such vehicle is transporting for compensation persons other than the one who actually rented or leased the vehicle; 
(4)  Vehicles used by automotive repair businesses, car dealerships, or similar operations to transport customers to or from the work or home and the place of business; and 
(5)  Nonemergency medical transportation providers. 
Taxicab driver means a person in actual charge of operating a taxicab on the public streets of Lake Jackson, Texas. 
Taxicab service license means the authority granted by the city to operate a taxicab service. 
Taxicab service operator means any person who owns, or has control, direction or management of, a taxicab service or company. 
Taxicab driver permit means a permit issued by the city to the driver of a taxicab. 
Terminal means the physical place at which place the taxicabs are housed or parked, and at which place requests for service are made. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-27. - Terminals. 
Every taxicab service operator shall maintain an off-street terminal of sufficient size to accommodate all of the taxicabs used in the service for the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-28. - Offenses. 
(a)  Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Any person found guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(b)  A taxicab service operator may not cause or allow a person to drive a taxicab unless the taxicab driver has a valid taxicab driver permit issued to them under this chapter. 
(c)  A taxicab driver may not operate a taxicab without a valid taxicab driver permit issued to them under this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a taxicab service operator to operate or cause to be operated a taxicab that is not listed on the taxicab service license. 
Exception: Whenever a taxicab shall become inoperative or when extra taxicabs are needed on a temporary basis, the operator may apply to the chief of police for a permit to operate temporarily one (1) or more taxicabs not listed on the taxicab service license. The chief of police, upon the presentation that the vehicles comply with all applicable provisions of this article, shall issue a temporary permit for any period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the taxicab business to overcrowd the taxicab. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or for any other person acting for the taxicab driver to seek or solicit passengers for a taxicab by word or sign, directly or indirectly, while driving a taxicab over, through, or on, any public street or public place of the city, or while the taxicab is parked on any public street or alley of the city. 
Exception: Taxicab drivers may park on a public street or alley near establishments that sell alcoholic beverages so that the taxicabs are visible to the patrons of such establishments. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver to fail to take the most direct route that will carry the taxicab passengers safely to their destination, unless otherwise instructed by the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Secs. 106-29, 106-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 106-31. - Taxicab service license application. 
(a)  Before a taxicab service operator drives a taxicab or causes a taxicab to be driven in the city, it shall obtain a taxicab service license, except a driver who is transporting passengers from a point outside of the city to a destination within the city or to a destination beyond the city. 
(b)  Applications for taxicab service licenses shall be filed with the police department. Initial applications may be filed at any time. Applications for renewal for existing taxicab service licenses shall be filed by December 1 of each calendar year. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name of the owner, or person by whom such permit is desired; 
(2)  Name of company; 
(3)  Address of company; 
(4)  Telephone number of company; 
(5)  If corporation, name and address of major officers of corporation and major stockholders; 
(6)  If partnership or association, trade, partnership, or association name, name and address of partners; 
(7)  If sole proprietorship, name and address of owner; 
(8)  Description of make, vehicle identification number, the seating capacity, vehicle owner's name and address, and license number of every vehicle to be used as a taxicab; 
(9)  Names, addresses, date of birth, and driver's license numbers for each taxicab driver who is or who will be driving vehicles for the company in Lake Jackson. Such information shall be kept current during the year; 
(10)  A schedule of rates to be charged to passengers; 
(11)  A statement that none of the taxicab operators have been convicted of: 
a.  A sex offense; 
b.  A capital felony; or 
c.  A first degree felony; 
(12)  A statement that, within the past ten (10) years, none of the taxicab operators have been finally convicted of: 
a.  Prostitution or related offenses; 
b.  Driving while intoxicated; 
c.  Violations of the Controlled Substance Act; 
d.  A felony or other offense involving moral turpitude. 
(13)  A state department of public safety driving record for each operator from each state in which the operator held a license in the five (5) years preceding the application; and 
(14)  A criminal history record from the Texas Department of Public Safety and from any state where the operator lived for the ten (10) years preceding the application. 
(c)  The application shall include a sworn statement by the applicant that all information provided in the application is true and correct and shall further state that the city is authorized to check the driving record and criminal history of the applicant and each taxicab driver. 
(d)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable taxicab service license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) if the application contains one (1) to five (5) vehicles or six hundred dollars ($600.00) if the application contains six (6) to ten (10) vehicles. Fees shall be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-32. - Insurance. 
(a)  Before the taxicab service license can be issued, each applicant shall deliver to the chief of police a certificate of insurance reflecting the minimum coverage specified in the Texas Motor Safety Responsibility Act. The applicant shall keep in full force and effect during the term of the taxicab service license a policy of public liability insurance, issued by an insurance company fully authorized to do business in this Texas and performable in Brazoria County, insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such vehicle or vehicles. The certificates of insurance shall contain a provision that coverage under such policies shall not be canceled or materially changed until at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice has been given to the city. Passenger liability exclusions are expressly prohibited. 
(b)  The city must be included as an additional insured on each policy. The taxicab service operator is responsible for paying all applicable deductibles. 
(c)  In the event that any insurance policy is canceled upon the request of the surety or insured, and no insurance policy is filed before the cancellation date, the taxicab service license shall be automatically revoked. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-33. - Issuance of taxicab service license. 
(a)  A taxicab service license shall not be issued if any of the operators have been convicted of the offenses listed in section 106-31 or if the operator has received three (3) or more moving traffic citations in the preceding 12-month period. 
(b)  Prior to issuance of the license, the chief of police shall inspect all taxicabs listed on the license to ensure that they meet the vehicle standards listed in section 106-41. 
(c)  Prior to issuing the taxicab service license, the chief of police may investigate any answer given on the application to determine whether the license should be issued. 
(d)  The taxicab service license shall state the year for which it is valid; description of make, vehicle identification number, the seating capacity, vehicle owner's name and address, and license number of every vehicle to be used as a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-34. - Posting of taxicab service license; nontransferability. 
(a)  The taxicab service license shall be posted by the applicant within each of the taxicabs to be driven in Lake Jackson in a conspicuous place. 
(b)  The taxicab service license is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-35. - Revocation or suspension of taxicab service license. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke or suspend a taxicab service license upon finding that a taxicab service operator has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. Such revocation or suspension shall take effect upon delivery of written notice to the taxicab service operator, with such delivery being made in person or by certified mail through the United States Postal Service. The taxicab service operator shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. The notice of appeal must be delivered to the city manager not more than five (5) days after receipt of notice of the suspension or revocation. In the event the taxicab service operator fails to deliver the notice to the city manager within the time prescribed, the revocation or suspension shall be final. If the taxicab service operator timely delivers the notice to the city manager, the city manager shall hear the appeal not more than twenty (20) days after the filing of the notice of appeal. 
(b)  A taxicab service license shall be revoked or suspended by the chief of police upon the verification of any of the following: 
(1)  The taxicab service operator has been convicted of an offense listed in section 106-31 while holding a current taxicab service license; 
(2)  The taxicab service license application contained false or omitted information; 
(3)  The taxicab service operator has operated taxicabs in the city that are in violation of the law; 
(4)  The taxicab service operator has violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions in this chapter; 
(5)  The taxicab service operator has charged, or allowed to be charged, rates in excess of the rate schedule filed in accordance with section 106-31 of this chapter; 
(6)  The taxicab service operator or any agent thereof has operated the service in a negligent manner; 
(7)  The taxicab service operator has allowed its insurance to be canceled, withdrawn, terminated, or to fall below the minimum prescribed in this chapter; or 
(8)  The taxicab service operator has allowed any of its vehicles or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated, unsafe or unclean to the extent that it is unsatisfactory for public use. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-36. - Taxicab driver permit application. 
(a)  Applications for taxicab driver permits shall be filed with the police department. Initial applications may be filed at any time. Applications for renewal for existing taxicab driver permits shall be filed by December 1 of each calendar year. The fee for the taxicab driver permit is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  Every applicant shall furnish a digital color photograph of the applicant and submit the following information: 
(1)  Name, local residence address, date of birth, and telephone number; 
(2)  Texas driver's license number; 
(3)  A statement that the taxicab driver has never been convicted of: 
a.  A sex offense; 
b.  A capital felony; or 
c.  A first degree felony. 
(4)  A statement that, within the past ten (10) years, the taxicab driver has not been convicted of: 
a.  Prostitution or related offenses; 
b.  Driving while intoxicated; 
c.  Violations of the Controlled Substance Act; or 
d.  A felony or other offense involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  A state department of public safety driving record from each state in which the taxicab driver held a license in the five (5) years preceding the application; 
(6)  A criminal history record from the Texas Department of Public Safety and from any state where the driver lived for the ten (10) years preceding the application; and 
(7)  That the applicant has read in full and understands the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The application shall include a sworn statement by the applicant that all information provided in the application is true and correct and shall further state that the city is authorized to check the driving record and criminal history of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-37. - Issuance of taxicab driver permit. 
(a)  A taxicab driver permit shall not be issued if the applicant has been convicted of the offenses listed in section 106-36 or if the applicant has received three (3) or more moving traffic citations in the preceding twelve-month period. 
(b)  Prior to issuing the taxicab driver permit, the chief of police may investigate any answer given on the application to determine whether the permit should be issued. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-38. - Revocation or suspension of taxicab driver permit. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke or suspend a taxicab driver permit upon finding that the taxicab driver has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. Such revocation or suspension shall take effect upon delivery of written notice to the taxicab driver, with such delivery being made in person or by certified mail through the United States Postal Service. The taxicab driver shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. The taxicab driver shall send the notice of appeal to the city manager not more than five (5) days after receipt of notice of the suspension or revocation. In the event the taxicab driver shall fail to deliver such notice to the city manager within the time prescribed, the revocation or suspension shall be final. If the taxicab driver timely delivers the notice to the city manager, the city manager shall hear the appeal not more than twenty (20) days after the filing of the notice of appeal. 
(b)  A permit shall be revoked or suspended by the chief of police upon verification of any of the following while holding a valid permit: 
(1)  The taxicab driver has been convicted of a felony or other offense involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  The taxicab driver permit application contained false or omitted information; 
(3)  The taxicab driver has operated taxicabs in the city that are in violation of the law; 
(4)  The taxicab driver has violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions in this chapter; 
(5)  The taxicab driver has charged rates in excess of the rate schedule filed in accordance with section 106-31 of this chapter; or 
(6)  The taxicab driver has been found guilty of operating a taxicab in a negligent manner. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-39. - Posting of taxicab driver permit; nontransferability. 
The taxicab driver permit shall be prominently displayed at all times in full view of persons in the back seat of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION OF TAXICAB 
 
Sec. 106-41. - Vehicle standards. 
Each taxicab proposed to be operated by a taxicab service operator shall be inspected by the chief of police. Taxicabs must meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Each taxicab must have a valid and current state certificate of inspection and state certificate of registration; 
(2)  Each taxicab shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher that is in good operating order and a spare tire, jack, and lug nut wrench; 
(3)  Each taxicab shall be equipped with a child passenger safety seat system that meets the federal standards as set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration; 
(4)  Each taxicab shall be reasonably free from dirt or rubbish and shall be clean and sanitary; 
(5)  Each taxicab shall be equipped with an air conditioner that is in good working order; 
(6)  Each taxicab shall be equipped with a windshield that does not have any type of damage that obstructs the drivers' view; 
(7)  Each vehicle shall be equipped with a taximeter; 
(8)  The vehicle identification number and the license number of each taxicab must match the numbers listed for that taxicab on the taxicab service license application; and 
(9)  Each taxicab shall have the business name and phone number affixed to the door, with lettering not less than two and one-half (2½) inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-42. - Fares. 
(a)  The taxicab service operator and the taxicab driver shall post, in a conspicuous place in such taxicab, a printed schedule of the rate schedule filed in accordance with section 106-31 of this chapter. 
(b)  No taxicab service operator or taxicab driver shall fix or charge a greater fare than that submitted with the application for the taxicab service license. Scheduled rates may encompass the following: 
(1)  Mileage; 
(2)  Waiting time; 
(3)  Charter; 
(4)  Extra passengers; 
(5)  Excessive baggage, excluding medically necessary devices; 
(6)  Animals, excluding animals specially trained to assist the disabled, when accompanying such persons. 
(c)  Changes in any rate schedule shall require notification to the chief of police along with justification for increases thirty (30) days prior to changes being enacted. Rates may not be increased more often than semi-annually except for events beyond the control of the owner of the taxicab service operator. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-43. - Manifest. 
Every taxicab driver shall maintain a daily manifest. The operator shall retain the manifests for a period of two (2) years. The owner and driver shall allow a peace officer to review the manifests upon request. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-44. - Loading and unloading. 
A taxicab driver may not impede traffic when loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-45. - Abandoned property. 
A taxicab driver shall attempt to return property to a passenger that the passenger left in the taxicab. If unable to locate the passenger, the taxicab driver shall deliver the property to the operator. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-46. - Disabled passengers. 
A taxicab driver may not refuse to accept a passenger or charge a higher rate for a passenger that is disabled or that uses a support animal, wheelchair, crutches, or other mobility assistance devices. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 106-47. - Advertising. 
An operator or driver may not affix nor allow to be affixed any advertisements on the taxicab, other than the name and phone number of the taxicab service. 
(Ord. No. 12-1996, § 1, 9-17-2012)  
Secs. 106-48—106-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUSES; BUS DEPOTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 2012, amended Art. III to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 106-71—106-95, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 74-542, § 2, adopted Oct. 21, 1974; Code 1958, §§ 4A-1—4A-14, 4A-16. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal governing body to license, tax or otherwise regulate bus drivers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.029. 
 
Sec. 106-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bus means a motor vehicle used to transport persons and designed to accommodate more than ten (10) passengers, including the operator, and that operates on a fixed route, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Buses transporting students to or from school or college; 
(2)  Ambulances; 
(3)  Vehicles rented or leased for operation by the person actually driving the same, unless such vehicle is transporting for compensation persons other than the one who actually rented or leased the vehicle; 
(4)  Vehicles used by automotive repair businesses, car dealerships, or similar operations to transport customers to or from the work or home and the place of business; 
(5)  Nonemergency medical transportation providers; and 
(6)  Taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 106-72. - Approval to operate. 
All persons or businesses wishing to operate a bus service on the public streets of the city must receive the permission of city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-1997, § 1, 10-1-2012)  
Secs. 106-73—106-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TOWING SERVICES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, adopted July 3, 2017, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1958, §§ 24A-1—24A-5, 24A-7—24A-13; Ord. No. 64-310, 11-16-1964; Ord. No. 81-818, 9-8-1981; Ord. No. 86-1001, 3-17-1986; Ord. No. 91-1183, 12-16-1991; Ord. No. 01-1654, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, 10-6-2003; and Ord. No. 12-1997, 10-1-2012. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-116. - Definitions. 
All terms used in this article, unless specifically defined otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the Texas Occupations Code. The following terms are specifically defined: 
Owner means any person holding the legal title of a motor vehicle or any person having the legal right of possession of such motor vehicle. 
Street means any public street, alley, right-of-way, easement, highway, public place, square, park or other public right-of-way within the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-117. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-5 of the Code. Each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  If this article is violated by a corporation, the president or vice-president of such corporation, or any manager, supervisor or employee of such corporation, shall be liable for the violation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other penalty, violations of this article may result in suspension of a towing company from the towing rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-118. - Presence at scene of accident restricted. 
No person shall drive a tow truck to or near the scene of an accident or collision, unless such person has been called to the scene by the police department. When it is necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an accident or collision, the prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-119. - Solicitation prohibited; evidence of guilt. 
No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, the towing of any vehicle that is wrecked or disabled on a street, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing such vehicle. Proof of the presence of any person engaged in the towing business or the presence of any tow truck or motor vehicle owned or operated by any person engaged in the towing business, either as owner, operator, employee or agent, on any street in the city, at or near the scene of a wreck, accident, or collision within one (1) hour after the happening of such wreck, accident, or collision, shall be prima facie evidence of solicitation in violation of this section. Proof of being called to the scene by the police department or person involved in the wreck, accident or collision is a defense to this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-120. - Towing selection form; contents. 
The police department shall use a towing selection form on which the owner of the disabled vehicle may designate a towing company and ate a location to which the vehicle should be towed. The form shall also provide the ability for the owner to allow the police department to choose a towing company. The owner shall sign the form. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-121. - Duties of investigating officer at scene of an accident. 
(a)  When a police officer investigating an accident or collision on a public street, determines that any vehicle that has been involved in a collision or accident is unable to proceed safely under its own power, or when the owner thereof is physically unable to drive such vehicle, the officer shall request the owner to designate on the towing selection form, the towing company the owner desires to use. 
(b)  If the owner of a vehicle involved in an accident or collision does not designate a towing company or if the owner is unable to designate a towing company, the officer shall request that the next towing company on the towing rotation list send a tow truck. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-122. - Towing rotation list, use by police. 
(a)  The police department shall keep a towing rotation list. To be placed on the list, a towing company must: 
(1)  Have a current permit under this article; 
(2)  Have applied to be placed on the list; 
(3)  Maintain twenty-four-hour towing service that is available through direct phone contact without the use of beepers, voicemail or other messaging devices; 
(4)  Are able to respond to any site in the city within a twenty-minute response time; and 
(5)  Use a vehicle storage facility that meets the standards of the Vehicle Storage Facility Act (V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 2303) and is within a five-mile radius of the city limits. 
(b)  The police department shall rotate through the towing companies in the order that they are listed on the towing rotation list. 
(c)  Upon receiving notification by the police department, the towing company or tow driver must either accept or decline the call and must not transfer the call to another towing service. 
(d)  The tow companies on the rotation list shall hold the city harmless from any and all claims arising from the performance of the towing service. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-123. - Suspension from rotation list. 
(a)  Failure of a tow driver to meet the twenty-minute response time shall result in a warning for the first failure. Upon the second failure in the same calendar year, the towing company may be suspended from the towing rotation list for ninety (90) days. Each succeeding failure may result in succeeding ninety-day suspensions. 
(b)  With the exception of subsection 106-123(a), the chief of police may suspend a towing company from the rotation list for a period of ninety (90) days if the towing company fails to meet any requirement listed in this article. The decision of the chief of police on a suspension is final. 
(c)  The chief of police will notify the towing company of the suspension from the rotation list either by hand delivery, fax or by certified mail. The suspension becomes effective upon delivery or deposit with the U.S. Postal Service. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Secs. 106-124—106-136. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NON-CONSENT TOW BUSINESS PERMIT 
 
Sec. 106-137. - Application, fee. 
Every person or tow truck owner desiring to engage in non-consent tows within the city shall make application in writing, on a form provided for that purpose, to the chief of police. Every application shall be sworn to by the applicant and accompanied by a nonrefundable inspection fee in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each tow truck proposed to be operated. The application shall state that "Any false statement contained in this application shall be good and sufficient reason for not granting the permit." 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-138. - Prerequisites to issuance; minimum standards. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit to engage in non-consent tows to all applicants complying with the provisions of this article. No permit shall be issued unless all provisions of the Texas Towing and Booting Act (V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 2308) have been met and: 
(1)  Every tow truck proposed to be used for non-consent tows: 
a.  Is not less than the equivalent of three-quarter (¾) ton in size or rating; 
b.  Has a power-operated winch and cable capacity of not less than five thousand (5,000) pounds; 
c.  Carries as standard equipment: tow bars, safety chains, a fire extinguisher, wrecking bars, brooms, axe, fuses and a flashing amber light mounted on top of the cab; and 
d.  Has a boom having a factory-rated capacity of not less than five thousand (5,000) pounds of lift. 
(2)  Each applicant shall have the use of a locked storage facility that meets the standards of the Vehicle Storage Facility Act (V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 2303). 
(3)  The owner of the storage facility shall maintain a policy of garage keepers insurance covering damage to or theft of the towed auto while in the tow company's care. 
(4)  The storage facility shall be located within a five-mile radius of the city limits. 
(5)  The tow fees and storage fees shall not exceed those mandated by the Texas Towing and Booting Act or the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act. The towing company shall have a list of the storage fees and towing fees available to the vehicle owner at the tow scene and posted at the storage facility. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Secs. 106-139—106-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NON-CONSENT TOW VEHICLE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 106-151. - Required; contents; term. 
The towing company shall obtain a permit for each approved vehicle used to make non-consent tows. The permit shall be affixed securely to the inside of the windshield of the appropriate tow truck. No permit shall be transferable, and every permit shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the calendar year in which issued. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 106-152. - Prerequisite to operation; display on windshield mandatory. 
No person shall operate a tow truck for non-consent tows on the streets of the city unless a valid non-consent tow vehicle permit is posted on the windshield of such tow truck. 
(Ord. No. 17-2134, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Chapter 110 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city council to adopt and modify zoning plan, § 3.07(g); municipal planning and zoning, art. 8. 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of the beautification commission, § 2-209; joint airport zoning board, § 2-251 et seq.; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 66; signs, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 102; vehicles for hire, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211; procedures for amending zoning ordinance, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.002, 211.006, 211.007. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 110-1. - General purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter shall be to: 
(1)  Promote the desirable development of all land. 
(2)  Protect the desirable development. 
(3)  Promote stability of development. 
(4)  Enhance and protect building and land values. 
(5)  Protect the public health and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-1) 
State Law reference— Zoning regulations to be designed to carry out certain planning purposes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.004.  
Sec. 110-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
Accessory building means a building subordinate to the principal building on a lot. Where a wall or portion of a wall and roof is common to the principal building, the accessory building shall be counted as part of the principal building. 
Accessory structure means an object constructed or erected on a lot that is subordinate to the principal building, such as an accessory building, fence, swimming pool, or deck. 
Accessory use means land and/or building uses which are allowed in a zone only when they are clearly subordinate to and in conjunction with a permitted use. 
Apartment hotel means a building with three (3) or more apartments and with the dining or cooking facilities separate. 
Apartment house or rooming house means a building with three (3) or more apartments and without separate dining or cooking facilities. 
Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel, apartment hotel or apartment house where lodging with meals is offered for compensation. 
Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property. 
Building line means a line, usually parallel to street or property line, beyond which buildings shall not be erected. Once a building is legally erected under the provisions of this chapter, the front of the building shall be considered to be the building line for that building for the purpose of determining placement of all fences, except ornamental fences as outlined in section 110-171. 
Bungalow court means a development consisting of two (2) or more one-family or two-family dwellings on a single tract where the building may face onto a courtyard or mall rather than on the street. 
Carport means a structure designed for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles that is open on at least two (2) sides. A carport that is open on only one (1) side shall be treated as a garage. 
Church means a facility principally used for people to gather together for public worship, religious training, or other religious activities. This includes monasteries, convents, rectories, etc. This does not include home meetings or other religious activities conducted in a privately occupied residence. 
Cinerarium means a durable, fireproof structure containing niches used or intended to be used to contain cremains. 
Common area means an area held, designed and designated principally for the common use of the occupants of a townhouse project. 
Conditional uses means land and/or building uses which, because they may generate special problems such as excessive traffic, excessive noise or other conditions, may in certain cases prove undesirable for a certain zone. 
Cremains means cremated human remains. 
Customary home occupations means an occupation which may be conducted in the home without changing the character of the residential use and which is incidental and secondary to the residential use. See section 110-161. 
Day care facility means a facility that is licensed or registered with the state which regularly provides care for persons less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
Driveway means a private roadway leading from a public street or right-of-way to a garage, carport or parking area. 
Duplex. See Dwelling, two-family. 
Dwelling, one-family, means a detached building having accommodation for and occupied by not more than one (1) family. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied by not more than two (2) families. 
Facility means a building or group of buildings that exist to serve a particular purpose, such as rehabilitation and training. 
Family means one (1) or more people domiciled together in one (1) dwelling unit and who are living together as a single housekeeping unit and sharing common living, cooking, and eating facilities. This definition shall not include: 
(1)  Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, or similar organizations; 
(2)  Boarding houses, lodging houses, or hotels; or 
(3)  Supervised living facilities or other similar facilities. 
Floor area means the total horizontal area of the several floors of a structure covered by a roof, exclusive of garages, stoops, carports and unenclosed porches; same as living area. 
Footprint means the gross horizontal area of the first floor, as determined by the most recent survey of the property, of a principal building, including attached garages and carports. 
Garage means a structure used for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles. 
Garden structure means a structure that is used only for decorative purposes, such as a trellis or statue. 
Gross floor area means the total horizontal area of the several floors of a structure covered by a roof, inclusive of garages, stoops, carports, unenclosed porches and other similar areas. 
Health services (medical, dental or optical) means the care, diagnosis, and treatment of persons by health professionals on a non-emergency and out-patient basis. 
Height of building means the distance from average grade or curb level to the highest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, towers, spires and the like. 
Hotels means a building containing rooms intended or designed to be used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests and where only a general kitchen and dining room are provided within the building or in an accessory building. 
Incidental livestock means livestock, not including pigs or goats, and poultry kept for the use of or the consumption by the occupants of the lot; provided however, that no corrals, stables, chicken houses or their yards shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any property line, and that they shall comply with the sanitary regulations; and that the number of livestock and poultry and their manner of keeping do not constitute a nuisance to the neighborhood. 
Living area means gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a structure covered by a roof exclusive of garages, carports and unenclosed porches; same as floor area. 
Lot frontage means the width of the lot at either front line or building line, whichever is greater. 
Lot line means the boundaries of any lot as described on the subdivision plat. 
Medical office means the use of a site for the consultation, diagnosis or therapeutic, preventative, or corrective personal treatment by doctors, dentists, medical or dental laboratories, chiropractors, masseurs, pharmacists, veterinarians or similar practitioners of medical and healing arts, licensed for practice by the state. 
Motel has the same definition as hotel. 
Niche means a space in a cinerarium used or intended to be used for the placement of cremains in an urn or other container. 
Off-street parking space means an area on a lot or site, other than on a public street or alley, that is permanently reserved for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle. 
Playfield or stadium means an athletic facility or stadium owned and operated by a public or private agency for the general public including a baseball field, golf course, football field or stadium. 
Principal building means the largest habitable building on a residential lot. 
Private yard means an area of open space within a townhouse but which is unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure. 
Recreation center means a building or complex of buildings housing community recreation facilities. 
Recreational business means an establishment that is primarily engaged in the operation of sports and recreation services such as baseball instruction, basketball instruction, handball courts, and rock climbing centers. 
Religious institution means any place of worship for the carrying on of religious activities which consists of one (1) or more permanent buildings. 
Residential care facility means a building containing services for: 
(1)  Convalescent and nursing facilities and related institutions licensed under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Ch. 242. 
(2)  Continuing care facilities licensed under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Ch. 246. 
(3)  Assisted living facilities licensed under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Ch. 247. 
(4)  Intermediate care facilities for individuals with an intellectual disability licensed under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Ch. 252. 
(5)  Residential child care facilities licensed under V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code Ch. 42. 
Screen enclosure means a metal structure that has no roof and is completely encapsulated only by a fabric which allows the elements to pass freely through it. 
Service shops means bakeries, beauty shops, restaurants, laundry agency, washateria, shoe repair, gasoline service, etc., but excluding auto repair, bus terminals, machinery repair and welding. 
Self-storage facility or mini-warehouse means a facility from which space is leased to individuals for the exclusive purpose of storing property and such property is cared for and controlled by the tenant. 
Setback means a minimum yard dimension measured from the lot line to the building or other structure. 
Space means an area that is permanently reserved for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle. 
Stacking lane means an area on a site with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility or passenger drop-off/pickup. 
Stacking space means an area in a stacking lane that is meant to be occupied by a single motor vehicle. 
Street right-of-way means property either conveyed or dedicated to the public for use as a public street. 
Structure means any object that is erected, constructed or installed by man that requires location in or on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground having a definite pattern of organization, including buildings, the construction of buildings or accessory buildings, decks, decking or swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, saunas and other similar constructions or installations. 
Supervised living facility means a residential facility that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for persons over the age of seventeen (17) who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. This definition does not include shelter, supervision, or rehabilitation services for former inmates of county, state, or federal correctional institutions and who require, upon release of said institution, a group residential setting to facilitate their transition back into society. 
Swimming pool means a constructed pool, used for swimming or bathing, with over twenty-four (24) inches in depth or a surface area exceeding two hundred (200) square feet. 
Temporary structure means a structure that is intended to be used ninety (90) days or less, that does not meet state and federal windstorm requirements, and that can be disassembled quickly. 
Townhouse means a dwelling unit structure having a separate wall with one (1) or more adjoining dwelling unit structures. 
Townhouse group means four (4) to ten (10) contiguous townhouses connected by common walls. 
Townhouse project means a townhouse development or plan which is submitted and approved by a single special permit. 
Water feature means a manmade body of water, such as an koi pond or fountain, that is not a swimming pool, lake, stream or river. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, § 1, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 84-914, § 1, 2-20-84; Ord. No. 87-1048, § 1, 10-5-87; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 1, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 1, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-2; Ord. No. 96-1384, § 3, 7-1-96; Ord. No. 08-1884, § 1, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 10-1932, § 1, 3-15-2010; Ord. No. 10-1951, § 1, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 11-1960, § 1, 6-6-2011; Ord. No. 14-2025, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 14-2037, § 1, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 15-2066, § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 16-2100, § 1, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 17-2124, § 1, 2-6-2017; Ord. No. 17-2129, § 1, 4-3-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 110-3. - Administration generally. 
(a)  Enforcing officials. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official of the city. 
(b)  Right of entry. The building official or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Stop orders. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to provisions of this chapter, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(d)  Furnishing utilities. No person or public utility shall furnish water, gas or electric energy to, nor make connection with, any building in the city which has been erected or structurally altered after July 17, 1961, unless and until such person or public utility shall have received from the building official, city secretary or city council notification that such erection or structural alteration of such building complies with this and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-10) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Enforcement of zoning ordinance, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.012.  
Sec. 110-4. - Interim zoning of newly annexed territory. 
(a)  No permit for the construction of a building shall be issued by the building official in a territory where an ordinance has passed on the first reading, annexing same to the city, other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building permitted to be constructed in what is defined as R-1 single-family residence as defined in section 110-68. An application for any other use than that specified hereinabove shall be made to the building official and by him referred to the planning commission which acts as the zoning commission on the designation by the council for a consideration and recommendation to the city council. Whenever such recommendation is filed with the city council by the planning commission, such classification and such recommendation shall be advisory in its nature and the council shall be at liberty to affirm it or allow such construction as the facts in their opinion may justify. 
(b)  No existing building in a territory where an ordinance has been passed on first reading, annexing the same to the city, not at that time lawfully used for business purposes, shall be altered, remodeled or constructed for business purposes without a permit from the city council. This permit shall be obtained under the same procedure set out in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The owner, lessees, or any other person owning, controlling, constructing or directing the construction of any building or structure now in process of construction and which is incomplete at the time the land upon which it is situated is covered in an ordinance passed on first reading, annexing same to the city, before proceeding any further with the construction, alteration or completion thereof, shall apply to the building official for a permit authorizing further work on such building or structure and shall attach to such application for such permit plans and specifications relating to the construction of such building, or structure, which such application for building permit shall be promptly referred to the planning commission for consideration and the commission shall promptly thereafter file with the council its recommendation as to granting, modifying or rejecting such permit, the recommendation to be advisory, as stated in subsection (a) of this section. Such construction work shall be suspended until the permit provided for in this section has been issued, or until final zoning regulations have been adopted which permit the construction, use and occupancy of the structure or building. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-18)  
Sec. 110-5. - Permanent zoning of new territory. 
The permanent zoning of newly annexed territory shall be handled in the same manner as amendments to the zoning ordinance provided under section 110-6 and the subsections thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-19)  
Sec. 110-6. - Amendments. 
(a)  Requirements for change. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justifies such action, and after consideration by the city council, city planning commission, zoning board of adjustment or the joint consideration of the planning commission and the city council, or by a petition by one (1) or more of the owners, optionees or lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed, the zoning of any specific property in the city may be changed pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Initiation of change. A proposed change of zone may be initiated by the city council, city planning commission, zoning board of adjustment, or by a petition by one (1) or more of the owners, optionees or lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed. 
(c)  Changing ordinance; public hearing required. At any regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission, the owners, optionees or lessees of property who desire a change of zone may appear and request that a public hearing be called to consider their petition. The city council may at any time request that the planning commission hold a special hearing to consider zoning matters. Written notice of all public hearings before the planning commission on proposed changes in classification shall be sent to owners of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed, such notice to be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the city post office. Where property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property proposed to be changed is located in territory which was annexed to the city after final date for making the renditions which are included on the last approved city tax roll, notice to such owners shall be given by publication in the manner provided in subsection (d) of this section. After published notice has been given as required by subsection (d) of this section, the city council may hold a public hearing jointly with the planning commission, but after such joint hearing, the city council shall not take any action until it has received the final report of the planning commission. The city council shall, however, be able to call and hold a public hearing on its own to consider, approve or disapprove requests for changes whenever a majority of the entire council deem it necessary or appropriate, and a report from the planning commission concerning the same tract of land is not pending. The planning commission may also meet in its own capacity to hold public hearings, when required under this Code. The city planning commission may approve or disapprove any proposed change either in whole or in part. If approved in whole or in part, a recommendation in conformity with such approved change, shall be presented to the city council and an ordinance approving such a change in whole or in part may be adopted by the council after a public hearing. If such proposed change is disapproved by the city planning commission, a report of its decision shall be made to the city council. The city council may then review the decision of the planning commission. If the city council is in favor of the proposed change, it may, after a public hearing, make such change in such ordinance by a majority vote of the entire membership of the city council. A joint public hearing of the planning commission and the city council shall satisfy this requirement. 
(d)  Notice of public hearing by city council or by planning commission. Notice of a public hearing by the city council or by the planning commission to consider proposed changes to this chapter shall be given by publication in the official paper of the city once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks. Such notice shall state the time, place and nature of such public hearing and such hearing shall not be held earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of the first publication of such notice. 
(e)  Passage of rezoning ordinances where written protest filed. In case, however, of a written protest against such change, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change, or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (¾) of all the members of the city council. The provisions of subsection (d) relative to public hearing and official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments. 
(f)  Restrictions. Any prior deed restrictions or other prior restrictions placed on any lot or land that is the subject of a zoning change request shall be disclosed to the city planning commission and to the city council by the land owner or optionee of land, when a change is requested by such owner or optionee. Any restriction on land or lots which was agreed to by the owner or optionee of property at the time the change of zone is approved by the city council shall be entered in the council minutes as a part of the permanent record. If the land is undeveloped, the restriction shall be placed in the plat at the time of plat approval by the planning commission. A violation of this subsection constitutes a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in accordance with section 110-12. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 74-519, § 1, 2-18-74; Ord. No. 74-524, § 1, 3-18-74; Code 1958, § 25-17) 
State Law reference— Procedures for amending zoning ordinance, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.002, 211.006, 211.007.  
Sec. 110-7. - Advertising costs. 
Persons applying for variances and zoning amendments must pay for the cost of advertising for such requests. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-13; Ord. No. 14-2025, § 2, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 110-8. - Nonconforming uses. 
Any use or structure existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued with the following limitations. Any use or building which does not conform to this chapter may not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Reestablished after discontinuance for six (6) months; 
(3)  Extended except in conformity to this chapter; or 
(4)  Rebuilt after damage exceeding two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its fair sales value immediately prior to damage. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-14)  
Sec. 110-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2074, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, repealed § 110-9, which pertained to building permits and derived from Code 1958, § 25-11; Ord. No. 259, adopted July 17, 1961; Ord. No. 76-593, § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 1976; Ord. No. 81-820, § 2, adopted Sept. 21, 1981; Ord. No. 14-2025, § 3, adopted June 2, 2014.  
Sec. 110-10. - Special permits. 
The following land uses shall require approval of the planning commission instead of the building inspector because of special problems of traffic, parking safety or effect on surrounding property: 
(1)  Public buildings erected by city, county, state, school district, federal or any other governmental body. 
(2)  Airports, landing fields or airport facilities. 
(3)  Water reservoirs, pumping station, water towers or artesian wells. 
(4)  Radio or television transmitting or receiving towers taller than one hundred (100) feet, whether commercial or private. 
(5)  Trailer camps. 
(6)  Drive-in theaters. 
(7)  Large scale developments, including housing projects and shopping centers, after submission to the planning commission of a site plan drawn to scale and showing the development in detail, including such essential requirements as parking facilities, location of buildings and uses to be permitted, and means of ingress and egress. 
(8)  Any of those uses which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration and the like. 
(9)  Strip lighting. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-5; Ord. No. 94-1311, § 1, 10-3-94) 
State Law reference— Authority of local governments under Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.111 et seq.  
Sec. 110-11. - External lighting. 
(a)  Purpose: 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to amend the city's comprehensive zoning code to ensure that outdoor lighting does not (a) interfere with the safety and welfare of the community and does not (b) interfere with or endanger the public in traveling to and from on streets, and does not (c) interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of property. It is also the purpose of this section to encourage outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, lighting design practices, and systems which will conserve energy, while preserving the natural environment while increasing nighttime safety, utility, security, and productivity. 
(b)  Outdoor illuminating devices: 
(1)  Generally, artificial outdoor or extended illuminating devices shall be installed in accordance with, and when permitted by, the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Outdoor illuminating devices, in nonresidential zones: 
(1)  In all nonresidential zones the proposed lighting plan shall be reviewed by the city engineer and be included as part of the site plan, under section 90-35 of the city subdivision code. The owner shall stay in compliance with the lighting requirements of the site plan and shall not deviate from such requirements unless the owner receives approval from the planning commission. 
(2)  When a nonresidential zone is located adjacent to a residential zone, all external lighting shall be shielded to prohibit illumination at the boundary of the nonresidential zone and the residential zone in excess of one-fourth (0.25) footcandles of average general light overflow or one-half (0.50) footcandles at any point on such boundary. In all cases, exterior lighting shall be installed, hooded, regulated, and maintained by the owner or person in control thereof in such manner that the direct beam of any such light will not glare upon any lot, tract, or parcel of land other than that upon which it is situated. 
(d)  Outdoor illuminated devices in other zones: 
(1)  Lighting in R4, PUD, PURZ, or MH-1 zones shall also comply with this section. 
(e)  Special permits: 
(1)  Laser source light, strobe light and similar high intensity light sources for advertising or entertainment shall be prohibited in any zone, unless a permit is obtained from the building official for specific events and timeframes. 
(2)  Searchlights shall be prohibited in any zone, unless a permit is obtained from the building official for specific events and timeframes. 
(f)  Phased in compliance. 
(1)  For those tracts that have lighting that does not conform to the provisions of this section at the inception of the section (January 5, 1998), such lighting shall either be abated, removed or modified to conform with the code as determined by the city building official, within a period of two (2) years, from the effective date of this adoption of this section (January 5, 1998). 
(2)  After the enactment of this section, the city administrator shall as soon as practicable, survey the city for lighting which does not conform to the requirements of this Code. Upon determination that lighting is nonconforming, the administrator shall use reasonable efforts to so notify, in writing, the user or owner of the property on which the lighting is located of the following: 
a.  The nonconformity of the lighting; and 
b.  The need to conform within two (2) years, as well as the potential penalties for failure to do so. If the user or owner of the property cannot be located, the notice may be affixed in a conspicuous place to the premises with which the lighting is associated. 
(g)  Exemptions: 
(1)  Strip lighting approved by the planning commission under section 110-10(9) shall be exempt from this section. 
(2)  Emergency lighting by police, fire, and rescue authorities is exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-1443, § 1, 1-5-98)  
Sec. 110-12. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Required. No change in the use or occupancy of land nor any change of use or occupancy in an existing building other than for single-family residences or for farming or gardening shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied for any purpose other than for single-family residence use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official. 
(b)  Record kept by building official. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building official, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or a building affected by such certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses must apply for certificates. A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses of land or buildings existing on July 17, 1961. Application for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed with the building official by the owner or lessee of the land or building occupied by such nonconforming use not later than July 17, 1962. It shall be the duty of the building official to issue a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use. Failure to apply for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use shall be considered evidence that such nonconforming use did not exist on July 17, 1961. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-12; Ord. No. 98-1443, § 1, 1-5-98)  
Sec. 110-13. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall build, alter, occupy or use any building or property in violation of any statement or plan submitted and approved under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day such violation shall be continued, or shall be allowed to continue to exist, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner of any building or property or part thereof where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, attorney or other person employed in connection therewith and who has assisted in the commission of such violations, shall be guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  In addition to the remedies provided for in this section the enforcing officer may, in case any buildings or structures are erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct of business or use in or about such premises. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 83-907, § 10, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 88-1060, § 10, 1-18-88; Code 1958, § 25-15; Ord. No. 98-1443, § 1, 1-5-98)  
Sec. 110-14. - Conditional use permit. 
To apply for a conditional use permit, the applicant must notify the engineering department in writing and supply the following information: 
(1)  Type of conditional use desired; 
(2)  Site plan showing ingress and egress to the conditional use; 
(3)  Hours the conditional use will be operated or used; 
(4)  Types of noise the conditional use will generate; 
(5)  Amount of traffic the conditional use will generate; and 
(6)  Any other information required by the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 14-2025, § 4, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 110-15. - Same—Restrictions. 
(a)  Only the conditional uses listed in each zone are allowed. 
(b)  Applicants must apply for each conditional use separately, and each use must attain approval of the planning commission separately. The planning commission's approval of a conditional use does not mean that the use becomes a permitted use for that zone. 
(Ord. No. 14-2025, § 4, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 110-16. - Same—Actions. 
(a)  The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for a conditional use. The planning commission may also impose requirements and conditions on the location, construction, operating hours, maintenance, and operation of the conditional use in order to protect adjacent properties. 
(b)  If the conditions of the permit are not being complied with, the planning commission may revoke the permit. The permit holder shall receive at least ten (10) days written notification of the meeting at which the planning commission will consider the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 14-2025, § 4, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 110-17. - Same—Expiration. 
The conditional use must be operational within one (1) year of the date the permit is granted unless the planning commission sets a different time limit. 
(Ord. No. 14-2025, § 4, 6-2-2014)  
Secs. 110-18—110-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008 et seq.; appeal to board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.010. 
 
Sec. 110-36. - Powers, duties generally. 
The zoning board of adjustment of the city shall have all of the powers and duties granted in section 8.04 of the home rule Charter of the city, as well as this article. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 79-684, § 1, 2-19-79; Code 1958, § 25-20(a))  
Sec. 110-37. - Composition, compensation. 
The zoning board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 79-684, § 1, 2-19-79; Code 1958, § 25-20(b))  
Sec. 110-38. - Appointment, terms; ex officio members. 
All members of the zoning board of adjustment shall be appointed by the city council. Two (2) such members to be appointed in each odd-numbered year, and three (3) such members to be appointed in each even-numbered year, the appointments to be made each year within thirty (30) days following election. The term of office of each such member shall be two (2) years. In addition, a representative of the city manager shall be an ex officio member of the board and shall serve the board in an advisory capacity, but shall have no voting rights, and shall attend meetings as requested. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 79-684, § 1, 2-19-79; Code 1958, § 25-20(c))  
Sec. 110-39. - Officers; rules of procedure. 
A board chairman and secretary shall be elected by the board annually, and the board shall establish its own rules and procedures which shall include the following: 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of four (4) voting members of the board, and an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, or to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board may or is required to pass under this section, the chairman being entitled to vote upon all questions. 
(2)  Meetings shall be held as needed. 
(3)  A record of all proceedings shall be kept, which records shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the city secretary. 
(4)  Notice of meetings of the zoning board of adjustment shall be provided to persons living within two hundred (200) feet of the property that is the subject of a variance request or an appeal from a decision of an administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 79-684, § 1, 2-19-79; Code 1958, § 25-20(e); Ord. No. 97-1413, § 1, 3-3-97)  
Sec. 110-40. - Appeals. 
Appeals to the board of adjustment shall be taken within a reasonable time as determined by the rules of the board, complete with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer, or body, from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 79-684, § 1, 2-19-79; Code 1958, § 25-20(f))  
Sec. 110-41. - Conduct of hearings. 
The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time or thirty (30) days, whichever is less. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. An applicant for a variance or an appellant from an administrative decision shall have the burden of proving that his proposed use is reasonably necessary and that it will not conflict with the public interest or adversely affect uses of adjacent and neighboring property. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 79-684, § 1, 2-19-79; Code 1958, § 25-20(g))  
Sec. 110-42. - Special exceptions to chapter not under board's jurisdiction. 
In no case shall it be appropriate for the zoning board of adjustment to hear and make special exceptions to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 79-684, § 1, 2-19-79; Code 1958, § 25-20(h))  
Sec. 110-43. - Scope of cases. 
The cases which are appropriate for the zoning board of adjustment to hear and decide are limited to the following: 
(1)  Appeals from a decision of an administrative official: 
a.  In the enforcement of this chapter or any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
b.  In the refusal of building permits for any use that is permitted by this chapter for the zone where the proposed building would occur. 
(2)  Variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where there is an unusual condition and a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant with regard to this chapter, including: 
a.  Building lines. 
b.  Side line setback. 
c.  Rear line setback. 
d.  Front line setback. 
e.  Lot size. 
f.  Width or length of lots. 
g.  Permitting driveways to intrude on easements. 
h.  Building slab heights. 
i.  Home occupations. 
j.  Cases in which this chapter does not permit any reasonable use of a tract or lot, not merely to accommodate the highest or best use of the property. 
k.  Abatement of, extension of, or addition to a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 79-684, § 1, 2-19-79; Code 1958, § 25-20(i); Ord. No. 06-1828, § 1, 11-20-2006)  
Secs. 110-44—110-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONE REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-700, § 21, enacted May 21, 1979, which amended this article, as amended by Ord. No. 80-727, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 1980, provided: 
"Section 21. This ordinance shall take effect on May 21, 1979, for zoning purposes and shall not affect properties platted (as provided in sections 19.10 through 19.14 of the subdivision ordinance of the City Code) prior to February 11, 1980, the date of the adoption of this correcting ordinance, nor shall it affect the Briarwood Subdivision Reserve west of Walnut Street as recorded in Volume 15, Page 251 of the plat records of Brazoria County." 
State Law reference— Zoning districts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.005. 
 
Sec. 110-66. - Establishment of zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into seventeen (17) zones known as: 
(1)  E-1 Single-family residence, estates. 
(2)  R-1 Single-family residence. 
(3)  R-2 Single-family residence. 
(4)  R-2A Single-family residence. 
(5)  R-3 Two-family residence. 
(6)  R-4 Multifamily residence. 
(7)  B-1 Neighborhood business. 
(8)  B-1A Professional offices. 
(9)  B-2 Central business. 
(10)  B-3 Institutional zone. 
(11)  C-1 Commercial. 
(12)  C-2 Commercial. 
(13)  M-1 Light industrial. 
(14)  M-2 Heavy industrial. 
(15)  T-1 Single-family residence, townhouse. 
(16)  PURZ Planned unit residential zone. 
(17)  PUD Planned unit development. 
(18)  MH-1 Mobile home park. 
(19)  MH-2 Manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(1); Ord. No. 97-1421, § 1, 6-2-97; Ord. No. 99-1593, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 110-67. - E-1, single-family residence, estates. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the E-1, single-family residence, estates, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: The most restrictive of residential zones, composed chiefly of individual homes on relatively large lots. 
(2)  Permitted use: One-family dwellings. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings or accessory structures: Twenty-five (25) percent. 
(4)  Minimum living area for houses: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(5)  Maximum height of buildings: Two and one-half (2½) stories. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: One (1) acre. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: Two hundred (200) feet. 
(8)  Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(9)  Minimum lot setback: 
a.  From front, forty (40) feet. 
b.  From side, twenty-five (25) feet. 
c.  From rear, twenty (20) percent of depth. 
d.  Side street, twenty-five (25) feet. 
(10)  Permitted accessory uses: Servant quarters, garden, tool and play houses, personal recreational facilities, country club and incidental livestock, customary home occupations. 
(11)  Accessory structures: 
a.  Height, fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  Side yard setback, twenty-five (25) feet minimum. 
c.  Rear yard setback, thirty (30) feet. 
d.  Front yard setback, sixty-five (65) feet. 
e.  Maximum floor area, fifty (50) percent of principal building. 
f.  No accessory structure shall be closer than the interior line of any easement. 
(12)  Conditional uses: Golf course, parks. 
(13)  Off-street parking: Minimum two-space garage (see section 110-162). 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(2); Ord. No. 10-1951, § 2, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 110-68. - R-1, single-family residence. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the R-1, single-family residence, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A highly restricted zone composed chiefly of individual homes. 
(2)  Permitted use: One-family dwelling. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings or accessory structures: Thirty (30) percent. 
(4)  Minimum living area for houses: One thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet. 
(5)  Maximum height of buildings: Two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth: One hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: 
a.  Front, thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Side, ten (10) feet. 
c.  Rear, fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  Side street, fifteen (15) feet. 
(10)  Permitted accessory use: Garden, tool and playhouses, personal recreation facilities. 
(11)  Accessory structures: 
a.  No storage, garden, tool or playhouse shall be used as a garage. 
b.  Garages shall meet all the setback requirements as required for the principal building. 
c.  No garage or driveway shall exit out the back of the lot. 
d.  Maximum height, fifteen (15) feet. 
e.  If the total square footage of any individual accessory structure exceeds two hundred (200) square feet, that structure shall meet the setbacks for the principal building. 
f.  An accessory structure whose square footage equals two hundred (200) square feet or less may be eligible for the alternate setbacks in accordance with section 110-86. 
(12)  Conditional uses: Golf course, parks. 
(13)  Off-street parking: Minimum two-space garage (see section 110-162). 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(3); Ord. No. 93-1235, § 1, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 07-1856, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 10-1951, § 3, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 110-69. - R-2, single-family residence. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the R-2, single-family residence, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose. A medium-density zone composed primarily of individual homes. 
(2)  Permitted use. One-family dwelling. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings or accessory structures. Thirty-five (35) percent. 
(4)  Minimum living area for houses. 
a.  For lots platted prior to July 3, 1961 that have less than seventy (70) feet of frontage, one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet; 
b.  For all other lots, one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
(5)  Maximum height of buildings. Two and one-half (2 ½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot area. Eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot. 
a.  For lots platted prior to July 3, 1961, sixty (60) feet; 
b.  For all other lots, seventy (70) feet. 
(8)  Minimum lot depth. 
a.  For lots platted prior to July 3, 1961, one hundred (100) feet; 
b.  For all other lots one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback. 
a.  For lots platted prior to July 3, 1961 that have less than seventy (70) feet of frontage: 
1.  Front, twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  Side, no less than five (5) feet on any one (1) side. 
3.  Rear, fifteen (15) feet. 
4.  Side street, fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  For all other lots: 
1.  Front, twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  Side, fifteen (15) feet total for both sides, no less than five (5) feet on any one (1) side. 
3.  Rear, fifteen (15) feet. 
4.  Side street, fifteen (15) feet. 
(10)  Permitted accessory use. Garden, tool and playhouses, personal recreation facilities. 
(11)  Accessory structures. 
a.  No storage, garden, tool or playhouse shall be used as a garage. 
b.  Garages shall meet all the setback requirements as required for the principal building. 
c.  No garage or driveway shall exit out the back of the lot. 
d.  Maximum height, fifteen (15) feet. 
e.  If the total square footage of any individual accessory structure exceeds two hundred (200) square feet, that structure shall meet the setbacks for the principal building. 
f.  An accessory structure whose square footage equals two hundred (200) square feet or less may be eligible for the alternate setbacks in accordance with section 110-86. 
(12)  Conditional uses. Parks. 
(13)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Minimum, for lots platted prior to July 3, 1961 that have less than seventy (70) feet of frontage, two (2) off-street parking spaces; 
b.  For all other lots, minimum two-space garage (see section 110-162). 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(4); Ord. No. 93-1235, § 2, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 07-1856, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 10-1951, § 4, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 11-1964, § 1, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 16-2099, § 1, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 18-2164, § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 110-69.1. - R-2A, single-family residence. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the R-2A, single-family residence zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A medium-density zone composed primarily of individual homes. 
(2)  Permitted use: One-family dwelling. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings or accessory structure: Thirty-five (35) percent. 
(4)  Minimum living area for houses: One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(5)  Maximum height of buildings: Two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: Sixty (60) feet. 
(8)  Minimum lot depth: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: 
a.  Front, twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Side, five (5) feet total for both sides. 
c.  Rear, fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  Side street, fifteen (15) feet. 
(10)  Permitted accessory use: Garden, tool and playhouses, personal recreation facilities. 
(11)  Accessory structures: 
a.  No storage, garden, tool or playhouse shall be used as a garage. 
b.  Garages shall meet all the setback requirements as required for the principal building. 
c.  No garage or driveway shall exit out the back of the lot. 
d.  Maximum height, fifteen (15) feet. 
e.  If the total square footage of any individual accessory structure exceeds two hundred (200) square feet, that structure shall meet the setbacks for the principal building. 
f.  An accessory structure whose square footage equals two hundred (200) square feet or less may be eligible for the alternate setbacks in accordance with section 110-86. 
(12)  Conditional uses: Parks. 
(13)  Off-street parking: Either a two-space garage or a carport type garage (See section 110-162). 
(Ord. No. 97-1421, § 1, 6-2-97; Ord. No. 07-1856, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 10-1951, § 5, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 110-70. - R-3, two-family residence. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the R-3, two-family residence, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A two-family dwelling zone providing most of the desirable residential characteristics attributed to single-family districts. In addition to large areas appropriate for such use it has useful application as a buffer zone bordering neighborhood shopping centers. 
(2)  Permitted use: One-family dwelling, duplexes. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings or accessory structures: Forty-five (45) percent. 
(4)  Minimum living area per family: Nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(5)  Maximum height of buildings: Two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth: Eighty-five (85) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: 
a.  Front, twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Sides, ten (10) feet. 
c.  Rear, fifteen (15) percent of depth. 
d.  Side street, fifteen (15) feet. 
(10)  Permitted accessory use: Garden, tool and playhouses, personal recreation facilities. 
(11)  Accessory structures: 
a.  No storage, garden, tool or playhouse shall be used as a garage. 
b.  Garages shall meet all the setback requirements as required for the principal building. 
c.  No garage or driveway shall exit out the back of the lot. 
d.  Maximum height, fifteen (15) feet. 
e.  If the total square footage of any individual accessory structure exceeds two hundred (200) square feet, that structure shall meet the setbacks for the principal building. 
f.  An accessory structure whose square footage equals two hundred (200) square feet or less may be eligible for the alternate setbacks in accordance with section 110-86. 
(12)  Conditional uses: Parks. 
(13)  Off-street parking:Minimum four (4) covered spaces (see section 110-162). 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(5); Ord. No. 93-1235, § 3, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 07-1856, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 10-1951, § 6, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 110-71. - R-4, multifamily residence. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the R-4, multifamily residence, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A medium density zone for garden apartments, group housing and courts. 
(2)  Permitted uses: One-family dwelling, apartment houses, duplexes, condominiums. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings or accessory structures: Fifty (50) percent. 
(4)  Minimum living area per family: Four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
(5)  Maximum height of buildings: Two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, or as approved by city council after receiving the planning commission's recommendation. 
(6)  Maximum density: Twenty (20) units per acre. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of site: One hundred (100) feet. 
(8)  Minimum site depth: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(9)  Minimum site area: One (1) acre. 
(10)  Minimum yard setback: 
a.  Front, twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Side, twenty-five (25) feet. 
c.  Rear, twenty-five (25) feet. 
d.  Side street, fifteen (15) feet. 
(11)  Permitted accessory uses: Garden, tool, and playhouses, personal recreation facilities, boardinghouses, day nurseries, nursing homes, professional offices. 
(12)  Accessory structures: 
a.  No storage, garden, tool or playhouse shall be used as a garage. 
b.  Garages shall meet all of the setback requirements as required for the principal building. 
c.  No garage or driveway shall exit out the back of the lot. 
d.  Maximum height, fifteen (15) feet. 
e.  If the total square footage of any individual accessory structure exceeds two hundred (200) square feet, that structure shall meet the setbacks for the principal building. 
f.  An accessory structure whose square footage equals two hundred (200) square feet or less may be eligible for the alternate setbacks in accordance with section 110-86. 
(13)  Conditional uses: Hospitals, clinics, membership clubs, funeral homes, fraternity/sorority houses, supervised living facilities, cemeteries, and residential care facilities. 
(14)  Off-street parking: See section 110-162. 
(15)  Off-street loading: None. 
(16)  Other provisions: All signs shall be shielded and source of steady light. No signs larger than one hundred (100) square feet, nor exceeding 4:1 height to width or width to height ratio. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(6); Ord. No. 93-1235, § 4, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 07-1856, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 10-1951, § 7, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 17-2129, § 2, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 17-2131, § 1, 4-3-2017)  
Sec. 110-72. - B-1, neighborhood business. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the B-1, neighborhood business zoning district after January 1, 2000: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A neighborhood shopping zone wherein retail business or selected service establishments supply commodities or services to meet the daily needs of the surrounding neighborhood, in which they are located. Uses which are not necessary to serve the neighborhood such as industrial/business supply or service facilities such as theaters, motels or warehouse style retail stores and automobile dealerships are not permitted in the zone unless built prior to January 1, 2000. B-1 neighborhood businesses that would be harmful to, or would adversely impact, single-family residential areas or facilities which are either hazardous, noxious or offensive to an ordinary reasonable person because of congested vehicular traffic, generation or emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, radiation or other objectionable emission, are not permitted in this zone unless built prior to January 1, 2000. Those businesses and properties built prior to January 1, 2000, may be remodeled or rebuilt under the terms of the applicable building code or ordinance in effect on January 1, 2000. 
Potentially harmful or objectionable characteristics of certain development may be mitigated by the inclusion of additional design or architectural features. To provide additional basis for exercising judgment in the determination of potential harm or adverse impact, permitted and conditional uses are listed below as well as use requirements and design limitations that serve to prevent potential harm. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Office and office buildings, medical offices, studios, retail shops, service shops, drive-in eating places, groceries, day care facilities, auto repair, membership clubs, and residential care facilities. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used by building: One hundred (100) percent. 
(4)  Minimum floor area: None required. 
(5)  Maximum height of building: Two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: Twenty (20) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: None required. 
(10)  Permitted accessory use: None allowed. 
(11)  Accessory building: None allowed. 
(12)  Conditional uses: Supervised living facilities, churches, and recreational businesses. 
(13)  Off-street parking: See section 110-162. 
(14)  Off-street loading: See section 110-163. 
(15)  Other provisions: All signs shall be shielded and sources of light steady. All signs must be physically attached to the building and on property owned or leased. 
(16)  The following provisions shall apply when B-1 neighborhood businesses have business lot lines within sixty (60) feet of single-family residential lot lines. 
a.  Permitted uses: 
Professional offices. 
Medical offices. 
Retail stores. 
Convenience stores (not open more than nineteen (19) hours per day). 
Service shops (i.e., hair salons, shoe repair, banking, dry cleaners and personal care facilities). 
Day care centers. 
Restaurants excluding those with drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
Health clubs. 
b.  Maximum percentage of lot to be used by building: That percentage allowed after taking into consideration the limits dictated by the provisions of (l)(1)4 below. 
c.  Minimum floor area: None required. 
d.  Maximum height of building: Two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
e.  Minimum lot area: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
f.  Minimum frontage of lot: Twenty (20) feet. 
g.  Minimum depth of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
h.  Minimum yard setback. 
i.  Permitted accessory use: None allowed. 
j.  Accessory building: None allowed. 
k.  Conditional uses: 
Gasoline services not including car wash services. 
Automotive repair conducted completely within an enclosed facility. 
Supervised living facilities. 
Convenience stores (twenty-four (24) hours per day). 
Vehicular drive-in or drive-through restaurants. 
l.  1.  Design limitations applicable to B-1 businesses with business lot lines within sixty (60) feet of single-family residential area lot lines: 
i.  All garbage storage shall be screened and located no closer than ten (10) feet from a single-family residential zone and may not be located between the front of the structure and any street right-of-way. 
ii.  See section 110-178 for additional design limitations and performance standards. 
(17)  The following performance standards shall be used for the purpose of evaluating the development proposals in the neighborhood business zone if the proposed B-1 neighborhood business lot line is within sixty (60) feet of single-family residential area lot lines: 
a.  New development shall be designed to be compatible with neighboring residential areas. This shall require that materials used on the outside of the buildings be of earth tone colors or colors conducive to colors in the surrounding residential area. 
1.  Colors of awnings should be muted, natural or earth toned and related to major materials of the building. 
2.  Window frames may be of an accent color to complement the major wall material. 
3.  Paint shall be flat or semi-gloss. 
4.  Metal roofs grey, natural green, rust or brown. 
5.  Metal canopies dark anodized or black or to match roof. 
This shall involve the preservation of the character and integrity of residential areas and the maintaining of an appropriate visual and functional interrelationship between residential and commercial uses. Potential intrusive design elements such as traffic circulation and light and glare shall be designed to designed to avoid interference with the residential environment. 
b.  The height, scale, mass and bulk of buildings shall not be overbearing in relation to neighborhood residential structures. Height, scale, mass and bulk shall also be a function of their proximity to residential structures, with buildings in close proximity made to adhere to a similar scale of development. Potential view impediments shall also be considered. 
c.  Architectural styles and features shall be compatible with and complementary to neighborhood residential structures to the extent commercial and residential structures share a visual relationship. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(7); Ord. No. 93-1241, § 1, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 00-1621, § 1, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 1, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 15-2066, §§ 2, 3, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 16-2100, § 2, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 17-2129, § 3, 4-3-2017)  
Sec. 110-73. - B-1A, professional offices. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the B-1A, professional offices, zoning district: 
(1)  Purpose and description: A zone comprised of professional offices. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Professional offices and office buildings, medical offices, studios, clinics; and daycares. No retail sales. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used by building: One hundred (100) percent. 
(4)  Minimum floor area: None required. 
(5)  Maximum height of building: Two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: None required. 
(10)  Permitted accessory use: None allowed. 
(11)  Accessory building: None allowed. 
(12)  Conditional uses: Hospital, churches. 
(13)  Off-street parking: See section 110-162. 
(14)  Off-street loading: See section 110-163. 
(15)  Other provisions: 
a.  All signs shall be shielded and source of light steady. All signs must be physically attached to the building and on property owned or leased. 
b.  See section 110-178 for additional design limitations and performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(8); Ord. No. 93-1241, § 2, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 00-1626, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 09-1922, § 1, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 2, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 15-2066, § 4, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 110-74. - B-2, central business. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the B-2, central business, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: This zone is the principal area and permits most types of general commercial enterprise. Manufacturing and nuisance industries are excluded. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Office and office buildings, medical offices, studios, retail shops, service shops, drive-in eating places, groceries, day care center, auto repair shops, membership clubs, newspaper, auto dealers, hotels, theatres, motels, banks and financial institutions, and residential care facilities. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used by building: One hundred (100) percent. 
(4)  Minimum floor area: None required. 
(5)  Maximum height: Four (4) stories, fifty (50) feet or as approved. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: Thirty (30) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: None required unless abutting residential zone of E-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 or T-1, then there shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on the rear and on the side, for all buildings up to fifty (50) feet in height, where the property abuts such zones. If the building is greater than fifty (50) feet in height, the setback on the rear and side shall be twenty (20) feet plus twice the height of that portion of the building that is in excess of the first fifty (50) feet. Portions of drainage ditches on the property or between properties shall be credited to the landowner for the purposes of establishing the setback. 
(10)  Permitted accessory use: None allowed. 
(11)  Accessory building: Any customary, incidental to business as a conditional use. Materials must be similar to the principal building. 
(12)  Conditional uses: Bowling alley and other recreational facilities, clinics and supervised living facilities, churches, and accessory buildings. No funeral homes. 
(13)  Off-street parking: See section 110-162. 
(14)  Off-street loading: See section 110-163. 
(15)  Other provisions: 
a.  All signs shall be shielded and source of light steady. All signs must be physically attached to the building and on property owned or leased. 
b.  See section 110-178 for additional design limitations and performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(9); Ord. No. 93-1241, § 3, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 00-1626, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 11-1975, § 1, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 3, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 15-2066, § 5, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 17-2129, § 4, 4-3-2017)  
Sec. 110-75. - B-3, institutional zone. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the B-3, institutional zone, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A zone for cultural, educational and other institutional uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Church, religious institution, public, private or parochial schools. 
(3)  Minimum floor area: None required. 
(4)  Maximum height: Four (4) stories, fifty (50) feet or as approved. The distance from average grade or curb level to the highest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, towers, spires and the like. 
(5)  Minimum lot area: One (1) acre. 
(6)  Minimum frontage of lot: Two hundred (200) feet. 
(7)  Minimum yard setback: None required unless abutting residential zones of E-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 or T-1, then there shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on the rear and on the side, for all buildings up to fifty (50) feet in height, where the property abuts such zones. If the building is greater than fifty (50) feet in height, the setback on the rear side shall be twenty (20) feet, plus twice the height of that portion of the building that is in excess of the first fifty (50) feet. Portions of drainage ditches on the property or between properties shall be credited to the landowner for the purposes of establishing the setback. Front setback is thirty (30) feet. 
(8)  Permitted accessory use: Parking garage, day care facility, cinerarium for a church or religious institution that meets the requirements listed in section 110-179. 
(9)  Accessory building: Any customary, incidental to business. 
(10)  Conditional uses: Playfield or stadium, recreation center; dental, non-surgical medical, and optical health services. 
(11)  Off-street parking: 
a.  No parking facility shall occupy any portion of a required setback within ten (10) feet of a public street or within ten (10) feet of a lot line adjacent to a residential zone (E-1, R or T-1) or more restrictive district. 
b.  The parking requirements of section 110-162 shall apply. 
(12)  Special conditions: 
a.  Section 98-56 will apply. 
b.  Screening devices will be required in accordance with the standards of section 90-63. 
(13)  Off-street loading: See section 110-163. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(10); Ord. No. 11-1960, § 2, 6-6-2011; Ord. No. 14-2037, § 2, 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 110-76. - C-1, commercial. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the C-1, commercial, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: This is a zone designed to contain commercial businesses. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Office and office buildings, medical offices, studios, retail shops, home improvement centers, service shops, restaurants, grocery stores, day care centers, auto repair shops, membership clubs, residential care facilities, newspapers, auto dealers, hotels, theatres, motels, banks and financial institutions, warehouses, wholesale business, veterinary clinic with or without temporary small animal boarding, laundries and cleaners, self-storage facilities or mini-warehouses and recreational businesses. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used by building: One hundred (100) percent. 
(4)  Minimum floor area: None required. 
(5)  Maximum height of building: Four (4) stories, fifty (50) feet or as approved. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: Thirty (30) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setbacks: None required unless abutting residential zone of E-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 or T-1, then there shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on the rear and on the side, for all buildings up to fifty (50) feet in height, where the property abuts such zones. If the building is greater than fifty (50) feet in height, the setback on the rear and side shall be twenty (20) feet, plus twice the height of that portion of the building that is in excess of the first fifty (50) feet. Portions of drainage ditches on the property or between properties shall be credited to the landowner for the purposes of establishing the setback. 
(10)  Permitted accessory uses: None allowed. 
(11)  Accessory building: Any customary building that is incidental to the business located in the primary structure. The exterior of the accessory building will be consistent in appearance with the exterior of the primary structure. 
(12)  Conditional uses: Churches; one (1) residential unit for a caretaker or similar personnel of self-storage facilities or mini-warehouses; research, development and testing laboratories; lumberyards; brickyards; warehouses; and small manufacturing. 
(13)  Off-street parking: See section 110-162. 
(14)  Off-street loading: See section 110-163. 
(15)  Other provisions: See section 110-178 for additional design limitations and performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(11); Ord. No. 93-1241, § 4, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 00-1626, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 08-1884, § 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 4, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 14-2029, § 1, 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 15-2066, § 6, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 17-2129, § 5, 4-3-2017)  
Sec. 110-77. - C-2, commercial. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the C-2, commercial, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: This zone is designed to contain highrise buildings. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Hotels, motels, office buildings, medical offices, hospitals, banks, and financial institutions and research, development and testing laboratories. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used by building: One hundred (100) percent. 
(4)  Minimum floor area: None required. 
(5)  Maximum height of building: Four (4) stories, fifty (50) feet or as approved. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: Thirty (30) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: None required unless abutting residential zone of E-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 or T-1, then there shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on the rear and on the side, for all buildings up to fifty (50) feet in height, where the property abuts such zones. If the building is greater than fifty (50) feet in height the setback on the rear and side shall be twenty (20) feet plus twice the height of that portion of the building that is in excess of the first fifty (50) feet. Portions of drainage ditches on the property or between properties shall be credited to the landowner for the purposes of establishing the setback. 
(10)  Permitted accessory uses: None allowed. 
(11)  Accessory building: Any customary, incidental to business. 
(12)  Conditional uses: None allowed. 
(13)  Off-street parking: See section 110-162. 
(14)  Off-street loading: See section 110-163. 
(15)  Other provisions: See section 110-178 for additional design limitations and performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. 00-1626, § 1, 3-20-2000; Code 1958, § 25-3(12); Ord. No. 13-2008, § 5, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 14-2029, § 2, 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 15-2066, § 7, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 110-78. - M-1, light industrial. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the M-1, light industrial, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: This zone permits most compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or materials with the exception of heavy manufacturing and the processing of raw materials. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Machine shops, carpenter shops, ice manufacturing, light metal processing, meat and food processing, paper fabricating, plastic manufacturing, clay products manufacturing, trucking yard, dairy product manufacturing, feed and fuel yards and miniwarehouses. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used by building: One hundred (100) percent. 
(4)  Minimum floor area: None required. 
(5)  Maximum height: Four (4) stories, fifty (50) feet or as approved. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: Sixty (60) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: None required unless abutting residential zone of E-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, or T-1, then there shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on the rear and on the side, for all buildings up to fifty (50) feet in height, where the property abuts such zones. If the building is greater than fifty (50) feet in height the setback on the rear and side shall be twenty (20) feet plus twice the height of that portion of the building that is in excess of the first fifty (50) feet. Portions of drainage ditches on the property or between properties shall be credited to the landowner for the purposes of establishing the setback. 
(10)  Permitted accessory use: No restrictions. 
(11)  Accessory building: No restrictions. 
(12)  Conditional use: Churches. 
(13)  Off-street parking: See section 110-162. 
(14)  Off-street loading: See section 110-163. 
(15)  Other provisions: See section 110-178 for additional design limitations and performance standards. 
(16)  This subsection is cumulative of subsections 110-76 and 110-77. All permitted and conditional [uses] in subsections 110-76 and 110-77 shall apply to the M-1 Zone. In the case of conflict, the stricter requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(13); Ord. No. 93-1241, § 5, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 00-1626, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 6, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 14-2040, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
Sec. 110-79. - M-2, heavy industrial. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to the M-2, heavy industrial, zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: This zone is designed to contain those industries which process raw material into useful goods. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Machine shop, carpenter shops, ice manufacturing, light metal processing, meat and food processing, paper fabricating, plastic manufacturing, clay products manufacturing, trucking yard, dairy product manufacturing, feed and fuel yards and miniwarehouses. All other manufacturing must obtain special permits. 
(3)  Maximum percentage of lot to be used for building: One hundred (100) percent. 
(4)  Minimum floor area: None required. 
(5)  Maximum height: Four (4) stories, fifty (50) feet or as approved. 
(6)  Minimum lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage of lot: One hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(8)  Minimum depth of lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(9)  Minimum yard setback: None required unless abutting residential zone of E-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 or T-1, then there shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on the rear and on the side, for all buildings up to fifty (50) feet in height, where the property abuts such zones. If the building is greater than fifty (50) feet in height the setback on the rear and side shall be twenty (20) feet plus twice the height of that portion of the building that is in excess of the first fifty (50) feet. Portions of drainage ditches on the property or between properties shall be credited to the land owner for the purposes of establishing the setback. 
(10)  Permitted accessory uses: No restriction except no dwellings. 
(11)  Accessory building: No restrictions. 
(12)  Conditional use: Churches. 
(13)  Off-street parking: See section 110-162. 
(14)  Off-street loading: See section 110-163. 
(15)  Other provisions: See section 110-178 for additional design limitations and performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(14); Ord. No. 93-1241, § 6, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 00-1626, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 7, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 110-80. - T-1, single-family residence, townhouse. 
In a T-1, single-family residence, townhouse, zone designated and approved according to the provisions of this chapter, within the city or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city for subdivision purposes, a townhouse or townhouse group may be erected or constructed, provided it meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A highly restricted high density residential zone composed of single-family townhouse dwellings. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Single-family dwelling. 
(3)  Maximum percent of project to be used for covered buildings: Fifty (50) percent, including common area. Those structures constituting "covered buildings" under this provision include, but are not limited to, buildings and required covered parking spaces. 
(4)  Minimum living area per family: Eight hundred (800) square feet. 
(5)  Lots: Each townhouse is located on an individual lot. 
(6)  Units and area: 
a.  There shall be at least four (4) connected units in each townhouse project. 
b.  Each townhouse group shall have not less than four (4) adjoining townhouse units. 
(7)  Maximum height of building: Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. 
(8)  Minimum area per family: Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet, including common area. 
(9)  Minimum lot area: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(10)  Minimum frontage of lot: Twenty (20) feet. 
(11)  Minimum lot depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
(12)  Minimum yard setback: 
a.  Each townhouse or townhouse group shall be set back from the front street five (5) feet for the building line. 
b.  Each townhouse or townhouse group shall be set back from a side street twenty-five (25) feet for the building line. 
c.  Each townhouse or townhouse group shall be set back from the rear lot line at least ten (10) feet for the building line. Garages or carports having direct access to a rear alley or common driveway shall set back from the rear lot line at least ten (10) feet; provided, however, the planning commission may reduce or waive the required rear setback requirements where a common area of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width is provided and there is provision for pedestrian and vehicular safety, utility service and privacy. 
(13)  Permitted accessory use: Mechanical building, maintenance and tool shop and recreational building, customary home occupations. 
(14)  Accessory building: Shall be the same design and appearance as townhouses and subject to the same maximum height restrictions. 
(15)  Conditional uses: There are no conditional uses allowed. 
(16)  Yards: 
a.  Each lot shall contain a private yard with not less than three hundred (300) square feet of area. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the required private yard may be occupied by a driveway, but parking areas shall not be included in the computation of the required private yard. A wall or solid fence, not less than five (5) feet in height, shall be required on side lot lines where the required private yard adjoins such lot lines. A private yard may be a patio cover or roof which does not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the private yard. 
b.  Within a townhouse project there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet of separation or combined sideyard between each townhouse group. 
c.  No side yard shall be required between connected townhouses or units. 
(17)  Parking spaces and driveways: 
a.  Off-street parking: Minimum two-space garage. 
1.  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each townhouse in the number specified in section 110-162. 
2.  No parking shall be provided in the front five (5) feet of a townhouse lot or common area (unless the rear of the lot abuts Loop Road) nor in the twenty-five (25) feet adjacent to a side street. 
b.  Driveways: 
1.  No driveway shall be located in the front yard of a townhouse, unless the rear of the lot abuts Loop Road. 
2.  One-way driveways shall be at least nine (9) feet in width, and two-way driveways shall be at least eighteen (18) feet in width. 
(18)  Off-street loading: None. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, §§ 25-3(15), 25-3.1)  
Sec. 110-81. - PUD, planned unit development. 
See article IV for regulations applicable to the PUD, planned unit development, zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(17))  
Sec. 110-82. - PURZ, planned unit residential zone. 
See article V for regulations applicable to the PURZ, planned unit residential, zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(16))  
Sec. 110-83. - MH-1, mobile home park. 
See chapter 58 for regulations applicable to the MH-1 mobile home park zoning district. In addition to chapter 58, the following additional regulations shall be applicable to the MH-1 mobile home park zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A medium-density zone composed primarily of individual mobile or manufactured homes. 
(2)  Permitted use: One-family mobile home dwelling, to include HUD code manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, §§ 3, 4, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 74-545, §§ 1—4, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 76-602, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 1—18, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 81-185, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 82-847, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 82-870, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 84-951, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 85-961, § 1, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 85-975, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1008, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-1021, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 88-1061, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-3(18); Ord. No. 99-1593, § 1, 3-15-99) 
Cross reference— Mobile home park zone, § 58-41 et seq.  
Sec. 110-84. - MH-2, manufactured homes. 
Manufactured homes shall have the same definition found in Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. arts. 5221 et seq. The following regulations shall be applicable to the MH-2 manufactured homes zoning district: 
(1)  Description and purpose: A medium-density zone composed primarily of individual manufactured homes. 
(2)  Permitted use: One-family manufactured home dwelling. 
(3)  Compliance with Code. Manufactured homes in MH-2 zone shall be subject to the terms, rules and regulations found in chapter 58 of this Code, specifically sections 58-65 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 99-1593, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 110-85. - Exceptions. 
The following are exceptions to the regulations set out in this article: 
(1)  Ornamental features and mechanical appurtenances may exceed height limitations, but in no case exceed one hundred forty (140) feet. 
(2)  Unattached garages may be placed within ten (10) feet of rear lot line if an alley is used between lots. 
(3)  Corner lots. 
a.  Side yards for corner lots, where front and side setbacks have not been established by plat (approved by the planning commission), shall have a minimum front yard setback from the lot line required for that zone from both streets. 
b.  For corner lots which have established front and side setbacks by plat (approved by the planning commission), those platted setbacks will control which is the front of the home and which is the side of the home (the front setback will be the larger of the two (2)). 
(4)  If, for any reason of solar orientation, an entire area or any entire block is developed cooperatively or as a unit, standard yard regulations may be waived to carry out such purpose, providing that the zoning board of adjustment after public notice and hearing is of the opinion that such a development is not injurious to adjacent property. 
(5)  Lots with schools and/or churches shall have twice the side setback requirements of residence when in residential zones. 
(6)  Libraries and museums may be permitted in residential zones and must meet restrictions for churches. 
(7)  This section shall not apply to the location, construction, maintenance or use of central office buildings or corporations, firms or individuals engaged in the furnishing of telephone service to the public, or to the location, construction, maintenance or any use of any equipment in connection with such buildings or a part of such telephone system, necessary in the furnishing of telephone service to the public. 
(8)  The rear setback for in-ground swimming pools is whichever of the following is the greater distance from the rear property line (i) five (5) feet from the rear property line or (ii) the rear utility easement. This exception does not apply to screened enclosures or any other pool related structures. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-6; Ord. No. 94-1298, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 99-1593, § 2, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 18-2165, § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 110-86. - Accessory structures in residential zones. 
(a)  The total percentage of square feet for principal buildings and accessory structures may not exceed the maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings. 
(b)  The square footage of a single accessory structure shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the principal building's footprint. 
(c)  The total square footage of all accessory structures shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the principal building's footprint or shall not exceed the maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings, whichever is less. 
(d)  Accessory structures whose square footage equals two hundred (200) square feet or less may meet the alternate accessory setbacks as follows: 
Alternate minimum accessory structure setback: 
(1)  Side, five (5) feet or interior line of easement. 
(2)  Rear, five (5) feet or interior line of easement. 
(3)  Front, to front of house. 
(e)  If the total square footage of accessory structures exceeds two hundred (200) square feet, only two hundred (200) square feet of those individual structures may meet the accessory setbacks. All other structures must meet the principal building setbacks. Square footage of structures may not be split between the alternate and principal building setback. 
(1)  For example, if a residential lot has one (1) five (5) by ten (10) (fifty (50) square foot) structure and one (1) eight (8) by twelve (12) (ninety-six (96) square foot) structure, both structures may meet the alternate setbacks. However, adding a ten (10) by ten (10) (one hundred (100) square feet) structure would cause the total amount of accessory structure square footage to exceed two hundred (200) square feet, so the ten (10) by ten (10) building would be required to meet the principal building setback. 
(f)  The following structures do not count towards the two hundred (200) square foot amount or to the maximum percentage of lot to be used for buildings: 
(1)  In ground flag poles; 
(2)  Fences; 
(3)  Light poles; 
(4)  Antennas; 
(5)  Satellite dishes; 
(6)  Screen enclosures; 
(7)  Swimming pools; 
(8)  Water features; 
(9)  Garden structures; 
(10)  A-frame playground equipment not anchored to the ground and that can be moved without being disassembled; 
(11)  Flat decks that are no more than two (2) feet in height and are not attached to the principal building and do not have a roof; and 
(12)  Flat decks that are attached to the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 10-1951, § 8, 12-6-2010)  
Secs. 110-87—110-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, adopted July 6, 2009, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 110-106—110-111, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 79-700, §§ 19, 20, enacted May 21, 1979, amended Code 1958, § 25-21. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Local appraisal of property owned by a planned unit development association, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 25.09. 
 
Sec. 110-106. - Purpose. 
The purpose of a Planned Unit Development District (PUD) is to promote diversity and creativity in site design. The PUD process is provided as an option to encourage unique developments which may combine a mixture of land uses and building uses. The PUD allows flexibility in the application of development standards by permitting departures from the conventional sites, setback, and density requirements of a particular zoning district in the interest of achieving site development not otherwise possible. A PUD may not be used for the purpose of avoiding the zoning regulations applicable to the primary zoning districts. All PUD applications shall be developed in compliance with the standards of the city's master plan. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-107. - Effect of article on prior PUD approvals. 
This article shall not apply to any PUD application approved by city council prior to the city's adoption of this article. In the event that a previously approved PUD is modified or requires a series of approvals, the application or modification will be evaluated under the rules and state laws in effect of the time the original PUD was approved. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-108. - Underlying zoning. 
a.  PUDs are created as an overlay district through an ordinance and the underlying zoning classification shall remain in place. The establishment of a PUD overlay district will supersede the underlying zoning classification unless the PUD expires or is terminated; in which case the underlying zoning classification and related regulations will be enforced. PUDs may be located in any zoning district, pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article. 
b.  The applicant shall follow the city's subdivision ordinance, sign ordinance, comprehensive development manual, and the PUD development manual. Any request for deviation from these ordinances or manuals shall be specifically detailed in the PUD application at the time of submission. All building and sign permits must be acquired and all permit fees must be paid during development. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-109. - PUD development size requirements. 
A small PUD shall be from 5 to 50 acres; a medium size PUD shall be from 50 to 150 acres; and a large PUD shall contain at least 150 acres. All land within a PUD shall be contiguous unless divided by an existing railroad, publicly owned property, a right-of-way, or a waterway. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-110. - Eligible applicants. 
PUD applications may only be initiated by a property owner. If the ownership of the land is not under a single ownership, then all owners shall either join in the application or provide a letter of consent to submit with the PUD application. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-111. - PUD approval process. 
1)  Pre-application Conference. Prior to the submittal of a PUD application, the applicant shall attend a pre-application meeting with the city manager or his designated representative. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the development with respect to compatibility with existing and anticipated land uses in the vicinity and to guide the applicant in the preparation of a development plan. 
2)  Application and Plan. An application and fee for the establishment of a PUD must be accompanied by two hard copies of the development plan and one electronic copy. If the PUD will be developed in phases, such phases shall be shown on the development plan. 
a.  The development plan must contain the following information: 
(1)  Delineation of site boundaries; 
(2)  General site layout showing the approximate location of buildings, parking lots, land uses, maximum and projected building height, and setbacks; 
(3)  Major thoroughfares and collector streets and other streets necessary to demonstrate the circulation system; 
(4)  Proposed residential development densities and acreages; 
(5)  Proposed areas for schools and municipal buildings, such as fire and police substations; 
(6)  Significant environmental features, including flood plains, water courses, and the impact on these features; 
(7)  General topographic conditions; 
(8)  All recorded and proposed easements; 
(9)  A list of proposed land uses and the approximate acreage devoted to each type of use; 
(10)  An open space plan; 
(11)  A parks and recreation plan and a hike and bike plan; 
(12)  Illustrations indicating the general form and character of development, including representative examples of residential and non-residential buildings; 
(13)  A description of the different phases of the development and schedule for commencement and completion of each phase; and 
(14)  A development schedule indicating the rate of anticipated development from the date on which construction begins to completion, along with clearly defined benchmarks. As part of the PUD plan, the development schedule shall be adhered to by the owner, applicant, and any successor in interest. 
b.  The city reserves the right to waive one or more of the required items of a PUD application as deemed necessary due to the size of the PUD, proposed use, or availability of existing infrastructure in the immediate area; and retains the authority to request additional information deemed necessary to provide a thorough review of the application. 
3)  City Engineer. The city engineer shall present a written report on the development plan that summarizes the anticipated impacts of the proposed development on planning goals, utilities, emergency services, traffic, and taxes and give this report to the planning commission and the council. 
4)  Planning Commission. The planning commission will conduct a public hearing on all completed PUD applications in accordance with public notification procedures contained in this chapter. The planning commission will provide its final recommendation to city council for action. 
5)  Final Approval. Following the receipt of the final report from the planning commission, city council shall hold a public hearing in accordance with this chapter. A PUD may be created by ordinance upon approval of the development plan. 
6)  PUD Review Criteria. A PUD application shall be evaluated based on the following criteria: 
a.  The proposal is unique in design to warrant the use of a PUD overlay and the development is not possible using the existing underlying zoning of the property; 
b.  The project depicts creative land development, providing a variety in the development patterns of the city which conform to the intended purpose of the city's master plan; 
c.  All uses within the site shall be complimentary and pose minimal impact to adjacent uses; and 
d.  Landscaping areas visually enhance the structures within the development and conform to the city's master plan. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-112. - Modification of approved PUDs. 
A modification of an approved medium or large PUD may be approved by the city manager if the modification does not deviate more than 
a.  10% in the amount of acreage of residential and multifamily land uses; 
b.  15% in the amount of acreage of commercial land uses; or 
c.  10% in the amount of acreage of open space. 
The above-mentioned modifications are intended to give the development elasticity, not to allow the applicant to move a land use or open space to a different area of the PUD. Therefore, all modifications must retain their respective percentages of the original footprint in order for the modification to be approved by the city manager. For example, if the type of modification is allowed 10% flexibility, then 90% of the footprint shall be retained. If the modification is allowed 15% flexibility then 85% of the original footprint must be retained. Any other change shall require submittal of an amended plan to the planning commission and council. The public hearing and notice procedures of this chapter shall apply to such requested changes. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-113. - Monitoring PUD development. 
(a)  The applicant or applicant's designee shall submit an annual progress report to the city on the PUD anniversary date (the date of final approval of the PUD) and upon city council's or the planning commission's request. A formal review of the PUD shall be presented to council every three years or more frequently if requested by the planning commission and city council. The reporting requirements shall cease once 80% of the lot plan in all of the residential areas and 80% of all of the commercial areas are ready for building permits to be issued, which means that the area has been platted, the plats recorded, and 100% of the infrastructure in those areas have been accepted by the city. However, a final report shall be given to city council once the PUD is 100% complete. 
(b)  The progress report shall provide the: percentage of project completed, expected completion date of uncompleted portion, and status of the development. 
(c)  In the event the applicant or designee fails to provide the annual progress report or if the applicant fails to meet designated benchmarks, the planning commission may freeze all permits and plat recordation approval and not allow further permits to be issued or plats recorded. In addition, the planning commission may consider recommending to the city council that the PUD be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-114. - PUD approval. 
PUD approvals shall be valid from the date of council approval in the following manner: a small PUD shall be valid for five (5) years; medium PUD shall be valid for ten (10) years; and a large PUD shall be valid for fifteen (15) years. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-115. - Termination of PUD. 
If the planning commission recommends termination of the PUD, city council shall give the applicant an opportunity to show good cause why the PUD should not be terminated. If good cause is not shown, council shall terminate the PUD through an ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-116. - Extension of PUD approval. 
PUD extensions may be requested if the project is not completely constructed by the end of the original approval timeline. An extension cannot be granted unless at least 60% of the lot plan in all of the residential areas and 30% of all of the commercial areas are ready for building permits to be issued, which means that the area has been platted, the plats recorded, and 100% of the infrastructure in those areas have been accepted by the city. The applicant or designee may apply for multiple two (2) year extensions. The request must not only be made before the PUD expires, but in sufficient time that the ordinance extending the PUD can be approved before the PUD expires. Extensions shall be first presented to the planning commission. The planning commission shall then give its recommendation to city council. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-117. - Dedications and improvements. 
All public dedications and improvements, including (but not limited to) rights-of-way, easements, streets and roads, alleys, pedestrian way, bikeways, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, sewer systems, and water and electrical distribution systems, shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the City of Lake Jackson Code of Ordinances at the time of the dedication or improvement. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-118. - Issuance of permits. 
The approval of a subdivision plat, or the issuance of building or other development permits for the development of an approved PUD may be delayed or issued contingent upon the applicant's providing adequate access, storm drainage facilities, water and sanitary sewer supply systems, and electrical power supply systems. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Sec. 110-119. - Subsequent owners or assignees. 
The applicant shall ensure that all prospective or future owners or assignees shall be informed in writing that the property is bound by the PUD documents. 
(Ord. No. 09-1907, § 1, 7-6-2009)  
Secs. 110-120—110-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
Sec. 110-131. - Intent. 
The planned unit residential zone is intended as a zone to encourage unified design of housing, commercial or institutional zones and facilities or combinations thereof to provide for related developments having harmony of design and variety of function. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22)  
Sec. 110-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Common open space means a parcel of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated as a planned unit residential zone, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the planned unit residential zone, common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents of the planned unit residential development. Parking areas shall not be considered as common open space. 
Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of all of the land proposed to be included in a planned unit residential zone. The holder of an option or contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than forty (40) years, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this zoning section. 
Plan means the proposal for development of a planned residential zone, including all covenants, grants of easement and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space and public facilities. The plan shall include such information as required by section 110-138. The phrase "provisions of plan" where used in this article shall mean those documents, verbal or graphic, referred to in this definition. 
Planned unit residential zone means an area of land, controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage or required open space to the regulations in any one (1) residential district established by any other article of this chapter. 
Single ownership means the proprietary interest of a landowner. 
Statement of objectives for planned unit residential zone means that statement of objectives contained in section 110-134 and shall include all maps and attachments incorporated in that statement of reference. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(A)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 110-133. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city, being confronted with increasing urbanization, and acknowledging that the technology of land development and the demand for housing are undergoing substantial and rapid changes, and recognizing the applicability of the objectives set forth by the city council, does hereby adopt this article for application to areas of land which are to be developed as planned residential developments. 
(b)  Of primary concern is the need to provide increased flexibility in the laws governing the development of those large areas in the city which are at present substantially open land; and to encourage such development in directions that will recognize both the changes in design and technology in the building industry and the new demands in the housing market; and to ensure that the uniform regulations appropriate to previously developed residential neighborhoods do not operate to discourage efficient and imaginative development of such substantially open areas consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring properties. 
(c)  Also of concern is the need for the redevelopment of those congested and blighted areas abutting the central areas of the city in order to furnish adequate housing facilities in proximity to the commercial and civic amenities of the central areas of the city, and in the belief that private investment should be encouraged to contribute to that redevelopment; and in recognition that such necessary redevelopment cannot be expected to take place in strict accordance with those uniform regulations appropriate to more viable established residential areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(B))  
Sec. 110-134. - Objectives. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to encourage unified design of housing, related facilities or combinations thereof to provide for related developments having harmony of design and variety of function, and to provide for a greater flexibility in the design of buildings, yards, courts and circulation than would otherwise be possible through the strict application of standard regulations. It is further the intent of this article to provide for: 
(1)  A maximum choice in the types of environment and living units available to the public. 
(2)  An integration of open space and recreation areas with residential development. 
(3)  A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding natural topography and geologic features. 
(4)  A creative approach to the use of land and related physical development. 
(5)  An efficient use of land, resulting in small networks of utilities and streets and thereby lowering housing and maintenance costs. 
(6)  An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding development. 
(b)  The city council is hereby designated as the municipal authority. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(C))  
Sec. 110-135. - Application of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply only to a tract of land proposed to be developed for fifty (50) or more dwelling units, which tract is under single ownership, and for which an application for a planned unit residential zone is made as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  An application for a planned unit residential zone on a tract of land for more than five (5) but less than fifty (50) or more dwelling units may be filed, but no tentative approval of such an application shall be given by the planning commission unless the commission shall find, upon a showing by the landowner, that the minimum of fifty (50) dwelling units should be waived because a planned unit residential zone is in the public interest, and that one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Because of unusual physical features of the property itself or of the neighborhood in which it is located, a substantial deviation from the regulations otherwise necessary or appropriate in order to conserve a physical or topographic feature of importance to the city. 
(2)  The property or its neighborhood has a unique character of economic importance to the community that will be protected by use of a planned unit residential development. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(D); Ord. No. 17-2135, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 110-136. - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in a planned unit residential development may include and shall be limited to: 
(1)  Dwelling units in detached, semidetached, attached or multistoried structures, or any combination thereof; and 
(2)  Nonresidential uses of religious, cultural, recreational and commercial character to the extent they are designed and intended to serve the residents of the planned unit residential zone. 
No commercial use, nor any building devoted primarily to a commercial use, shall be built or established prior to the residential buildings or uses it is designed or intended to serve. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(E))  
Sec. 110-137. - Standards and criteria. 
(a)  The plan for a planned unit residential zone shall be consistent with: 
(1)  The statement of objectives for planned unit residential zone; 
(2)  The general standards set out hereinafter; and 
(3)  The specific rules and regulations for the planned unit residential zone adopted from time to time and placed in the public record by the city council. No such rules and regulations shall be revised or added to so as to be applicable to a specific proposal for a planned unit residential zone after an application for tentative approval has been filed by the landowner. 
(b)  A plan shall be consistent with the following general standards for use of land, and the use, type, bulk, design and location of building, the density or intensity of use, the common open space, the public facilities and the development by geographic division of the site: 
(1)  The plan may provide for a variety of housing types. 
(2)  The total ground areas occupied by buildings, structures and parking areas, shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the total ground area of the planned unit residential zone. For the purpose of this subsection, total ground area shall be equal to the gross area of the proposed planned unit residential zone site, less those areas required for public street improvements or excavated drainage areas. 
(3)  Height of particular building shall not be a basis for denial or approval of a plan, provided any structures in excess of thirty-five (35) feet shall be designed and platted to be consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and the efficiency of existing public services. 
(4)  Architectural style of buildings shall not be a basis for denying approval of a plan. 
(5)  Nonresidential uses of religious, educational or recreational nature shall be presumed to be designed or intended for the use of the residents of the planned unit residential zone, and the burden shall be on the planning commission or objecting parties appearing at the public hearings to show by substantial evidence that the use will primarily serve persons residing outside the planned unit residential zone. The burden shall be on the landowner to show that nonresidential uses of a commercial character are intended to serve principally the residents of the planned unit residential zone. No building designed or intended to be used, in part or in whole, for commercial purposes shall be constructed prior to the construction of not less than fifty (50) percent of the dwelling units proposed in the plan. 
(6)  If the density or intensity of land use exceeds twenty (20) units per acre, the landowner has the burden to show that such excess will not have an undue and adverse impact on existing public facilities and on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property. The planning commission, in determining the reasonableness of the increase in the units per acre, shall recognize that increased density may be compensated for by additional private amenities and by increased efficiency in public services to be achieved by the amount, location and proposed use of common open space and achieved by the location, design and type of dwelling units. The planning commission shall, in its determination, also consider that the physical characteristics of the site may make increased densities appropriate in the particular location. 
(7)  The amount and location of common open space shall be consistent with the declared function of the common open space as set forth in the application for a planned unit residential zone, and there shall be such provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space as reasonable to ensure its continuity and conservation. If the common open space is permitted to deteriorate or is not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interest of the entire city then, and in such event, the city shall take those remedial steps provided for in section 82-41. 
(8)  The plan shall contain such proposed covenants, easements and other provisions relating to the bulk, location and density of such residential units, nonresidential uses and public facilities as are necessary for the welfare of the planned unit residential zone and are not inconsistent with the best interest of the entire city. Such covenants, easements and other provisions, if part of the plan as finally approved, may be modified, removed or released only in accordance with those requirements specified by this Code. 
(9)  The planning commission may designate divisible geographic sections of the entire planned unit residential zone to be developed sequentially, and shall, in such case, specify reasonable periods within which development of each such section must be commenced, and may permit in each section deviations from the number of dwelling units per acre established for the entire planned unit residential zone, provided such deviation shall be adjusted for in other sections of the development so that the number of dwelling units per acre authorized for the entire planned unit residential zone is not affected. The period of the entire development and the commencement date for each section thereof, may be modified from time to time by the planning commission upon the showing of good cause by the landowner, provided that in no case, shall any extension exceed twelve (12) months. If the landowner does not appear in the specified time, his final plat approval may be revoked by the planning commission. The landowner shall make such easements, covenants and other arrangements as may be determined by the planning commission to be reasonably required to assure performance in accordance with the plan and to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of such plan before completion. 
(10)  The uniqueness of each proposal for a planned unit residential zone may require waiver from the specifications established in chapter 90. The planning commission may, therefore, within the limits specified, waive or modify the specifications otherwise applicable for a particular public facility where the planning commission finds that such specifications are not required in the interests of the residents of the planned unit residential zone and that the modifications of such specifications are not inconsistent with the interests of the entire city. No such modifications shall be made without prior approval of the city council. Any such modifications must be stated in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(F))  
Sec. 110-138. - Application for approval. 
(a)  Application for planned unit residential zone. To zone property as provided for in this article, the applicant must complete all of the steps in the following process: 
(1)  Preapplication conference. Prior to the formal application for a planned unit residential zoning change, the applicant shall discuss with the city manager the elements of the proposed planned unit development, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The project location. 
b.  The project size. 
c.  The project's intended land use. 
d.  The variation from normal zoning provisions needed to implement the plan. 
e.  The relationship of the proposed project to existing adjacent development. 
f.  The proposed document concerning ownership and maintenance of the common areas. Such document shall provide at a minimum a trust instrument or equivalent device that shall establish an institution other than the city to assure maintenance of the common areas in case of financial or other emergency. 
The purpose of the preapplication conference is to clarify for the applicant, the city's policies regarding planned unit development and for the city to provide an informal nonbinding opinion on the acceptability of the proposal. 
(b)  Preliminary plan. To receive preliminary approval of a request for planned unit residential zoning, the applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  A preliminary plan including: 
a.  A location diagram at a convenient scale. 
b.  A land use plan at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, illustrating the boundaries of the proposed tract, any existing land uses on proposed tract, any interesting or unusual existing features of the tract, including, but not necessarily limited to, topography, vegetation or flooding, and adjacent existing land uses to a distance of two hundred (200) feet. This land use of plan shall also illustrate existing zoning on and within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed development. 
(2)  Two (2) copies of a plan of the proposed development at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, illustrating all of the elements of the proposal, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Land uses and drainage. 
b.  Circulation and parking. 
c.  Common area(s). 
(3)  A staging plan, if appropriate to the proposal. 
(4)  The variation from normal zoning provisions needed to implement the plan. 
(5)  Sketches and/or elevation drawings illustrating visually the general features of the proposed plan. 
(6)  A written statement outlining the applicant's views on the relationship of the proposal to any existing adjacent development, and the landowner's reasons why, in his opinion, the planned unit residential zone would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the city's statement of objectives for planned unit residential zone and with the specific criteria, if any, theretofore published by the planning commission. 
(7)  The proposed document concerning ownership and maintenance of the common areas. Such document shall provide at a minimum a trust instrument or equivalent device that shall establish an institution other than the city to assure maintenance of the common areas in case of financial or other emergency. 
(8)  One (1) copy for every application for tentative approval received by the secretary shall be promptly delivered to the planning commission for its review. As part of its review the planning commission shall consult to the extent it deems necessary with the fire, health, building and other departments of the city concerning such application. 
(9)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to forbid or discourage informal consultations between the landowner and the city staff prior to the filing of an application for a tentative approval, provided no statement or representation by a member of the staff shall be binding upon the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(G))  
Sec. 110-139. - Public hearing. 
The planning commission and the city council shall hold a joint public hearing on each proposed planned residential development, as specified in section 110-6, and all the requirements of section 110-6 must be met. Applicant should return to the planning commission if the commission requires changes of the preliminary or final plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(H))  
Sec. 110-140. - Final plan and recordation. 
(a)  Final plan. To complete the zoning process, the applicant for a planned residential development shall, as soon as possible following action on the preliminary plan, submit the following for review and approval: 
(1)  Two (2) copies of a plan of the proposed development at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet illustrating all of the elements of the proposal and reflecting all elements and changes required by the planning commission during the preliminary plan review process. Such changes shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. All of the requirements of the preliminary plan shall also be requirements of the final plan. 
(2)  Two (2) copies of staging plan, if appropriate to the proposal, reflecting all changes required by the planning commission during the preliminary plan review process. 
(3)  A specific listing of variations required in chapter 90. 
(4)  Two (2) copies of a legal instrument or instruments setting forth a plan or method of permanent care and maintenance of open spaces, recreational areas and other commonly owned properties including the legal instrument required by section 110-138(b)(7). 
The city council shall notify the applicant of their approval or disapproval. This approval shall constitute the final step in the process and when received, the zoning shall be changed. 
(b)  Subdivision plat. Review of the preliminary plan and the final plan may, at the option of the applicant, be undertaken simultaneously with subdivision plat review; provided, however, that all requirements of this section and those of chapter 90 shall be met. 
(c)  Recording of the approved plan. Two (2) copies of the final approved plan shall be marked approved, dated, signed by the planning commission and submitted to the city manager for use in subdivision platting and/or issuing building permits. 
(d)  Changes in the plan. Following favorable action by the planning commission, minor alterations to the plan that do not affect platting, the general character or overall design of the plan may be approved by the city manager and city engineer. Any other alterations shall be resubmitted for review by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 2, 3-3-80; Code 1958, § 25-22(I))  
Secs. 110-141—110-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 110-161. - Customary home occupations. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Answering service means the receiving and relaying of telephone messages by a human operator. Answering service does not include telemarketing or soliciting business or the purchase of goods and/or services by telephone. 
Community home means a personal care facility licensed under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 247, provided that the exterior structure retains compatibility with the surrounding residential dwellings. No more than six (6) persons with disabilities can reside in a community home and the principal resident/owner must reside in the home. The aforementioned is subject to reasonable building occupancy limits as may be required of the building official and/or fire marshal. A community home may not keep, either on the premises of the home or on a public right-of-way adjacent to the home, motor vehicles in numbers that exceed the number of bedrooms in the home. 
Customary home occupation means an occupation which may be conducted in the home without changing the character of the residential use and which is incidental and secondary to the residential use. 
Daycare facility means a facility that is licensed or registered with the state which regularly provides care for persons less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
Demand responsive transport services means a service that offers on-demand call-up door-to-door service from any origin to any destination in a service area. 
Kennel means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where animals are kept wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs, cats or other animals. 
Limousine means a motor vehicle with a lengthened wheelbase. 
Person with a disability means a person whose ability to care for himself, perform manual tasks, learn, work, walk, see, hear, speak, or breathe is substantially limited because the person has: 
(1)  An orthopedic, visual, speech, or hearing impairment; 
(2)  Alzheimer's disease; 
(3)  Pre-senile dementia; 
(4)  Cerebral palsy; 
(5)  Muscular dystrophy; 
(6)  Multiple sclerosis; 
(7)  Epilepsy; 
(8)  Cancer; 
(9)  Heart disease; 
(10)  Diabetes; 
(11)  Mental retardation; 
(12)  Autism; or 
(13)  Emotional illness. 
Service representative means an occupation whereby a service is provided. Service representative includes but is not limited to electrician, plumber, interior decorator, accountant, air conditioning repair, small appliance repair, janitorial service, pool service, lawn and landscape service, real estate appraiser and similar occupation. 
(b)  Customary home occupations may be conducted in the home within the limits of the following: 
(1)  Uses permitted Customary home occupations include home office for a salesman, sales or service representative, manufacturer representative, studio of an artist, musician, music teacher, etiquette teacher, photographer, writer, tailor, architect, dressmaker, launderer, registered family homes, agency homes, community home for the disabled, daycare facilities for twelve (12) or fewer persons, caterers licensed by the city, the transfer of firearms, demand responsive transport services, answering service, or other similar occupations. 
(a)  Under this subsection, firearms may only be transferred by a person who holds a federal firearms license and may only be transferred to a person who already owns, but does not yet possess, the firearm. Commercial selling or trading of firearms is prohibited. Maintaining stock or inventory of firearms is prohibited. 
(b)  Under this subsection, the operator of a demand responsive transport service must comply with the following: 
1.  Only one (1) vehicle may be used for the occupation; 
2.  The vehicle may not be more than thirty-five (35) feet in length; 
3.  The vehicle may not be a limousine or any other vehicle listed in subsection 98-154(b); 
4.  The vehicle cannot be a 15-person passenger van or bus; 
5.  The vehicle shall be parked on a concrete pad; 
6.  The vehicle shall be parked completely behind the sidewalk; or within a five-foot setback from the curb edge if there is no sidewalk; 
7.  The vehicle shall not be operated on a fixed route; 
8.  The operator shall not deviate from a route to pick up or discharge other passengers unless at the request of the customer that initiated the call; and 
9.  The operator shall obtain a permit from the city on which all drivers of the vehicle are listed as well as the license plate number and the vehicle identification number of the vehicle. The city manager may revoke or suspend the permit for any violations of this section. 
(2)  Uses not permitted. Uses not considered customary home occupations include, but are not limited to, barbershops, beauty parlors, animal hospitals, kennels, carpenter shops, electrical shops, plumbing shops, radio shops, tin shops, auto repair, auto paint and body repair shops, furniture repairing shops, clinics, doctor offices, hospitals, real estate offices, insurance agent offices, health studios, palm readers, day care centers or day care facilities which care for more than twelve (12) persons, taxi and limousine services, garage/yard sales (except that as many as two (2) garage/yard sales may be held per year), major appliance repair shops, dance studios or other similar occupations. 
(3)  Use restrictions. In addition to the requirements of the appropriate section of this chapter, a home occupation shall comply with the following restrictions. 
a.  No home occupation shall cause, by reason of its existence, a significant increase in the number of vehicles traveling to and from the home or on the public streets surrounding or abutting the home, nor shall the home occupation receive regular deliveries from delivery trucks. 
b.  A home occupation shall in no way destroy, restrict or interfere with the primary use of the home as a place of residence. 
c.  No stock in trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises except that which is custom made to order. 
d.  The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling unit or accessory structure, and in no event shall such use be visible from any other residential structure or public way. 
e.  There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or material used in the home occupation. 
f.  No mechanical, electrical or other equipment which produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare or other annoyance outside the residential or accessory structure shall be used. 
g.  No home occupation shall be permitted which is noxious or offensive to a person of ordinary sensitivity or hazardous by reason of vehicular traffic, generation or emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, radiation or other objectionable emission. 
h.  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in the home occupation unless required by licensing requirements or where such engagement is occasional and incidental to the occupation. 
(4)  Advertising. No sign advertising the home occupation shall be allowed on or off the premises. 
(5)  Preexisting day care facilities. Day care facilities operating prior to June 1, 1992, which are permitted for more than twelve (12) persons may continue to exist or operate, provided that such facilities do not modify the terms and conditions of their current license with regard to owner and number of clients. 
(6)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation for each day that the violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 92-1201, § 1, 6-15-92; Code 1958, § 25-4.1; Ord. No. 99-1603, § 1, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 01-1653, § 1, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 03-1735, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 08-1876, § 1, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 12-1989, § 1, 7-16-2012; Ord. No. 13-2021, § 1, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 14-2048, § 1, 8-4-2014) 
State Law reference— Industrial homework, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 143.001 et seq.  
Sec. 110-162. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking facilities must conform to the table of parking requirements when: 
(1)  A building is erected; 
(2)  The building's number of dwelling units, dimensions, or seating capacity is increased; 
(3)  The building is moved; 
(4)  The type of use changes; or 
(5)  When a site with multiple businesses adds one (1) or more restaurants. 
(b)  In addition to the table of parking requirements, businesses shall provide one (1) parking space per the greatest number of staff on duty at any time. 
(c)  Exceptions to the table of parking requirements are: 
(1)  Downtown buildings (Area J) do not need a specific number of spaces. Instead, the following shall be used as a guide: each use shall be given credit for the spaces abutting the use as well as one-half (½) of the spaces in the center of the street where there is center parking; 
(2)  A site with two (2) or more businesses that will share off-street parking. Shared off-street parking must comply with subsection (i) of this section. 
(d)  The planning commission may approve an alternative parking plan that is not in strict compliance with the requirements of this section. The alternative plan must meet the objective and purposes of this section. In making the determination, the planning commission may consider whether the alternative plan will preserve existing trees, the shape and size of the property, industry parking standards, and any other information the planning commission finds helpful. 
(e)  Off-street parking or stacking for uses not specified in the table of parking requirements shall be determined by the planning commission. 
(f)  The parks and recreation board is responsible for designating the number of off-street parking spaces needed for parks. 
(g)  All off-street parking and stacking spaces must be a minimum of nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet. 
(h)  For businesses with a drive-through or passenger drop-off/pickup area, a stacking lane shall be at least nine (9) feet wide and shall not constitute space for any other circulation aisle, parking space, or maneuvering area. The required length of stacking lanes is in the table of parking requirements. The stacking lane shall not be curbed or, if it is curbed, shall have a curb cut to allow vehicles to leave the stacking lane. 
(i)  All off-street parking spaces required in this section shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows: 
(1)  Where an increase in number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required off-street parking spaces may be located no more than three hundred (300) feet from an institutional building served and no more than five hundred (500) feet from any other nonresidential building served. 
(2)  The planning commission may allow a business, commercial or institutional use to share off-street parking spaces with another use to meet the required number of off-street parking spaces. The developer must present a site plan and calculations to show that sharing the parking will not cause a shortage of parking spaces or congestion. 
(3)  All shared off-street parking arrangements must be acknowledged in a written agreement executed by all involved parties and approved by the city attorney as to form. The agreement shall be filed with the application for a building permit. 
(j)  Any head-in parking or parking on public right-of-way where street width is less than forty-eight (48) feet is prohibited. 
(k)  No off-street parking shall be allowed in city parkway, including downtown (Area J). 
(l)  All other parking requirements in this chapter shall be followed. 
TABLE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
(This table is meant only to give the required ratio of spaces. All other parking requirements in this chapter must be followed.) 
Type of Use 	Number of Spaces Required 
Institutional 
Assembly with no fixed seating 	10 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Church or other assembly with fixed seating 	1 space: 3 seats 
Library 	3 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Day care, child care, nursery school, kindergarten, playgroups, day habilitation or workshops for disabled 	1 space: 5 students + a stacking lane with 1 space per 5 students 
School - Elementary, middle, junior high 	1 space: 6 students + stacking lane with 1 space per 5 students + bus lanes 
School - High school 	1 space: 2 students 
College educational facilities 	1 space: each student and staff expected at the busiest time of the day 
Retail/Services 
Convenience store with gas pumps 	10 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. + stacking lane with 1.5 spaces per pump 
Mini-warehouses/storage 	5 spaces 
Offices - Medical/dentist 	5 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Offices (except medical or dental) 	3 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Retail - General (includes grocery and personal services) 	5 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Retail - Large item (e.g., furniture, appliance, carpet, non-public wholesale) 	2 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Retail or service with drive-thru (e.g., pharmacy, drycleaners, bank) 	3 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. + stacking lane with 3 spaces for drive-thru lanes 
Shopping centers 	6 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Warehouse 	1 space: 1,000 sq. ft. 
All automotive services (e.g., gas, car wash, oil changes) 	4 [spaces]: 1,000 sq. ft. including service bays; excluding spaces for detailing 
Recreation & Entertainment 
Arcade or game room 	5 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Billiard hall 	6 spaces: billiard table 
Bowling alley 	5 spaces: bowling lane 
Recreation hall with no fixed seating 	1 space for every 3 people that can be accommodated at one time 
Health/fitness club or studio 	8 space: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Sports venue with fixed seating, theater 	1 space: 3 seats 
Game courts (racquetball, tennis, etc.) 	4 spaces: court 
Recreational businesses 	1 space for every 4 persons normally accommodated in the establishment at one time 
Restaurant 
Restaurant, high turnover & fast food 	15 spaces: 1000 sq. feet (including patio & play area) + a stacking lane with 5 spaces before the first stopping space + 3 spaces between penultimate stopping place and service window 
Restaurants, general 	20 spaces: 1,000 sq. ft. 
Residential/Lodging 
Apartment/condominium 	1 space: bedroom or 2 spaces: dwelling unit, whichever is highest 
Hotel/motel 	1 space: sleeping room + spaces for accessory uses 
Mobile home park 	1 space: mobile home 
Nursing home 	0.5 space: bed 
Senior assisted living 	1.5 spaces: dwelling unit 
Senior independent living 	1 space: dwelling unit 
Single family detached 	2-spaced garage: dwelling unit 
Townhouse 	2-spaced garage: dwelling unit 
Duplex 	2 covered spaces: dwelling unit 
 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 69-397, § 5, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 73-506, § 1, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 81-780, § 1, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 3, 12-3-90; Code 1958, § 25-7; Ord. No. 11-1964, § 2, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 15-2067, §§ 1, 2, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 17-2124, § 2, 2-6-2017)  
Sec. 110-163. - Loading requirements. 
(a)  On the same premises with every building devoted to retail trade, retail and wholesale food markets, warehouses, supply houses, wholesale and manufacturing trade, hotels, hospitals, laundry, dry cleaning establishments or other buildings where large amounts of goods are received or shipped, erected in any zone after July 17, 1961, shall provide loading and unloading space as follows: 
(1)  Buildings of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area must provide at the rear of each establishment a loading and unloading space which is adequate for the particular type of business. 
(2)  Buildings of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area and over must provide one (1) off-street loading and unloading space within minimum dimensions of ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet by fifteen (15) feet overhead clearance, plus one (1) additional such space for each additional fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor space or major fraction thereof. 
(3)  Loading space being maintained in connection with any existing building on the effective date of the ordinance from which this provision derives shall thereafter be maintained so long as such building remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided conforming to the requirements of this section; provided, however, that this regulation shall not require the maintenance of more loading space than is required for a new building. 
(b)  Supervised living facilities and other health care institutions or other buildings where large amounts of goods are received or shipped, erected in any zone after December 3, 1990, shall provide loading and unloading space as follows: 
(1)  Off-street facilities shall be provided and maintained for receiving and loading of merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the premises. 
(2)  Required off-street loading facilities may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive, or may consist of a berth within a structure. 
(3)  No portion of a loading facility may extend into a public right-of-way. 
(4)  The off-street loading spaces or truck berths shall provide maneuvering areas on site to prevent any blockage of public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 90-1143, § 4, 12-3-90; Code 1958, § 25-8)  
Sec. 110-164. - Mining, excavation, soil removal. 
No mining, excavation, or soil removal except in connection with construction covered by building permit. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-4(1))  
Sec. 110-165. - Number of main buildings—Residential. 
Only one (1) principal building may be located upon an R-1, R-2, R-2A, or R-3 lot. The principal building shall be habitable. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-4(2); Ord. No. 10-1951, § 9, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 110-166. - Same—Nonresidential. 
Where a lot is used for retail, commercial, industrial or a combination of same, more than one (1) main building may be located upon the lot but only when such building conforms to all the open space, parking and density requirements applicable to the uses and zones and when all such main buildings face upon a street. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-4(3))  
Sec. 110-167. - Same—Facing streets. 
Whenever two (2) or more main buildings, or portions thereof, are placed upon a single lot and such buildings will not face upon a street, the same may be permitted when the site plan for such development is approved by the city planning commission so as to comply with the normal requirements for platting. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, 3-4-85; Code 1958, § 25-4(5))  
Sec. 110-168. - Screening. 
Screening consisting of either masonry, or berms with adequate trees or shrubs, or chainlink fencing with adequate trees or shrubs shall be required when a business, commercial or industrial building backs up to either a major city street or a state highway and there are garbage receptacles, work vehicles and other common but unsightly operational or back-door materials visible. Such screening must be thick or dense enough to hide the unsightly items up to a height of at least six (6) feet. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, 3-4-85; Code 1958, § 25-4(4))  
Sec. 110-169. - Permits for multiple buildings. 
Whenever an area or tract of land under one (1) or several ownerships is proposed for development with more than one (1) main building, permits may be issued for housing projects, shopping centers, institutions, industrial development, or a combination development of two (2) or more uses when the same is issued with the approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, 3-4-85; Code 1958, § 25-4(6))  
Sec. 110-170. - Height restrictions generally. 
No structure shall be built with a height of more than one hundred forty (140) feet within ten thousand (10,000) feet of the center of an airport. No structure shall be built with a height of more than one hundred (100) feet within three (3) miles of either end of and in a line with any runway of an airport. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, 3-4-85; Code 1958, § 25-4(7))  
Sec. 110-171. - Sight-obstruction at intersections. 
On any corner lot on which front and side yards are required, no fence, structure, sign, tree, shrub or hedge may be maintained within a twenty-five-foot isosceles triangle formed by the lot lines on the corner, as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 84-914, § 2, 2-20-84; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, 3-4-85; Code 1958, § 25-4(9))  
Sec. 110-172. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2038, § 1, adopted Apr. 21, 2014, repealed § 110-172, which pertained to fences—when required and derived from Ord. No. 259, adopted July 17, 1961; Ord. No. 80-764, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1980; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, adopted Mar. 4, 1985; and Code 1958, § 25-4(8). 
Cross reference— Fence required for swimming pools, § 14-272.  
Sec. 110-173. - Fences—Construction permits required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, business, partnership, corporation, or other entity, to commence the construction, enlargement, extension or relocation of a fence without first obtaining a permit from the building official for such work. 
(1)  Application. Application for a fence construction permit shall be made to the building official on forms provided for that purpose. 
(2)  Requirements. The building official shall require that every application for a fence construction permit be accompanied by one (1) copy of a plan or plot drawn to scale and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the building official to ascertain whether the proposed fence and its placement is in accordance with this chapter: 
a.  Lot dimensions and corners. The actual shape, proportion and dimensions of the lot to be built upon and satisfactory evidence that actual corners of the lot are known and are identified by stakes or rods and established on the ground. The proposed fence should be within the property line of the lot seeking the permit. 
b.  Existing yards. The dimensions of all yards and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
c.  Proposed structures. 
1.  The shape, height, type, quality, fabric, and location of all fences on a lot shall be consistent. 
2.  All nails or fasteners shall be of nonrusting, noncorrosive metal such as hot dipped galvanized steel. All nails or fasteners shall be of the type (such as screw shank, ring shank, or divergent point staples) that when properly driven, will not work free, due to wind, vibration or shrinkage of members. 
3.  All materials shall be securely fastened, vertical boards to horizontal stringers, stringers to vertical posts, top rail, to ensure an ongoing attractive appearance and safe condition, free from rust, rot, vandalism, and other sources of decay. 
(3)  Issuance. If the proposed fence as set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the building official shall issue a fence permit. 
(4)  Disapproval. If an application for a fence permit is not approved, the building official shall state in writing on the application the reasons for such disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 84-914, § 2, 2-20-84; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, 3-4-85; Code 1958, § 25-4(10); Ord. No. 93-1253, § 1, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 96-1399, § 1, 11-4-96; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 8, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 14-2038, § 2, 4-21-2014; Ord. No. 18-2173, § 1, 12-3-2018)  
Sec. 110-173.1. - Same—Height, location, and maintenance. 
(a)  No fence or enclosure shall exceed a height of seven (7) feet measured from the ground directly below the fence, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The side of the property abutting an arterial street or state highway may have fences up to eight and one-half (8½) feet in height. 
(2)  Business properties in business, commercial and manufacturing zones (B-1 through M-2) may, for security purposes, have fences up to ten (10) feet in height. 
(3)  Multi-family, business, commercial or industrial uses that abut a single-family residence zone on any side or the rear must be screened with a fence that is at least six (6) feet but no more than ten (10) feet in height. If the fence is to exceed eight (8) feet in height, the applicant must prove a specific need to the planning commission and the applicant must submit a site plan or landscape plan that depicts the fence. 
(4)  Applicants for uses in business, commercial and industrial zones may have a fence that exceeds seven (7) feet in height if the applicant proves a specific need to the planning commission. The applicant must submit a site plan or landscape plan that depicts the fence. 
(b)  The planning commission may grant an applicant's request not to have a fence if the applicant proves that there is a physical need related to the property to omit the fence. 
(c)  No fence or enclosure shall extend closer to any street right-of-way line than the building line in front (see section 110-2 building line definition, being the front of the building) and the point of intersection of the building line with the property line on the side, except that when the lot is at least one (1) acre or more, ornamental see-thru (spaces six (6) inches to eighteen (18) inches in width) iron or steel fences with brick pillars may be erected up to and along the minimum setback line in front and on the property line on the side to its intersection with the minimum setback line in front. 
(d)  All fences shall be maintained by the property owner/lessee and shall be kept clean, free from all hazards such as, but not limited to faulty and loose fastenings, nails, boards, so as not to be detrimental to the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 14-2038, § 3, 4-21-2014)  
Sec. 110-174. - Surfacing of off-street parking areas. 
All off-street parking areas shall be graded and paved with an all weather type pavement, either concrete, asphaltic concrete or other surfacing material. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, 3-4-85; Code 1958, § 25-4(11))  
Sec. 110-175. - Lot widths. 
For the purpose of determining the minimum required width of the lot for building purposes, the width required may be measured at either the front line or the building line, whichever is greater, as long as either the front line or the building line meets the minimum requirement for the frontage of the lot or site under this Code for the particular zone and the lot meets the total square footage requirement of the Code for that zone. 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Ord. No. 84-929, § 1, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 85-969, § 1, 3-4-85; Code 1958, § 25-4(12))  
Sec. 110-176. - Tents in business and commercial zones. 
The time period for which a business or other entity may erect or have a tent on their premises in business and commercial zones for the purpose of housing materials, providing cover from the elements, providing for an outside sale area, providing for entertainment, conventions or any other social, business or commercial purpose shall not exceed thirty (30) days total for a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 93-1262, § 1(25-4(13)), 11-1-93)  
Sec. 110-177. - Screen enclosures. 
(a)  Interpretation of the definition of a screen enclosure shall be the duty of the building official. 
(b)  Appeals of the definition may be made to the zoning board of adjustments through the building official. The decision of the zoning board of adjustments shall be final if no challenge suit is filed in district court within fifteen (15) days after the decision. 
(c)  Screen enclosures shall not be counted toward total percentage of allowable structures on any lot. This subsection shall apply to all those structures existing on February 17, 1997, as well as those that are erected after that date. 
(d)  Additionally, screen enclosures shall: 
(1)  Be designed and stamped by an engineer to meet Texas windstorm standards; 
(2)  Not encroach onto any easements or setback requirement; 
(3)  Be considered a structure and a permit is required; 
(4)  Be exempted from the percentage of lot allowed for buildings or structures; and 
(5)  Be subject to all other requirements for buildings or structures and those requirements shall be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 97-1412, § 1, 2-17-97; Ord. No. 10-1951, § 10, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 110-178. - Design limitations. 
(a)  The following design limitations shall apply after March 1, 2000, when a B-1A, B-2, C-1, C-2, M-1 or M-2 zone lot line is within sixty (60) feet of single-family residential area lot lines: 
(1)  All garbage storage shall be screened and located no closer than ten (10) feet from a single-family residential zone and may not be located between the front of the structure and any street right-of-way. 
(2)  All lots zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses shall be screened in accordance with section 110-180 if the lot line is within sixty (60) feet of a single-family residential area lot line. 
(3)  Hours of operation shall be limited to 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight unless planning commission review determines alternative hours will not adversely impact the neighborhood residents outside normal hours of operations, all external lighting except that necessary for security purposes shall be secured. 
(4)  No structure shall be located nearer to any single-family residential property than a distance equal to one and one-half (1½) times the height of the exterior walls of such building or structure. But those businesses built prior to March 1, 2000, are excepted from this requirement. 
(5)  No mechanical, electrical or other equipment which produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare or other annoyance at nearby residential lot lines shall be permitted. Mechanical and electrical equipment shall be designed and installed to minimize noise impact on surrounding residential property. Additionally, no external amplified sound for other than safety or security purposes is allowed. 
(6)  Uses that typically and inherently produce significant noise such as tire shops, muffler shops and car wash facilities are not allowed unless design features are present to eliminate noise that would intrude on the neighborhood. 
(7)  All exterior signage, both temporary and permanent, shall meet the conducive color standards of section 110-72(17) and is subject to a design review and placement study by the planning commission. All signage detached from buildings/structures shall meet the requirements of a monument sign as defined in section 78-10 of this Code. 
(8)  All storage, both temporary and permanent, of materials, pending customer work (i.e., vehicles), freight/deliveries or products intended for sale/lease shall be within the building or structure. 
(b)  The following performance standards shall be used after March 1, 2000 for the purpose of evaluating the development proposals when a B-1A, B-2, C-1, C-2, M-1 or M-2 zone lot line is within sixty (60) feet of single-family residential area lot line: 
(1)  New development shall be designed to be compatible with neighboring residential areas. This shall require that materials used on the outside of the buildings be of earth tone colors or colors conducive to colors in the surrounding residential area. 
a.  Colors of awnings should be muted, natural or earth toned and related to major materials of the building. 
b.  Window frames may be of an accent color to complement the major wall material. 
c.  Paint shall be flat or semi-gloss. 
d.  Metal roofs grey, natural green, rust or brown. 
e.  Metal canopies dark anodized or black or to match roof. 
This shall involve the preservation of the character of the character and integrity of residential areas and the maintaining of an appropriate visual and functional interrelationship between residential and commercial uses. Potential intrusive design elements such as traffic circulation and light and glare shall be designed to avoid interference with the residence environment. 
(2)  The height, scale, mass and bulk of buildings shall not be overbearing in relation to neighboring residential structures. Height, scale, mass and bulk shall also be a function of their proximity to residential structures, with buildings in close proximity made to adhere to a similar scale of development. Potential view impediments shall also be considered. 
(3)  Architectural styles and features shall be compatible with and complementary to neighborhood residential structures to the extent commercial and residential structures share a visual relationship. 
(Ord. No. 00-1626, § 2, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 9, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 110-179. - Cinerariums. 
(a)  [Definition.] For purposes of this section, building means a free standing occupiable structure, exclusive of any other structure connected to the building by breezeways, walkways, or other types of attachment. 
(b)  All cinerariums. The following regulations shall apply to all cinerariums. 
(1)  Only a church or religious institution that owns and uses the property on which the cinerarium shall sit may install and use a cinerarium. 
(2)  Only one (1) cinerarium is allowed per church or religious institution. 
(3)  Only one (1) cinerarium is allowed per lot. 
(4)  A cinerarium shall contain no more than one hundred fifty (150) niches, with each niche measuring no more than twelve (12) inches by twelve (12) inches by twelve (12) inches. 
(5)  Each niche shall only contain the cremains of one (1) person at a time. 
(6)  No sign permit shall be issued that identifies an area as a cinerarium. 
(7)  Cinerariums may not occupy more than three hundred (300) square feet. This three hundred (300) square foot limitation includes the niches as well as the concrete slab or wall that contains the niches. 
(8)  The church or religious institution must maintain a current list of those interred in the cinerarium. 
(9)  The church or religious institution must file a plat with the county clerk showing the layout or plan of the cinerarium. The church must file an amended plat if the number of niches in the cinerarium changes. 
(c)  Interior cinerariums. The following regulations shall apply to all interior cinerariums. 
(1)  The cinerarium may only be inside of a building and it must adjoin and be a part of the building that houses the main sanctuary. 
(2)  Niches may only be accessible and viewed from the interior of the building. 
(3)  If the sanctuary is moved, then the cinerarium must also be moved so that all requirements in this section are met. 
(d)  Exterior cinerariums. The following regulations shall apply to all exterior cinerariums. 
(1)  The cinerarium shall consist of an in-ground concrete slab with niches constructed in the slab for placement of urns or other suitable containers for cremains. 
(2)  The cinerarium must adjoin the building that houses the main sanctuary on the church or religious institution's campus. 
(3)  The cinerarium must be constructed so that the niches do not collect water. 
(4)  The top surface of the cinerarium, including the niche covers, cannot be higher than the top elevation of the building's foundation to which the cinerarium adjoins. 
(5)  All niches shall have a uniform cover. 
(6)  The cinerarium shall be built so that no items such as ornaments, flower vases, or other memorials that extend above the surface of the cinerarium are accommodated. 
(7)  The cinerarium may be enclosed within a wall. The wall either must be made from masonry materials or must consist of a hedge that completely screens the cinerarium. Wooden fences may not be used to screen the cinerarium. The wall may not contain niches. 
(8)  If the sanctuary is moved, then the cinerarium must also be moved so that all requirements in this section are met. 
(e)  Removal of cremains. 
(1)  Once the property ceases to be used for a church or religious institution or if the property is deemed to be a nuisance, the property owner shall be responsible for the removal of all cremains. 
(2)  If the property owner does not remove the cremains, the city shall remove and dispose of the cremains as allowed by state law. The city shall document the place and manner of disposal and shall keep such documentation as a permanent record. 
(Ord. No. 11-1960, § 3, 6-6-2011)  
Sec. 110-180. - Screening and fencing materials. 
(a)  Unsightly features. When a business, commercial or industrial use backs up to a major city street or a state highway and there are garbage receptacles, work vehicles and other common but unsightly operational or back-door materials visible, the unsightly area may be required to have at least a six-foot screen consisting of: 
(1)  Masonry walls; 
(2)  Wood fencing; 
(3)  Chain link fencing with trees or shrubs thick or dense enough to hide the unsightly items; or 
(4)  Berms with adequate trees or shrubs thick or dense enough to hide the unsightly items. 
(b)  Abutting single-family residential zones. Where a multi-family, business, commercial or industrial use abuts a single-family residence zone on any side or the rear, the fence must be solid enough to prevent light penetration. 
(c)  Fencing materials. Fencing materials for fences that are over two (2) feet and are not installed to fence agricultural uses may only consist of: 
(1)  Chain link; 
(2)  Wood that is decay resistant; 
(3)  Iron or steel ornamental; 
(4)  Chain link with vinyl slats; 
(5)  Masonry; 
(6)  Wrought iron; 
(7)  Solid stone; 
(8)  Galvanized welded wire with a minimum thickness of at least wire gauge 14 if used as a backing fabric in conjunction with wood, masonry, stone, or otherwise approved fencing. The fence shall be constructed with adequate frame and rail structure so that the wire does not sag, does not become misshapen when a person or animal climbs over the fence or pushes against the fence, and the mesh opening does not permit the passage of a sphere with a diameter of four (4) inches. This does not include woven or knotted wire fabric similar to commercial rural field fence products. (See Fig. 1) 
(d)  Barbed wire. Fences surrounding commercial and industrial uses may contain barbed wire on the top of the fencing if the use is not adjacent to a residential zone. Barbed wire may be used in E-1 residential zones. 
 
(Ord. No. 13-2008, § 10, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 14-2038, § 4, 4-21-2014)  
Secs. 110-181—110-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - AIRPORT ZONING 
 
Sec. 110-196. - Airport zoning. 
(Reserved) 
(Ord. No. 259, 7-17-61; Code 1958, § 25-9) 
Editor's note— The above section is reserved for future airport zoning regulations. 
State Law reference— Municipal and county zoning authority around airports, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 241. 
