7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/562
City of Lake Worth
Code of Ordinances
Including Web Update 16.1
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 1145 adopted 6/11/19.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.100 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.101 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake Worth, as compiled, edited and published
by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc.
Sec. 1.102 Designation and Citation of Code
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “2004 Code of Ordinances, City of Lake Worth, Texas,” and may be so cited.
Sec. 1.103 Catchlines of Articles and Sections
The catchlines of the several articles and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the article or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles and sections, nor as
any part of the articles and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
articles and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1.104 Definitions and Rules of Construction
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/562
City and Town. Each means the City of Lake Worth, Texas.
Council. Whenever the words “council” or “this council” or “the council” are used, they shall mean the city
council of the City of Lake Worth, Texas.
City Manager, City Secretary, Chief of Police or Other City Officers. The words “city manager,” “city secretary,”
“chief of police” or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary,
chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Lake Worth, Texas.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Tarrant, Texas.
May. Is permissive.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Must and Shall. Are each mandatory.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylightsaving
time as may be in current use in the city.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Property. Includes real and personal property.
Real Property. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. Means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use
of pedestrians.
Signature or Subscription. Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. Shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues,
recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or In Writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. Shall mean a calendar year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/562
Sec. 1.105 Severability of Parts of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, subsection or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, subsections and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, subsection or section.
Sec. 1.106 Repeal of Ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed.
Sec. 1.107 Amendments or Additions to Code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereinafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure so to do shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances.
Sec. 1.108 Supplementation of Code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/562
(4) Change the words “this article” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,”
“this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
articles or sections inserted into the code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
Sec. 1.109 General Penalty for Violations of Code; Continuing Violations
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful
or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any
such provisions of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00). However a fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that
governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation including the dumping of refuse may not exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty
provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this code or of
any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is designated
as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition
to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive
relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.200 COUNCIL MEETINGS*
Sec. 1.201 Special Meetings
The city council of the city shall hold such special meetings as the mayor shall call or such other meetings as the
majority of the city council shall call. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 2B)
Sec. 1.202 Matters to Appear on Agenda
All matters considered by the city council at each regular or special meeting must appear on the agenda prepared
for such meeting. Any person wishing to discuss or present any subject or proposition to the city council must
notify the city manager or his/her designee at least 96 hours in advance of such meeting at which such person
wishes to appear, and have the subject matter placed on the agenda. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1,
Section 2C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 1.300 FISCAL YEAR†
Hereafter the fiscal year of the city shall be from October 1 of the calendar year to September 30 of the
following calendar year. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 3)
ARTICLE 1.400 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.401 Organization
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/562
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
director;
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management
within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may
delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such
execution shall remain with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers
and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well
as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management
plan.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 7A)
Sec. 1.402 Emergency Management Director - Powers and Duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property
within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by the consent of the city council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city manager or his/her designee.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city manager or
his/her designee.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal,
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/562
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.S. Article 6889-7).
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 7B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 1.403 Emergency Management Plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan should be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management of the state. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and
terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When
approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and
to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan
shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 7C)
Sec. 1.404 Interjurisdictional Program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the county and the mayors of the other cities in
said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to
cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency
management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency
management insofar as said program may affect the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 7D)
Sec. 1.405 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 7E)
Sec. 1.406 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/562
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 7F)
Sec. 1.407 Commitment of Funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless
during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the
city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 7G)
Sec. 1.408 Offenses; Penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or
the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the
penalties imposed by this article.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 7H)
Secs. 1.409–1.430 Reserved
Division 2. National Incident Management System
Sec. 1.431 Adoption
The city council adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004. (Ordinance 808
adopted 9/13/05)
ARTICLE 1.500 ABANDONED, STOLEN OR RECOVERED PROPERTY*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/562
Sec. 1.501 Abandoned, Stolen, or Recovered Property Not Claimed to be Auctioned or Used
(a) All abandoned, stolen or recovered property of every kind, to include firearms, which shall remain
unclaimed with the police department for a period of ninety (90) days without being claimed or reclaimed by the
owners, whether known or not, may be sold at public auction or appropriated to the city's use, as provided in this
article. Such abandoned, stolen or recovered property may be destroyed according to the provisions as set forth
in the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure Chapter 18, Article 18.17, Article 18.19 and according to policies and
procedures as set forth by the chief of police regarding the destruction of such abandoned, stolen or recovered
property. Such policies and procedures must be approved by the city manager or his/her designee.
(b) Ten (10) days notice of the time and place of sale of all property to be offered for sale and a descriptive list
of the property to be offered for sale shall be posted at the city hall of the city and a copy thereof sent by
registered mail to the last known address of the owner, if the name of such owner is known. Thereafter, such
property shall be offered for sale at public auction to the highest bidder. Such property may be sold as individual
items or assembled in lots at the discretion of the chief of police. The chief of police may, at his or her
discretion, assign such item or items to the police department or sell such item or items at public auction.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 8A; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 1.502 Notice of Auction to be Published
(a) Notice of the public auction shall be published in the official newspaper of the city fifteen (15) days prior
to the date of the auction stating the date, time, location and items to be auctioned.
(b) The public auction provided for in the preceding subsection shall be conducted at the place and hour
designated in the notice. All sales shall be for cash.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 8B)
Sec. 1.503 Police Chief to Conduct Sale and Keep Records
The chief of police shall conduct such public auction and he/she shall keep an accurate statement of each article
sold and the price bid and paid therefor, and shall make a complete report in writing to the city manager or
his/her designee of the time, place and manner of conducting such sale. All funds received on account of such
auction shall be delivered to the city manager or his/her designee who shall give his or her receipt therefor.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 8C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 1.504 Disposition of Funds From Sale
The city manager or his/her designee shall place all funds received by him/her under and by virtue of this article
to the credit of the general fund, to be thereafter disbursed as the city council shall order. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 8D; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 1.600 PARKS AND RECREATION
Sec. 1.601 Definitions
City Manager. The city manager of the City of Lake Worth, or his or her designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/562
Park. A park, reservation, playground, recreation center, recreational or playing field or any other area in the city
owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation, including all planted creeks and lakes
maintained by the city, except the parkway strips between curbs and sidewalks along the several streets and
highways of the city.
Parks Supervisor. The person designated by the city manager to oversee the operation of parks in the City of
Lake Worth, or his or her designee.
Sec. 1.602 Park Curfew
(a) The parks supervisor shall post the hours during which the area is open to the public. Unless otherwise
posted by the parks supervisor the parks shall be open to the public as follows: Lake Worth Park 5 a.m. to 11
p.m.; Keenum-Shelton Dog Park 7 a.m. to 11 p.m.; and all other parks 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any portion of a park during the hours of the day
when such area is not open to the public. A person who violates this section shall be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code and may be physically removed from the area by
a peace officer.
(c) This section shall not apply to the following persons if in the park in the performance of their official
duties: peace officers, physicians, ambulance operators or attendants, employees of the city, and employees of
public utility companies.
Sec. 1.603 Prohibited Acts
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any one (1) or more of the following acts in a park:
(1) To intentionally harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture or collect any
animal or bird in any city park or recreational field or attempt to engage in any such conduct.
(2) To ride, drive, tether or pasture any horse or other animal, except in designated areas.
(3) To erect any structure, sign, bulletin board, post, pole or advertising device of any kind in or to
attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rope, or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or other
structure in any park or recreation area.
(4) To carry a firearm, except those persons who are duly licensed by the state to carry a concealed
handgun.
(5) To carry (unless permitted under (4) above), or discharge firearms, fireworks, bb guns, airguns,
bows and arrows, slingshots, blowgun, rockets or paintball guns.
(6) To remain in any park after being advised by a parks department employee or peace officer that
he is interfering with, disrupting or preventing the orderly conduct of any supervised or unsupervised
play, educational program, or amusement program, and after having been asked to leave any park
area located in or on any public property within the city.
(7) To wash a vehicle in any park or recreation area, except in designated areas.
(8) To stop, stand or park any motorized vehicle or to permit any such motor vehicle to so stop,
stand, or park within the confines of any park or recreation area, except such as may be necessary or
incidental to park visits or such as may be due to accidental or temporary mechanical failure of such
vehicle or such as may be occasioned by the order of any peace officer or person charged with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/562
supervision of any park or recreation area. If any motorized vehicle is found within the confines of
any park or recreation area in violation of any prior provisions of this section and the identity of the
operator of such vehicle can not be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner or person to whom the vehicle is
registered is responsible for such violation.
(9) To ride, drive or park any motorcycle, automobile or other motorized vehicle upon, over or
across any park, curb, sidewalk, grass, lawn, hike or jogging trail or park land except in designated
areas or unless authorized by the parks supervisor. This provision is not applicable to city motor
vehicles or emergency vehicles.
(10) To damage, move, cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building,
monument, fence, bench, equipment or other structure, apparatus or property, or to pluck, pull up,
cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower, or to mark or write upon, paint or deface in any
manner any building, monument, fence, bench, equipment or other structure.
(11) To swim, bathe, pollute, or wade in the water of any fountain, pond, lake or stream except in
designated areas.
(12) To use or operate any motorboat, boat, or watercraft (except radio controlled boats) on any
creek, pond, lake, or water within any park where the parks supervisor has designated by sign that
such activity is prohibited.
(13) To fish within any park where the parks supervisor has designated by sign that such activity is
prohibited. Where fishing is allowed, no trotlines, throw lines, fish traps, seines or nets shall be
permitted.
(14) To make or kindle a fire, except in picnic stoves, braziers, fire pits or designated areas
provided for that purpose; to leave the park without extinguishing a fire; to burn wood found in the
park; or to throw hot coals in any trash receptacle.
(15) To place or dump any trash, refuse, solid waste, grass clippings, leaves, or other objectionable
or unsightly matter in any park.
(16) To place, abandon or leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, or other refuse in any public park
except in proper waste receptacles.
(17) To violate any park rules which are conspicuously posted at or near the main entrance to a
park or park facility.
(18) To use any city parks for overnight camping or lodging.
(b) (1) A person who violates any provision of this section is subject to penalty per Section
1.109 of this code and may be physically removed from the area by a peace officer.
(2) No provision of this section shall apply if a person has written permission from the city
manager to perform any of the prohibited acts listed above. The written permission from the city
manager must be provided to any parks department employee or peace officer if requested while the
person is performing a prohibited act in the park. This section shall not apply to the following
persons in the performance of their official duties for the benefit of the health, safety, or welfare of
the public: peace officers, employees of the city, and employees of public utility companies.
Sec. 1.604 Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited in Parks
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/562
(a) For the purposes of this section, “alcoholic beverage” shall be defined as: alcohol or any beverage
containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage
purposes, either alone or when diluted.
(b) Except as permitted in subsection (e) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to bring into, consume or
possess alcoholic beverages in any city park or park facility, or on any property owned or maintained by the city.
(c) The city manager shall conspicuously post a sign in each city park stating substantially the following:
“Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in this park is prohibited–up to $500.00 fine for violation.”
(d) Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who
resists the enforcement of any provision of this section shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code.
(e) The city council may authorize the consumption of alcoholic beverages in a city park for special events.
Sec. 1.605 Fee Schedule for Use of City Park and City Park Facilities
(a) The usage fees for recreational fields in city parks shall be those listed in subsection (d). The fees listed in
subsection (d) are hourly fees unless expressly indicated otherwise.
(b) All reservations must be made pursuant to the city reservation and usage policy. Any violation of the city
reservation and usage policy by the renter or any person utilizing the facilities in coordination with the
reservation or rental shall be grounds for termination of the rental agreement, ejection from the park and/or loss
of all rental fees and deposits.
(c) The parks supervisor is authorized to charge and collect fees for class trips, equipment, merchandise,
police or supervisory service, and other programs, services, events and merchandise provided or offered by the
department where no fee is established in the code. The fee or charge shall be based on the costs of providing the
event, service, equipment or goods.
(Ordinance 900 adopted 1/13/09)
(d) Fee Schedule.
(1) Lake Worth Park.
(A) Football Field.
(i) Resident: $15.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $20.00.
(Ordinance 917 adopted 5/19/09)
(iii) Organized athletic event: $20.00. (Ordinance 968 adopted 8/9/11)
(iv) 501(c)(3) must submit proof: $15.00.
(v) Minimum rental: 2 hours.
(B) Baseball 1.
(i) Resident: $15.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/562
(ii) Nonresident: $20.00.
(Ordinance 917 adopted 5/19/09)
(iii) Organized athletic event: $20.00. (Ordinance 968 adopted 8/9/11)
(iv) 501(c)(3) must submit proof: $15.00.
(v) Minimum rental: 2 hours.
(C) Baseball 2.
(i) Resident: $15.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $20.00.
(Ordinance 917 adopted 5/19/09)
(iii) Organized athletic event: $20.00. (Ordinance 968 adopted 8/9/11)
(iv) 501(c)(3) must submit proof: $15.00.
(v) Minimum rental: 2 hours.
(D) Softball/T-ball.
(i) Resident: $15.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $20.00.
(Ordinance 917 adopted 5/19/09)
(iii) Organized athletic event: $20.00. (Ordinance 968 adopted 8/9/11)
(iv) 501(c)(3) must submit proof: $15.00.
(v) Minimum rental: 2 hours.
(E) Covered Picnic 1.
(i) Resident: $7.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $10.00.
(iii) Organized athletic event: refer to resident/nonresident category.
(iv) 501(c)(3) must submit proof: refer to resident/nonresident category.
(v) Minimum rental: 2 hours.
(F) Covered Picnic 2.
(i) Resident: $7.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $10.00.
(iii) Organized athletic event: refer to resident/nonresident category.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/562
(iv) 501(c)(3) must submit proof: refer to resident/nonresident category.
(v) Minimum rental: 2 hours.
(G) Concession Stand1 2.
(i) Resident: n/a.
(ii) Nonresident: n/a.
(iii) Organized athletic event: $25.00.
(iv) 501(c)(3) must submit proof: refer to resident/nonresident category.
(v) Minimum rental: 3 hours.
(H) All Day Rentals (fee listed is per day).
(i) Fields (per): $240.00, 8 hour minimum.
(ii) Concession: $150.00, 6 hour minimum.
1 Concession stand is only available for organized athletic events.
(2) Extras.
(Ordinance 917 adopted 5/19/09)
(A) Field lights: $5.00. This is an hourly rate in addition to the rental rate. (Ordinance 968
adopted 8/9/11)
(B) Keys: $25.00, refundable deposit-additional sign agreement required.
(C) Score board remote: $25.00, refundable deposit-additional sign agreement required.
(D) 2 Concession stand: $150.00, refundable deposit-can be held as a seasonal deposit and
refunded.
(3) Hodgkins Park.
(A) James Hodgkins Pavilion.
(i) Resident: $20.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $25.00.
(iii) Minimum Rental Time: 2 hours.
(B) Entire Park.
(i) Resident: $37.50.
(ii) Nonresident: $37.50.
(iii) Minimum rental time: 4 hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/562
(4) Grand Lake Park. Entire park:
(A) Resident: $37.50.
(B) Nonresident: $37.50.
(C) Minimum rental time: 4 hours.
(5) Rayl Family Park. Covered picnic 3:
(A) Resident: $7.00.
(B) Nonresident: $10.00.
(C) Minimum rental time: 2 hours.
(6) Reynolds Park.
(A) Baseball 3 Practice.
(i) Resident: $4.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $7.50.
(iii) Minimum rental time: 2 hours.
(B) Baseball 4 Practice.
(i) Resident: $4.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $7.50.
(iii) Minimum rental time: 2 hours.
(C) Covered Picnic 4.
(i) Resident: $7.00.
(ii) Nonresident: $10.00.
(iv) Minimum rental time: 2 hours.
(7) Charbonneau Park. Kids and Trees Pavilion:
(A) Resident: $15.00.
(B) Nonresident: $20.00.
(C) Minimum rental time: 2 hours.
(8) Navajo Park. Entire park:
(A) Resident: $37.50.
(B) Nonresident: $37.50.
(C) Minimum rental time: 4 hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/562
(9) Keenum-Shelton Park. Entire park:
(A) Resident: $37.50.
(B) Nonresident: $37.50.
(C) Minimum rental time: 4 hours.
(Ordinance 917 adopted 5/19/09)
(10) Fees Associated with Inclement Weather, Cancellations, and Rescheduling.
(A) Inclement Weather. If inclement weather, including, but not limited to, rain,
thunderstorm, or high wind prohibit a scheduled use, a request must be submitted in writing to
the parks department no later than 5:00 p.m., on the first business day after the reservation day
to request a rescheduled reservation day. Failure to submit request in writing for a reschedule
will result in forfeiture of fees previously paid for the original reservation day. The parks
department will attempt to reschedule the reservation at no additional charge if the requested
rescheduled date is within 30 days of the original reservation, depending on availability. If the
parks department is unable to accommodate areschedule date during that time frame, a 75%
refund will be provided. If the individual or group is unable to work with a reschedule date that
is available within that time frame, a 50% refund will be provided.
(B) Cancellations.
(i) Any cancellation more than 15 calendar days prior to the reserved times are eligible
for a 75% refund. Full refunds are not provided.
(ii) Any cancellation 14 to 7 calendar days prior to the reserved times are eligible for a
50% refund. Full refunds are not provided.
(iii) Any cancellation less than 7 calendar days prior to the reserved times are not
eligible for a refund.
(C) Rescheduling.
(i) With the exception of reschedules under subsection (A) due to inclement weather,
there shall be a $25.00 administrative fee assessed for each reschedule. Reschedule dates
shall not exceed 30 days from the original reservation date.
(ii) Any changes requested less than seven (7) days prior to the reservation date are not
eligible for reschedule and are not eligible for a refund.
(Ordinance 983 adopted 2/14/12)
Sec. 1.606 Posting of Reservations/Notice
(a) The parks supervisor shall post a sign advising the public as to when an area is closed to the public and has
been reserved for an event, stating “Reserved Facility–Up to $500.00 fine for unauthorized entry.”
(b) The parks supervisor is authorized to close a city park or recreational field for maintenance or to protect
surfaces of a park or field and shall post a sign advising the public as to when a park or field is closed for either
purpose, stating “Closed–Do Not Trespass-Up to $500.00 fine for unauthorized entry.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/562
(c) It shall be offense for any person to unlawfully enter or remain in a park or upon a recreational field which
has been designated as closed or reserved. This section shall not apply to peace officers, employees of the city,
and employees of public utility companies in performance of their official duties for purposes of maintaining a
field or park facility.
(Ordinance 900 adopted 1/13/09)
ARTICLE 1.700 LIABILITY ADMINISTRATIVE INSURANCE ACCOUNT
A fund to be known as the “Liability Administrative Insurance Account,” is hereby established and such account
shall be opened in the Lake Worth National Bank with an initial deposit in the amount of $40,211.00. Such fund
shall be administered for the purpose of providing self insurance to protect third persons (liability insurance)
pursuant to policies established by ordinance and the law of this state. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1,
Section 14)
ARTICLE 1.800 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.801 Definition of Municipal (City) Records
All documents, papers, letter, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city, or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city, and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 1, Section 15A)
Sec. 1.802 Additional Definitions
Department Head. The officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the
city, that creates or receives records.
Essential Record. Any record of the city, necessary to the resumption or continuation of the said city in an
emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent Record. Any record of the city, for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given
as permanent.
Records Liaison Officers. The persons designated under Section 1.809 of this article as such.
Records Management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records Management Officer. The person designated in Section 1.805 of this article.
Records Management Plan. The plan developed under Section 1.806 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/562
Records Retention Schedule. A listing issued by the Texas State Library that specifies the time period each
record obtained by the city should be retained.
Retention Period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15B)
Sec. 1.803 City of Lake Worth, Texas, Records Declared Public Property
All municipal or city records as defined in Section 1.801 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of
the city. No municipal or city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property
right to such records even though he or she may have developed, or compiled them. The unauthorized
destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1,
Section 15C)
Sec. 1.804 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal and city records
through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to
their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and
accepted records management practice. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15D)
Sec. 1.805 Designation of Records Management Officer
The city manager or his/her designee and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records
management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or
her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial
designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15E;
Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 1.806 Records Management Plan to be Developed: Approval of Plan; Authority of Plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city, for submission to
the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the
efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those
records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management
officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
department, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city, and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, etc., according to it.
(c) state law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirement of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis
for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15F)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/562
Sec. 1.807 Duties of Records Management Officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures;
(3) in cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for
each municipal or city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order
to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) provide records management advice and assistance to all city department by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library
and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of
municipal and city records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the
records management program and the requirements of state law;
(13) maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and
space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) report annually to the city council on the implementations of the records management plan in
each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13); and
(15) bring to the attention of the city council non-compliance by department heads or other city
personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local
Government Act.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15G)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/562
Sec. 1.808 Duties and Responsibilities of Department Heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city, for the efficient and economical management of the records and in carrying
out the requirements of this article;
(2) adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) keep the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or
other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program of the city, and the requirements of this article.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15H)
Sec. 1.809 Designation of Records Liaison Officers
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the
implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer
determines that in the best interest of the records management program more than one records liaison officer
would be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers
specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly
familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of
the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action
of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly
designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or
her department. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15I)
Sec. 1.810 Duties and Responsibilities of Records Liaison Officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officer shall:
(1) conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation
for the development of records control schedules;
(2) in cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15J)
Sec. 1.811 Records Control Schedules to be Developed; Filing With State
(a) The city adopts records retention schedules that comply with the minimum requirements of records
retention schedules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission.
(b) The records management officer shall complete a declaration of compliance with the records scheduling
requirements of the Local Government Records Act and file it with the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/562
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head, the city attorney and the city finance director.
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian and provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15K)
Sec. 1.812 Implementation of Records Control Schedules Destruction of Records Under Schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under Section 1.806 shall
be implemented by department head and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the
records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the city attorney and the city finance
director.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15L)
Sec. 1.813 Destruction of Unscheduled Records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15M)
Sec. 1.814 Records Center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by Section 1.806, shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the
records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under Section 1.806. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 15N)
ARTICLE 1.900 MULTI-PURPOSE FACILITY*
Sec. 1.901 Fee Schedule for Use of City Multi-Purpose Facility
The hours of use and usage fees for the multi-purpose facility shall be as follows:
(1) Hours of operation. 7 a.m.–12 a.m.
(2) Minimum rental. Two (2) hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/562
(3) Rental times. Include the renter's set up and cleanup time.
Description Resident/Nonprofit 501(c)
(3) Per Hour
Nonresident Per Hour
1 room $25.00 $35.00
2 rooms $40.00 $50.00
3 rooms $55.00 $65.00
2 rooms
w/kitchen
$60.00 $70.00
3 rooms
w/kitchen
$75.00 $85.00
(4) Deposits.
(A) Room usage only: $100.00.
(B) Room usage with kitchen: $200.00.
(C) Refunds: Deposit refunds will be processed and returned within three weeks of the rental
less any sum required to repair damages.
(5) Fees.
(A) Attendant:
(i) After hours: $15.00 per hour.
(ii) Holidays: $25.00 per hour.
(B) Security: $35.00 per hour.
Sec. 1.902 Cancellation Policy
Refunds for cancellations shall be available only as follows:
(1) Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Holiday Rentals.
(A) 90 days or more prior: Full refund minus $25.00 administration fee.
(B) 31–89 days prior: 50% refund of all fees paid.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/562
(C) 30 days or less prior: No refund.
(2) Monday–Thursday Rentals.
(A) 10 days or more prior: Full refund minus $25.00 administration fee.
(B) 6–9 days prior: 50% refund of all fees paid.
(C) 5 days or less prior: No refund.
Sec. 1.903 Policies, Reservations, Applications
All reservations must be made by written application pursuant to the city reservation policy and rental rules and
regulations. Any violation of the city reservation policy or rental rules and regulations by the renter or any
person utilizing the facilities in coordination with the reservation or rental shall be grounds for termination of the
rental agreement, ejection from the multi-purpose facility and/or loss of all rental fees and deposits.
(Ordinance 954 adopted 1/11/11)
ARTICLE 1.1000 NOTICE OF CLAIMS REQUIREMENT*
Before the city shall be liable for death, personal injury or damage to property, all persons who are injured or
whose property is damaged, or who claim to have a cause of action by reason of such death, injury or damage, or
someone in their behalf, shall give the city manager or his/her designee, or the city manager or his/her designee,
notice in writing within six (6) months of the occurrence of the alleged death, injury or damage, reasonably
describing the incident giving rise to the death, injury or damage and stating specifically in such notice when,
where and how the injury or damage was sustained and setting forth the extent and amount of the injury or
damage as accurately as possible. Such notice shall also state the name and residence address of the claimant.
No action at law for damages shall be brought against the city for death, personal injury or damage to property
prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after the above notice has been filed with the city manager or his/her
designee. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to constitute a waiver of any rights, privileges, defenses or
immunities which are available to the city under the common law, the constitution or general laws of the State of
Texas or the United States. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 17; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 1.1100 SEARCH WARRANTS AND ENFORCEMENT ORDERS
Sec. 1.1101 General
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this article:
Enforcement Order. A written order issued by a magistrate authorizing entry by the city onto specified premises
for the purpose of abating a nuisance or other condition which is in violation of city ordinance or State Statute.
inspector. Any official inspector for any department of the city who is charged with the enforcement of city
ordinances, including but not limited to inspectors for the departments of zoning, environmental control,
housing, building inspection, fire inspection and health inspection.
Magistrate. The judge of the municipal court of the city, or any other person or position designated as a
magistrate by state law.
Search Warrant. A written order issued by a magistrate and directed to any inspector or peace officer
commanding him to a specified premises to determine the presence of a violation of any ordinance of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/562
(b) Conflicts; Additional Remedies. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to conflict with any
state or federal law and shall be in addition to any rights granted thereby. The city or any inspector or peace
officer may seek other available enforcement remedies, both civil and criminal, in addition to those allowed by
this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the city or any inspector from performing
inspections or abatement work without the necessity of a warrant or order where authorized by law.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 19A)
Sec. 1.1102 Administrative Search Warrants
(a) Search Warrants Authorized. Except as provided in subsection (b) below, inspectors are hereby authorized
to seek and obtain search warrants from magistrates as provided in this article before making an inspection
incidental to the enforcement of any provision of the zoning ordinance, building code, plumbing code,
mechanical code, electrical code, fire code, or any ordinances related to the use or condition of property or a
nuisance on the property.
(b) Authorized Searches Without a Warrant. Search warrants shall not be required under the following
circumstances:
(1) When permission to inspect the premises has been granted by someone with apparent charge or
control of those premises. For the purpose of this subsection, permission to inspect may be granted
either verbally, in writing or by some other action indicating consent; or
(2) When there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life, limb or property and any delays
resulting from the application for a search warrant would materially increase the likelihood of loss
from such danger or peril; or
(3) When the inspection can be executed by a person who is an invitee on premises held open to
the general public. For the purposes of this subsection, a person ceases to be an invitee when he has
been instructed to leave the premises or otherwise terminate his inspection by someone having charge
or control of those premises; or
(4) When the inspection can be executed from public property or adjacent private property with the
permission of someone with apparent charge or control of such adjacent private property; or
(5) When the inspection is an open fields inspection of or from an unoccupied or undeveloped
area.
(c) Probable Cause for Search Warrant. No search warrant shall be issued pursuant to this article except on the
presentation of evidence of probable cause to believe that a violation is present or that reasonable administrative
standards for conducting an inspection are satisfied with respect to the premises sought to be inspected. A sworn
affidavit setting forth substantial facts toward establishing probable cause or reasonable administrative standards
shall be filed in every instance in which a search warrant is requested. In determining probable cause, the
magistrate shall consider the totality of the circumstances behind the issuance of the search warrant and may
consider and weigh evidence of specific knowledge or any other evidence that a substantial basis exists that a
search warrant would uncover evidence of a violation.
In determining whether reasonable administrative standards are satisfied for the issuance of a warrant, the
magistrate may consider and weigh the following:
(1) The age and general condition of the premises;
(2) Previous violations or hazards found present on the premises and the scope and objects of the
search;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/562
(3) The type of premises;
(4) The purposes for which the premises are used;
(5) The presence of hazards or violations and the general condition of premises near the premises
sought to be inspected; or
(6) The passage of time since a previous inspection.
(d) Content of a Search Warrant. A search warrant issued pursuant to this article shall be sufficient if it
contains the following requisites:
(1) It run in the name of the “State of Texas;”
(2) It identify as near as may be the premises to be inspected, and the scope and objects of the
search;
(3) It command an inspector or peace officer to inspect forthwith the premises described; and
(4) It be dated and signed by the magistrate.
(e) Execution of Search Warrant. The inspector shall, upon going to the premises ordered to be inspected, give
notice of his purpose to the person who has charge or control of the premises described in the warrant. If such
person cannot be found, a search may be conducted in accordance with the search warrant provided that a copy
of the warrant shall be affixed to the front door of the building or gate of the premises inspected. In every
instance, entry shall be effected using the minimum force necessary according to the circumstances.
(f) Days Allowed for Search Warrant to Run. An inspector to whom a search warrant is delivered shall
execute it without delay and forthwith return it to the proper magistrate. The time allowed for the execution of a
search warrant shall be three (3) whole days exclusive of the day of its issuance and of the day of its execution,
or such shorter period as may be ordered by the magistrate. The magistrate issuing a search warrant under the
provisions of this article shall endorse on such search warrant the date and hour of the issuance of the same.
Upon returning the search warrant, the inspector shall state on the back of same or on some paper attached to it,
the manner in which it has been executed and shall likewise deliver to the magistrate a copy of the report
resulting from that inspection. The magistrate shall keep a record of all proceedings had before him in the cases
of search warrants as part of the official records of his court.
(g) Power of inspector Executing Search Warrant. In the execution of a search warrant, the inspector may call
to his aid any number of citizens in the city who shall be bound to aid in the execution of same. Any person
interfering with the execution of a lawful search warrant, issued pursuant to this article, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The execution of a search warrant issued pursuant to this article shall not include any authority to
seize tangible goods or any authority to make arrests without the assistance of a peace officer.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 19B)
Sec. 1.1103 Administrative Enforcement Orders
(a) Enforcement Orders Authorized. Where civil enforcement by the city is authorized by ordinance or statute,
inspectors are hereby authorized to seek and obtain an administrative enforcement order from the magistrate
authorizing entry upon private property for the purpose of abating any public nuisance or other violation of an
ordinance or statute which adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare. The inspector shall present to
the magistrate a sworn affidavit setting forth substantial facts establishing that a violation of the city ordinance
or state statute exists and that requisite notice has been given under the ordinance or statute. The magistrate shall
issue an enforcement order if he determines:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/562
(1) That facts exist to show that a violation of a statute or ordinance has occurred;
(2) That the abatement of the nuisance or violation is in the best interest of the public health, safety
or welfare; and
(3) That the proposed abatement action is reasonable under the circumstances.
(b) Content of Enforcement Order. An enforcement order issued by a magistrate pursuant to this article shall
contain the following requisites:
(1) That it identify as near as may be the premises which are in violation of ordinance or statute;
(2) That it reasonably specify the scope of the work or improvements to be performed by the city
in abating the violation;
(3) That it set forth such other requirements or conditions as the magistrate deems necessary to
assure that the premises will be adequately protected and that the work or improvements are no
greater than is reasonably necessary to abate all conditions which adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare;
(4) That it specify a reasonable amount of time in which to carry out such enforcement order.
(c) Authorized Entry Without an Enforcement Order. An administrative enforcement order shall not be
required under the following circumstances:
(1) When permission to perform the abatement work or improvements has been granted by
someone with apparent charge or control of the premises. For purposes of this subsection, permission
may be granted either verbally, in writing or by some other action indicating consent; or
(2) Where there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life, limb or property and any delays
resulting from the application for an enforcement order would materially increase the likelihood of
loss from such danger or peril; and
(3) When the abatement work or improvements are on open fields or unoccupied or undeveloped
areas.
(d) Power of inspector Executing Enforcement Order. The execution of an enforcement order, the inspector
may call to his aid any number of citizens in the city who shall be bound to aid in the execution of same. Any
person interfering with the execution of a lawful enforcement order issued pursuant to this article shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(e) Execution of Enforcement Order. The inspector shall, upon entering the premises for the purpose of
abatement, give notice of his purpose to the person who has charge or control of the premises. If such person
cannot be found, the work may be performed in accordance with the enforcement order provided that a copy of
the order shall be affixed to the front door of the building or gate of the premises. In every instance, entry shall
be effected using the minimum force necessary according to the circumstances.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 19C)
ARTICLE 1.1200 UNIFORM EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES*
Sec. 1.1201 Statutory Authority
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/562
This article is enacted by city (“this jurisdiction”), pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code § 773.051, which
provides that local governments may establish standards for ambulances, and pursuant to Tex. Government Code
Chapter 791, which authorizes combinations of local governmental units to contract for the provision of
governmental services, including the creation of administrative agencies to promote public health and welfare.
Sec. 1.1202 General Purposes and Intent of Article
It is the purpose of this article:
(1) To establish a regulated prehospital emergency medical services and medical transportation
system which can provide quality clinical care with performance measures and standards, with the
goal of facilitating the best possible outcomes for each patient;
(2) To establish a mobile integrated healthcare program with effective medical direction and
quality assurance and review;
(3) To form an administrative agency to administer and operate the prehospital emergency medical
services and medical transportation system in a service area comprised of member jurisdictions and
to administer and operate the mobile integrated healthcare program;
(4) To designate the administrative agency as the sole-provider of emergency and nonemergency
ambulance service within this jurisdiction to maintain consistent, high-quality service while
controlling costs through efficiencies and economies of scale;
(5) To provide for effective medical direction by establishing a multi-jurisdictional emergency
physicians advisory board to advise the administrative agency's board and, through the agency's
office of the medical director, to oversee and regulate all clinical aspects of prehospital emergency
medical services, the administrative agency's mobile integrated healthcare program, and medical
transportation which affect patient care in the service area; and
(6) To provide for effective coordination and communication between first responder agencies in
the service area, the emergency physicians advisory board, and the board of the administrative
agency by establishing a multi-jurisdictional first responder advisory board.
Sec. 1.1203 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Advanced Life Support. Out-of-hospital care that uses invasive medical acts (as defined in Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 773.003(1).
Aeromedical Transportation Unit. Any rotary or fixed wing aircraft providing basic or advanced life support
services and patient transportation that originates within the service area.
Ambulance Mutual Aid Agreement. A written agreement between the authority and one or more entities whereby
the signing parties agree to provide backup ambulance service to one another under the terms and conditions
specified in the agreement.
Ambulance Service. The transportation of patients by emergency or nonemergency ambulance.
Associate Medical Director. A licensed physician who assists the medical director in carrying out EPAB's duties
under this article through the OMD.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/562
Authority (Metropolitan Area EMS Authority). The public administrative agency, formerly known as the area
metropolitan ambulance authority, established to administer and operate the medical transportation and
prehospital emergency medical services system and the MIH program established by this article.
Basic Life Support. Out-of-hospital care that uses noninvasive medical acts (as defined in § 773.003(2), Tex.
Health and Safety Code).
Board. The board of directors of the authority.
Emergency Care Attendant. A person certified as an “emergency care attendant” under § 773.046 of the Tex.
Health and Safety Code.
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT). A person certified as an “emergency medical technician” under §
773.047 or an “advanced emergency medical technician” under § 773.048 of the Tex. Health and Safety Code,
and any other class of EMT recognized by state law or regulation.
EMS Communications Center. The single facility designated by the authority as the central communications
center from which all services offered by the authority shall be dispatched and controlled.
First Responder. Any agency that provides first response to requests for emergency medical services and, in
cooperation with the ambulance service, provides immediate on-scene care to ill or injured persons but does not
transport those persons to healthcare facilities.
Medical Director. The licensed physician appointed by EPAB who is responsible for carrying out EPAB's duties
and for directing the office of the medical director.
Medical Transportation. The transportation of patients by ambulance, specialized mobile intensive care unit,
specialty care transport, or aeromedical transportation unit, including both emergency and nonemergency
transports, where such transportation originates within the service area.
MIH Associate Medical Director. An associate medical director who is specifically tasked with assisting the
medical director in overseeing the clinical aspects of the authority's MIH program.
Mobile Integrated Healthcare (MIH). Services provided by the authority that are designed to enhance,
coordinate, effectively manage, and integrate out of hospital care, in order to improve outcomes, enhance the
client's experience of care, and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare services provided to the
enrolled clients.
Office of Medical Director. The clinical office of the authority through which EPAB carries out its rights and
duties under this article. The office of the medical director is comprised of the medical director, the MIH
associate medical director and any other associate medical directors, and the employees of the authority who are
assigned to the office of the medical director to assist the medical directors in carrying out EPAB's rights and
duties under this article.
Paramedic. A person qualified as a certified or licensed “paramedic” as defined by Tex. Health and Safety Code
Sections 773.049 and 773.0495.
Patient. An individual who is ill, sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated, and in need of or at risk of
needing medical care at the scene of a medical emergency or during transport to or from a healthcare facility.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, governmental entity, or other group, or a
combination of the same acting as a unit.
Restated Interlocal Cooperative Agreement. The interlocal contract, as it may be amended from time to time,
adopted by this jurisdiction concurrently with the passage of this article pursuant to chapter 791 of the Tex.
Government Code (the Interlocal Cooperation Act).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/562
Service Area. That geographical area which is contained within the boundaries of all the jurisdictions which
become members of the authority by adopting this uniform EMS ordinance and executing the restated interlocal
cooperative agreement.
Special Event. Any public event located within the service area for which standby ambulance service is arranged
in advance, and for which an ambulance is hired by the sponsor of the event or other interested party.
Specialty Care Transport. The transportation of a critically injured or ill patient at a level of service beyond the
scope of the EMT-paramedic when the patient's condition requires ongoing care that must be furnished by one or
more health professionals in an appropriate specialty area; for example, emergency or critical care nursing,
emergency medicine, respiratory care, cardiovascular care, or a paramedic with additional training.
Specialized Mobile Intensive Care Unit. A vehicle which is specially constructed, equipped, staffed, and
employed in the inter-facility transport of patients whose requirements for en route medical support are likely to
exceed the clinical capabilities of an advanced life support ambulance.
Sec. 1.1204 Emergency Physicians Advisory Board
(a) There is hereby created an emergency physicians advisory board (“EPAB”) which, acting through the
office of the medical director, shall, on behalf of this jurisdiction, oversee and regulate all clinical aspects of
medical transportation, the authority's MIH program, and prehospital emergency medical services in this
jurisdiction, including such services provided by the authority and first responders, and shall exercise
independent professional judgment in all matters related to patient care.
(b) EPAB's membership and other matters relating to EPAB shall be set forth in the restated interlocal
cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by the EPAB.
Sec. 1.1205 Metropolitan Area EMS Authority
(a) By adopting this article and executing and approving the restated interlocal cooperative agreement, this
jurisdiction has joined the authority, which shall now be known as the metropolitan area EMS authority.
(b) The authority shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) The authority is hereby designated as the sole provider of ambulance service and special event
ambulance standby service within this jurisdiction, whether directly or indirectly through contractors,
pursuant to the terms, conditions and provisions of the restated interlocal cooperative agreement,
except for those services exempted by section 1.1207(b) of this article.
(2) The authority shall comply with all terms of the restated interlocal cooperative agreement and
have all the powers and duties enumerated therein.
(3) The authority is required to provide this jurisdiction with basic and advanced life support
ambulance service in accordance with system performance standards and all applicable law, rules and
regulations, as well as all patient care standards that EPAB may from time to time promulgate.
(4) The authority is authorized to operate an MIH program on a nonexclusive basis in this
jurisdiction.
(5) The authority shall enter into a first responder agreement with this jurisdiction and may issue,
suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the delivery of first responder services in this jurisdiction by
other agencies, subject to the credentialing process by EPAB and the office of the medical director
and subject to rights of appeal to the board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/562
(6) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the operation of specialized
mobile intensive care units and for specialty care transport within the service area, including
standards limiting the types of patients which may be transported thereby, and, subject to the
credentialing process by EPAB and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke,
and renew permits for the operation of such units as required by this article.
(7) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the operation of aeromedical
transportation units within the service area, including standards defining the circumstances under
which such units may be deployed to emergency scenes and, subject to the credentialing process by
EPAB and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the
operation of such units as required by this article.
(8) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the provision of special event
ambulance standby service within the service area and, subject to the credentialing process by EPAB
and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the
provision of such ambulance standby service.
(c) The authority board's membership and other matters relating to the authority shall be set forth in the
restated interlocal cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by the authority's board.
Sec. 1.1206 First Responder Advisory Board
(a) There is hereby created a first responder advisory board (“FRAB”) which shall advise and inform the
authority and EPAB on matters related to first response and prehospital emergency medical services in the
service area.
(b) The FRAB's membership and other matters relating to the board shall be set forth in the restated interlocal
cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by the FRAB.
Sec. 1.1207 Violations
(a) It shall be unlawful:
(1) To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance or aeromedical
transportation unit;
(2) To perform duties as an ECA, EMT, paramedic or emergency ambulance dispatcher without
current credentials issued by the office of the medical director, unless participating in a training
program approved by office of the medical director;
(3) To permit a person to work as an ECA, EMT, paramedic or emergency ambulance dispatcher
without current credentials issued by the office of the medical director, unless participating in a
training program approved by office of the medical director;
(4) To use, or cause to be used, any ambulance service other than the authority, except as permitted
in subsection (b) below;
(5) For any person or entity other than the authority to provide ambulance service within this
jurisdiction, unless pursuant to a written agreement with the authority;
(6) For any person to provide medical transportation originating in the service area without a
permit issued by the authority;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/562
(7) For any agency to provide first responder services without a first responder permit issued by
the authority, unless pursuant to a first responder agreement with the authority or a written automatic
aid or mutual aid agreement with this jurisdiction;
(8) To use an ambulance for the transportation of persons other than in connection with the
transportation of a patient.
(b) It shall be a defense to any alleged violation of this section that a vehicle is being used or service is
provided solely in any of the following manners:
(1) As a privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of transporting persons who
are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless;
(2) Rendering service as an ambulance at the request of the EMS communications center upon the
declaration of a disaster by this jurisdiction, the state, or the United States; or a declaration of a major
catastrophe or extreme system overload by the chief executive officer of the authority;
(3) Any ambulance owned or operated by the federal or state government;
(4) Ambulance mutual aid calls when rendered pursuant to an ambulance mutual aid agreement
approved by the authority;
(5) Special event ambulance standby coverage, so long as such service is provided without charge
by an emergency medical services volunteer provider, as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code §
773.003(13), or the authority has first declined to provide coverage and the entity providing coverage
has been issued a permit by the authority;
(6) Wheelchair transport services for persons other than patients, when the service is not provided
by ambulance; and
(7) Medical transportation of a patient where the transport originates outside the service area.
Sec. 1.1208 Penalties
(a) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of section 1.1207 shall be guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 (Tex. Penal Code §.12.23).
(b) This section does not serve to limit any other remedies available to the jurisdiction in law or equity.
(c) Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 1.1209 Traffic Laws; Exemption
When the driver of an emergency medical response vehicle has reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency
exists, as determined by the EMS communication center, the vehicle shall be treated as an “authorized
emergency vehicle” within the meaning of chapter 546 of the Tex. Transp. Code and shall be exempt from traffic
laws as provided therein.
(Ordinance 1075, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/17)
ARTICLE 1.1300 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES
Sec. 1.1301 Fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/562
The city will charge for fingerprinting services for noncriminal or noncity purposes at a fee of:
(1) Nonresidents of the city: $10.00 per card.
(2) Residents of the city: $6.00 per card.
Sec. 1.1302 Time Schedule
The days and times fingerprinting services will be available shall be determined and established by the chief of
police or his/her designee.
(Ordinance 1026 adopted 5/13/14)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 2.101 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult dog/cat. Any dog or cat four months of age or older.
Animal. Any living creature, including but not limited to, dogs, cats, pigs, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, insects,
fowl and livestock, but specifically excluding humans.
Animal control authority. The animal services division of the city or its designee as determined by the city council,
which is authorized to represent and act for the city to receive reports of animal nuisances, animals at-large, animal bites,
and other animal matters, and to investigate bite reports, ensure quarantine of possibly rabid animals, carry out provisions
of state law pertaining to control and eradication of rabies and otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Animal shelter. Any facility designated and/or operated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals
held under authority of this chapter.
At-large. Any animal of any family or breed, other than a cat, which is not completely confined by a building, cage,
container, wall, leash, rope, chain, vehicle, or fence of sufficient construction to restrain the animal, whether on or off the
owner's premises. An animal being physically held by the owner within the limits of the owner's private property is not an
animal running at-large.
At-large cat. Any cat which is off the premises of its owner and not secured within a vehicle and/or restrained by means
of a crate, carrier, leash, or other physical apparatus to preclude the animal from making any unsolicited contact with any
person, their clothing, their property, and/or their premises. Any cat intruding upon the property of any person other than
the cat's owner shall be deemed at-large.
Bodily injury. Physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical condition.
Cat. A domesticated member of the Family Felidae (felis catus).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/562
City. The City of Lake Worth, Texas.
City limits. The corporate city limits of the City of Lake Worth, Texas.
Collar. Any collar constructed of nylon, leather, or similar material, specifically designed to be used for the type of animal
wearing or being restrained by it.
Cruel treatment. Any treatment to any animal in violation of the Texas Penal Code.
Currently vaccinated. Vaccinated for rabies and satisfying the following criteria:
(1) The owner of each dog or cat shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies before four
months of age and shall obtain a booster for the dog or cat within 12 month of the initial vaccination.
After the dog or cat has received its booster, the dog or cat shall be revaccinated:
(A) No longer than 12 months thereafter for one-year-dose vaccinations; or
(B) No longer than every 36 months thereafter for three-year-dose vaccinations.
Dangerous animal. An animal that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or other domestic animal that causes bodily injury
and that occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was
reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being
kept and that was certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts
cause a person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person.
Dangerous wild animal. All species of animals which commonly exist in a natural, unconfined state and are usually not
domesticated, regardless of the circumstances or duration of captivity, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) A lion;
(2) A tiger;
(3) An ocelot;
(4) A cougar;
(5) A leopard;
(6) A cheetah;
(7) A jaguar;
(8) A bobcat;
(9) A lynx;
(10) A serval;
(11) A caracal;
(12) A hyena;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/562
(13) A bear;
(14) A coyote:
(15) A jackal;
(16) A baboon;
(17) A chimpanzee;
(18) An orangutan;
(19) A gorilla;
(20) A skunk;
(21) A raccoon;
(22) A panther;
(23) A fox;
(24) A javelina;
(25) A wolf;
(26) A python;
(27) A boa constrictor;
(28) A crocodile;
(29) An alligator;
(30) Any poisonous reptile; and
(31) Any hybrid of an animal listed in this definition.
Dog. Any domesticated member of the family Canidae, but shall not include a wolf, jackal, coyote, fox or other dangerous
wild animal of this family or hybrid thereof.
Fowl. Chickens, turkeys, pheasant, quail, geese, ducks, ostriches, emus, pigeons, or similar feathered animals regardless of
age, sex or breed.
Fowl shelter. A farm building or structure specifically designed and constructed to constrain fowl within its confines that
provides adequate space for movement and exercise; adequate ventilation, and shelter from sun, wind, cold, and moisture;
provides sufficient shade to protect the animal from the direct rays of the sun at all times; and which is cleaned and
sanitized. Fowl shelter may include, but is not limited to, a pen, coop or hutch.
Hybrid. The product of mating two different species of animal regardless of the number of generations born since that
original mating.
Kennel. Any premises where any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, or selling
dogs, cats, or other animals and that is located within the corporate limits of the city on property zoned to allow such use as
outlined in the city's zoning regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/562
Livestock. Horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, emus, and ostriches, and any member of the order Ungulata (such
as antelope, deer, bison and camels) regardless of age, sex, size or breed.
Nuisance animal. Any animal which negatively impacts the health, safety, property, or environment of another animal or
person, including, but not limited to, any animal which:
(1) Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
(2) Attacks other domestic animals;
(3) Trespasses on school grounds;
(4) Is repeatedly at-large;
(5) Climbs upon a motor vehicle belonging to another;
(6) Damages private or public property not belonging to the animal's owner;
(7) Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion;
(8) Tears, punctures, or otherwise opens refuse containers, causing their contents to be emptied or
exposed to the elements;
(9) Causes fouling of the air by odor, thereby creating an unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to
a person of ordinary sensibilities in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or
harbored;
(10) Defecates on any property except that belonging to the animal's owner; or
(11) Interferes with refuse collection or other service personnel.
Owner. Any person, firm or corporation that has a right of property in an animal or that has care, control, custody or
possession of an animal or that provides a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of
three consecutive days.
Performing animal exhibition. Any spectacle, display, or act or event other than circuses in which animals perform
tricks, feats, or other exhibitions of training.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, or other entity.
Pet shop. An establishment offering small animals such as dogs, cats, birds, fish, ferrets, and similar animals which are
not dangerous wild animals or livestock, for sale, and that is located within the corporate limits of the city on property
zoned to allow such use as outlined in the city's zoning regulations.
Properly fitted. With respect to a collar, a collar that measures the circumference of the animal's neck plus at least one
inch.
Registration. The requirement for all dogs and cats and any animal declared to be dangerous to be registered annually
with the city, for all relevant fees to be paid, and for all animals to be wearing appropriate city-issued registration tag(s).
Restraint. A chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device that attaches an animal to a stationary object or trolley
system.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area that is locked; capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
capable of preventing the escape or release of an animal; and, if applicable, clearly marked as containing a dangerous
animal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/562
Serious bodily injury. An injury characterized by bite wounds or ripping and tearing of muscle and/or bodily tissues that
would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization
without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment.
Service personnel. Any person providing legitimate, authorized service to a property including, but not limited to, public
safety personnel; utility technicians; letter carriers, couriers, or delivery personnel; plumbers, electricians, lawn
maintenance workers, pest control professionals, or contractors; and others in comparable service professions.
Spay or neuter. A medical procedure removing the reproductive organs or otherwise rendering a dog or cat unable to
reproduce.
Sterilization. The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat or the use of nonsurgical methods or
technologies approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration or the United States Department of Agricultural
to permanently render the animal unable to reproduce.
Swine. Pigs, hogs, potbellied pigs, or any member of the family Suidae.
Unprovoked. The animal was not hit, kicked, struck, pulled, pinched, squeezed, etc. by a person or an object, and the
animal was not provoked or taunted in a manner that an ordinary person would find unreasonable or objectionable.
Vaccinated. Properly injected with a rabies vaccine licensed for use in that species by the United States Department of
Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state.
ARTICLE 2.200 RABIES CONTROL
Sec. 2.201 Vaccinations
An owner of a dog, cat, or other animal for which a rabies vaccination is commonly given shall keep the animal
currently vaccinated against rabies. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall
comply with this article within ten days after moving into the city, except when the animal has inflicted a bite on
a human within the previous ten days. In such case, the owner of the animal shall report the bite to the
veterinarian and the city's animal control authority within 24 hours of the animal's arrival in the city. No rabies
vaccine shall be administered until after the ten-day observation period.
Sec. 2.202 Certificate of vaccination
Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the animal as evidence thereof a
vaccination certificate on a form furnished by the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy.
The certificate shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated animal;
(2) The date of vaccination;
(3) The year and number of the rabies tag; and
(4) The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated animal.
Sec. 2.203 Rabies tags
(a) Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in section 2.202, the
owner of the animal shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/562
(1) Outfit the animal with a collar or harness;
(2) Affix a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number,
bearing the year of issuance and the name and address of the issuing veterinarian to the collar or
harness; and
(3) Require the animal to wear the collar or harness with the attached metal tag at all times.
(b) Duplicate tags: In the event of loss or destruction of the original tag provided in this section, the owner of
the animal shall obtain a duplicate tag from the veterinarian who administered the vaccination. Vaccination
certificates and tags shall be valid only for the animal for which they were originally issued.
Sec. 2.204 Animals exposed to rabies
Any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to have been, or suspected of being,
exposed to rabies shall report such knowledge to the animal control authority within 24 hours, giving any
information which may be required. Any animal that has been, or is suspected of having been, exposed to rabies
shall be quarantined in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 826.
ARTICLE 2.300 ANNUAL REGISTRATION
(a) Required. The owner of a dog or cat that is four months of age or older must register each such dog or cat
with the city. A registration may be obtained in person or by mail upon providing:
(1) A certificate of vaccination for the cat or dog showing that the cat or dog has received a rabies
vaccination within the last 36 months and including the following information:
(A) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat;
(B) The date of vaccination;
(C) The year and number of the rabies tag;
(D) The breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat; and
(E) Whether the dog or cat is neutered, spayed, or intact; and
(2) The payment of the registration fee as set by the city council.
(b) Metal tag. The city will issue a metal tag for the dog or cat upon the registration. The owner of the dog or
cat shall attach the current registration tag to a collar or harness that is worn at all times by the dog or cat. All
registration tags shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance.
(c) Duplicate tags. The owner of a dog or cat may obtain a duplicate registration tag upon payment of a
duplicate tag fee and presentation of the receipt showing payment of the current year's registration fee.
(d) Renewal. The owner of a dog or cat shall annually renew the registration with the city. The same proof of
current rabies vaccination and payment of the registration fee that is required for the initial registration is
required for a renewal.
(e) New residents. A person moving into the city from an area outside of the city has 30 days to comply with
this article.
(f) Guard or attack dogs. The owner of a guard or attack dog shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/562
(1) Indicate on the registration application that the dog is a guard or attack dog and the location
and hours of presence of the dog;
(2) Register the guard or attack dog with the police department; and
(3) Conspicuously post warning signs stating “guard dog on premises” in letters not less than 2
inches high at the location or premises where the guard or attack dog is confined.
ARTICLE 2.400 ANIMAL BITES TO HUMANS
Sec. 2.401 Reporting animal bites
(a) A person having knowledge of an animal bite to a human, except bites by rodents, rabbits, fowl, or
reptiles, shall report the incident to the animal control authority as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours
after the time of the incident. The animal control authority will investigate each bite incident.
(b) Any person moving into the city from a location outside the city limits and owning an animal which has
inflicted a bite on any person in the last ten days, shall report such fact to the veterinarian and the animal control
authority within 24 hours of the animal's arrival in the city limits.
Sec. 2.402 Owner responsibility
If the biting animal is owned, the owner shall place that animal in quarantine, as prescribed in article 2.500
below.
ARTICLE 2.500 PROCEDURES FOR ANIMAL QUARANTINE
Sec. 2.501 Disposition of biting animals
The owner of an animal subject to quarantine pursuant to this chapter is required to quarantine the animal for a
period of not less than ten days confinement from the date of the bite, at the owner's expense. The quarantine
may be accomplished by:
(1) Quarantine in the animal shelter, supervised by the local animal control authority;
(2) Quarantine at a veterinary clinic, supervised by a licensed veterinarian; or
(3) The owner of the animal may request permission from the animal control authority for home
quarantine, which may be granted if the following requirements are met:
(A) A secure enclosure approved by the animal control authority will be used to prevent
escape.
(B) The animal has been vaccinated against rabies and the time elapsed since the most recent
vaccination has not exceeded the manufacturer recommendations for the vaccine. If an
unvaccinated animal is not over 16 weeks of age at the time of the potential exposure, it may be
allowed home confinement.
(C) During the confinement period, the animal's owner must monitor the animal's behavior
and health status and immediately notify the local rabies control authority if any change is
noted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/562
(D) The animal was not a stray as defined in the Texas Health and Safety Code, section
826.002, at the time of the potential exposure.
Sec. 2.502 Observation of the animal
The animal control authority or a licensed veterinarian must observe the animal at least on the first and last days
of the quarantine period. If the animal becomes ill during the observation period, the person having possession
of the animal shall notify the animal control authority as soon as the animal presents with symptoms of any
illness.
Sec. 2.503 Destruction of animal
If the biting animal cannot be maintained in secure quarantine, it shall be humanely destroyed and the brain
submitted to a Texas Department of State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. The owner of
the animal may be requested to reimburse the expense of shipping the brain of the animal.
Sec. 2.504 Interruption
A person commits an offense if the person interrupts the observation period by removing an animal from the
quarantine facility approved by the animal control authority. Any interruption of the quarantine by any person
shall be just cause for seizure and impoundment of the quarantined animal by the animal control authority.
Sec. 2.505 Release
(a) An animal that has been quarantined may be released by the animal control authority under the following
conditions:
(1) At the end of the observation period, if the owner can provide proof that the animal is currently
vaccinated;
(2) When all applicable fees have been paid; and
(3) If the animal is not being impounded for legal proceedings.
(b) If, by the end of the observation period, the owner cannot provide proof that the animal is currently
vaccinated, the animal control authority will conditionally release the animal with a voucher for rabies
vaccination paid for by the animal's owner. The owner commits an offense if (s)he does not provide proof of
vaccination to the animal control authority within one business day of the animal's release from quarantine.
Sec. 2.506 Dangerous wild animals
No dangerous wild animal will be placed in quarantine. Any dangerous wild animal involved in a biting incident
will be humanely euthanized and the brain shall be submitted to a Texas Department of State Health Services
certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
Sec. 2.507 Disposition of unclaimed, quarantined animal
The veterinarian or animal control authority may sell the animal and retain the proceeds or keep, grant, or
destroy an animal if the owner or custodian does not take possession of the animal before the fourth day
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/562
following the final day of the quarantine period.
ARTICLE 2.600 ANIMALS IN CITY ATHLETIC FIELDS
Sec. 2.601 General regulations
(a) Dogs are prohibited within the spectator and playing field areas at city parks. Dogs are permitted in the
parking lot, pedestrian trail and other undeveloped areas of the city parks.
(b) This article does not apply to a service animal if:
(1) The service animal is under the control of its disabled owner and the animal does not pose a
direct threat to the health or safety of others; or
(2) The service animal is otherwise permitted in accordance with state or federal law.
ARTICLE 2.700 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS
Sec. 2.701 Number of dogs and cats
Except as provided by this article, no residence within the city shall harbor more than four adult dogs, four adult cats, or
four adult dogs and cats in any combination. No residence within the city shall harbor more than one litter of puppies or
one litter of kittens at any given time.
Sec. 2.702 Multi-pet permit
Any person desiring to keep more than four adult dogs and/or cats or more than one litter of puppies or kittens at
a residence may apply with the animal control authority for a multi-pet permit. The applicant shall pay an
application fee at the time of filing.
(1) The animal control authority is authorized to issue such a permit if the following conditions are
met:
(A) An applicant provides the animal control authority with information concerning the
maximum number of animals to be kept at any one time at such premises and a record search
indicates that no enforcement action for violations of this chapter dealing with nuisances has
been necessary within the preceding 12 months; and
(B) The animal control authority inspects the property; inspection to include interviews with
occupants of all immediately adjacent properties, and deems it appropriate for housing multiple
pets based on criteria including, but not limited to:
(i) Facilities shall be of sufficient size as to allow each animal to move about freely.
Size of the facility shall be in proportion to the size of the individual animal's height and
weight.
(ii) Adequate food and water must be provided so that each and all animals kept shall
be maintained in good health and free of malnutrition and/or dehydration.
(iii) The said premises shall be kept in a sanitary condition and reasonably free of
animal waste, parasites, insects, and flies that could be harmful to the animal's health
and/or to the health of the general public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/562
(iv) The animals and the facility must be kept free of odor or stench which is offensive
to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
(v) The animals must be maintained in a manner which does not pose a danger to the
health of the animals themselves or adjacent animals.
(vi) The animals must not cause noise which is offensive or disturbing to a person of
ordinary sensibilities on adjoining or adjacent premises.
(vii) All animals must be vaccinated and must wear current tags at all times in
accordance with this chapter.
(2) Fees for the issuance of a multi-pet permit shall be set by city council.
(3) Such permit may be revoked by the animal control authority for cause, including but not
limited to, violations of the provisions of this chapter or the inability of the permit holder to keep the
animals in a healthy or sanitary environment.
(4) Multi-pet permits must be renewed annually and each renewal will require inspection and
approval by the animal control authority or its designee.
(5) Any person either denied a multi-pet permit, or who has had their permit revoked, may file an
appeal with the city manager. Such appeal must be made in writing within ten days of receiving
written notice from the animal control authority of the permit denial or revocation. If no appeal
request is filed within the ten-day period, the denial or revocation of the permit becomes final. Upon
receiving an appeal, the city manager or his/her designee shall hold a hearing at a time and place of
his/her designation. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the city manager or his/her
designee shall make a final finding.
(6) Changes in residence or ownership. Multi-pet permits are issued for specific owners of a
specific property. Application for a new multi-pet permit will be required if:
(A) The original permit holder moves to a new residence within the city limits and wishes to
keep more than four adult dogs/cats or more than one litter of puppies/kittens on the new
property; or
(B) Ownership of the property for which a permit was originally issued changes and the new
owners desire to keep more than four adult dogs/cats or more than one litter of puppies/kittens.
ARTICLE 2.800 KENNEL/PET SHOP REQUIREMENTS
Kennels and pet shops must be operated and all animals must be cared for in accordance with the Texas Health and Safety
Code and this chapter.
ARTICLE 2.900 PROHIBITED ANIMALS
Sec. 2.901 Dangerous wild animals
A person commits an offense if the person keeps a dangerous wild animal within the city. It is an affirmative
defense to prosecution for this violation that the dangerous wild animal is kept as part of a circus, performing
animal exhibition, zoological park, or to individuals keeping wild animals as properly permitted wildlife
rehabilitators, as required by state and federal regulations.
Sec. 2.902 Swine
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/562
A person commits an offense if the person keeps swine on any property within the city limits.
Sec. 2.903 Livestock and fowl
Livestock and fowl, that are kept, owned or harbored within a land use zoning classification allowing same shall
constitute a nuisance if any such animal is kept, fenced, stabled, or pastured within 100 feet of an occupied
building. The term “occupied building” as used herein shall mean a building occupied by any person, other than
buildings and structures owned or controlled by the owner of the animals involved. This section does not apply
to “occupied buildings” constructed after the keeping of any livestock and/or fowl is in place.
(1) Any animal of the order Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison and camels) may not be kept
on parcels of land of less than five acres and which are not zoned for agricultural use.
(2) Pigeons kept for purposes of competition and registered with a recognized association of
pigeon fanciers shall be an exception to this article, provided that:
(A) A person may not keep more than 20 pigeons at one location.
(B) The enclosure for such birds is maintained in a sanitary and odor-free condition, and is
located no less than 50 feet from an adjacent residential or commercial structure, excluding the
residence or business of the owner.
Sec. 2.904 Exceptions for keeping of certain fowl
For the purposes of this section, fowl shall be limited to female chickens, hens. A person commits an offense if
the person knowingly:
(1) Keeps or maintains more than four fowl;
(2) Keeps or maintains fowl in an adequate fowl shelter, including the fenced run, at a distance
closer than 25 feet of an “occupied building” as defined in section 2.903;
(3) Fails to provide an adequate fowl shelter as defined in section 2.101;
(4) Keeps or maintains fowl in the front yard area;
(5) Fails to provide fowl with fresh, clean water and food;
(6) Fails to store fowl feed in secure containers protected from rodents, insects and other animals;
(7) Keeps or maintains roosters;
(8) Slaughters fowl;
(9) Fails to keep or maintain fowl within a fowl shelter, pen, coop or hutch as defined in section
2.101. A fenced yard shall not qualify as a pen, coop or hutch;
(10) Keeps or maintains fowl in a manner that creates offensive odors, fly breeding, or any other
nuisance or condition that is injurious to the public safety, or welfare;
(11) Sells eggs for profit. Any eggs produced by fowl permitted under this section shall be for
personal use only;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/562
(12) Fails to allow an animal control officer to inspect the fowl shelter, pen, coop, or hutch and
related premises.
Sec. 2.905 Exception for keeping swine and certain animals
Exception for keeping swine and certain animals for bona fide or accredited educational purposes at a high school
agricultural facility. It is an exception to the application of this article that otherwise prohibited animals, including swine
and other livestock and farm animals including, sheep, swine, goats, horses and cattle may be housed, pastured and fed
within the city limits for certain educational purposes at a high school agricultural facility. The exemption extended above
to high school agricultural facilities shall apply only to facilities situated upon property that is owned and maintained by a
public-school district or a private school. The exception described herein does not include declared dangerous animals as
defined herein or state law.
(1) Eligibility to keep certain animals. In order to keep any of the animals listed in section for
educational purposes, the person responsible for the care and feeding of the animal or animals shall
be enrolled as a student in a vocational agriculture course sanctioned by the state education agency,
and such animals must be maintained by the student as a vocational agriculture project the
maintenance of which will affect that student's grade.
(2) Immunizations. All animals maintained for educational purposes shall be given any
immunizations ordinarily required for the responsible maintenance of that particular breed and
species. Certification of such immunization shall be provided by the vocational agriculture instructor
upon request by a city inspector.
(3) Certification to be provided on request. Certification of any animal as a vocational agriculture
project shall be provided at the request of a city inspector by the vocational agriculture instructor.
(4) Applicability of other ordinances. The organization, district, or person in charge of animals
exempt under this section from the other requirements and provisions of this article shall not be
relieved of the operation of any of the other applicable provisions of this code, including, without
limitation, those governing sanitary conditions, nuisances, and noises.
(5) Animals used for educational purposes must be kept within enclosures which may include
fences, corrals, barns, pens, etc., and be sufficient to meet the sanitary standards stated herein.
(6) Property owners keeping swine, livestock or other animals for educational purposes must
maintain such animals in a manner that does not cause a nuisance and create an adverse impact to
neighboring properties. Potential negative impacts on adjacent properties include odors, noise,
drainage, erosion, insects and rodents.
ARTICLE 2.1000 CARE AND HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS
(a) Owner's duty to provide food, shelter, and care. The owner or person who has custody or control of any
animal shall:
(1) Keep the animal in clean, sanitary, and healthy condition;
(2) Provide the animal sufficient nutritious and wholesome food, served to the animal in clean
containers, to maintain the animal's good health;
(3) Provide the animal constant and adequate supply of fresh, clean, potable water served from a
clean container that keeps the animal hydrated for environmental conditions;
(4) Provide the animal care and veterinarian medical treatment for injuries, parasites, and disease
that is sufficient to maintain the animal in good health and minimize and prevent suffering;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/562
(5) Maintain the animal's shelter (pens, kennels, coops, fenced areas and enclosures of any kind) in
sanitary condition, including, but not limited to, disposing all animal waste promptly, and all pens
and enclosures shall be cleaned as needed to prevent odors and not attract insects or other vermin or
create a nuisance; and
(6) Provide the animal with adequate shelter that:
(A) Is large enough for the animal to enter, stand, turn around, and lie down in a natural
manner;
(B) Keeps the animal dry;
(C) Provides the animal natural or artificial shade from direct sunlight,;
(D) Protects the animal from excessive heat and cold and other adverse weather conditions;
and
(E) Is adequately ventilated.
(b) Abuse of animals prohibited. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload,
overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dog fight, cock fight, or other combat
between animals or between animals and humans.
(c) Abandoning an animal. It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person having custody or control of any
animal to abandon such animal, including the abandonment of any animal at the animal control facility.
(d) Cropping, docking, or castrating. It shall be unlawful for a person other than a licensed veterinarian to crop
a dog's ears, dock an animal's tail; or castrate an animal; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to
normal livestock operations occurring within the city.
(e) Striking animal with vehicle. The operator of any motor vehicle which strikes or injures a domesticated
animal shall stop and immediately render aid and report such incident to the animal control authority or the
police.
(f) Tying dogs and other animals. A person commits an offense if the person ties or tethers a dog or other
animal in an unenclosed front or back yard, or by a fixed point, chain, or tether so as to create, as determined by
the animal control authority, an unhealthy situation for the animal or a potentially dangerous situation for a
person or another animal. A person restraining a dog with a chain or tether shall attach the chain or tether to a
properly fitted collar, not wrap a chain or tether directly around the animal's neck.
(1) An owner may not leave an animal outside and unattended by use of a restraint that
unreasonably limits the animal's movement:
(A) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
(B) Within 500 feet of the premises of a school; or
(C) In the case of extreme weather conditions, including conditions in which:
(i) The actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit;
(ii) A heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or jurisdiction; or
(iii) A hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for the jurisdiction
by the National Weather Service.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/562
(2) A restraint unreasonably limits an animal's movement if the restraint:
(A) Uses a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or that is not properly fitted to
the animal;
(B) Is a length shorter than the greater of:
(i) Five times the length of the animal, as measured from tip of the animal's nose to the
base of its tail; or
(ii) Ten feet.
(C) Is in an unsafe condition; or
(D) Causes injury to the animal.
(3) Exceptions. Subsections (f)(2)(B)(i) and (f)(2)(B)(ii) above do not apply to:
(A) An animal restrained to a running line, pulley, or trolley system and that is not restrained
to the running line, pulley, or trolley system by means of a pinch-type, prong-type, choke-type,
or improperly fitted collar;
(B) An animal restrained in compliance with the requirements of a camping or recreational
area as defined by a federal, state, or local authority or jurisdiction;
(C) An animal restrained for a reasonable period, not to exceed three hours in a 24-hour
period, and no longer than is necessary for the owner to complete a temporary task that requires
the animal to be restrained;
(D) An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively training for, an activity
that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued by the state if the activity for which the
license is issued is associated with the use or presence of the animal;
(E) An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the
business of shepherding or herding cattle or livestock; or
(F) An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly relating to the
business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint is reasonably necessary for the
safety of the animal.
(4) A restrained animal must have access to water and shelter from the elements, have a restraint
that does not become entangled, and stay within the owner's property.
(5) Penalty.
(A) A peace officer or animal control officer who has probable cause to believe that an owner
is violating this article shall provide the owner with a written statement of that fact. The
statement must be signed by the officer and plainly state the date on which and the time at
which the statement is provided to the owner.
(B) A person commits an offense if the person is provided a statement as described in
subsection (f)(5)(A) and fails to comply with this article within 24 hours of the time the owner
is provided the statement. An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor.
(C) A person commits an offense if the person violates this article and has previously been
convicted of an offense under this article. An offense under this section is a class B
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/562
misdemeanor as provided in Texas Health and Safety Code, section 821.079.
(D) If a person fails to comply with this section with respect to more than one animal, the
person's conduct with respect to each animal constitutes a separate offense.
(E) If conduct constituting an offense under this section also constitutes an offense under any
other law, the actor may be prosecuted under this section, the other law, or both.
(6) Hand-held leashes. This section does not prohibit a person from walking an animal with a
hand-held leash.
(g) Fences/enclosures. A person commits an offense if the person keeps a dog or other animal within a
fence/enclosure which is in such a state of disrepair that the animal may escape or be injured or may pose a
threat to passersby.
(h) Young rabbits and fowl. A person commits an offense if the person sells, offers for sale, barters or gives
away as toys, premiums or novelties, baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl under three weeks old and rabbits
under two months old, unless the manner or method of display is first approved by the animal control authority.
(i) Dyed animals. A person commits an offense if the person colors, dyes, stains or otherwise changes the
natural color of any chickens, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits, or possesses, for the purpose of sale or to be
given away, any of the above-mentioned animals which have been so colored.
(j) Animals not to be used as prizes or inducements. A person commits an offense if the person gives away or
auctions any animal as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or competition, or as an
inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any business
establishment whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
(k) Hunting and trapping. No person may hunt, trap, wound, kill, maim, torture or otherwise threaten the
health and safety of any indigenous wild animal in the city limits, excluding the trapping of nuisance wildlife
under the authorization and supervision of the animal control authority; also excluding any person who holds a
seasonal hunting license for a species for which there exists a hunting season, and that person's hunting activities
occur on property which is properly zoned, and property owner's permission has been granted for such activity;
or a person holds proper permits issued by the animal control authority or Texas Parks and Wildlife.
(l) Animals in parked vehicles. A person commits an offense if the person leaves any animal in any standing
or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health, safety or welfare. The animal control
authority or peace officer is authorized to use reasonable force to remove an animal from a vehicle whenever it
appears the animal's health, safety or welfare is or soon will be endangered, and said animal shall be impounded.
(m) Seizure. The animal control authority shall liberally utilize the authority granted by Texas Health and
Safety Code, section 821.022 to seize and impound any animal, if the animal control authority has reason to
believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, pending a hearing before the municipal court on the
issues of cruelty and disposition of the animal. Seizure of the subject animal prior to receiving a warrant is
hereby authorized if such delay endangers the life of or would unreasonably prolong the suffering of the subject
animal.
(n) Displaying for commercial purposes.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person displays any live animal for a commercial purpose
on any roadside, public right-of-way, or commercial parking lot. Commercial purpose shall include,
but not be limited to, intent to sell, trade, barter, lease, rent, or give away, any live animal.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person receives any live animal through sale, trade, barter,
lease, rent, or give away conducted on any roadside, public right-of-way, or commercial parking lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/562
(o) Class A misdemeanors. A person commits a class A misdemeanor offense if that person violates V.T.C.A.,
Penal Code, sections 42.09, 42.091, or 42.092, as currently written or as may be amended.
(p) Class C misdemeanors. The animal control authority shall determine whether to file a violation of this
section as a class C misdemeanor or class A misdemeanor depending on the degree of abuse or neglect.
(q) Other law. The actions prohibited by this section are in addition to any prohibitions existing elsewhere in
this code or any applicable state or federal law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit any duty
imposed on an owner by any other provisions of this code or any applicable state or federal law.
ARTICLE 2.1100 ANIMALS AT-LARGE
Sec. 2.1101 Generally
An owner of any animal commits an offense if the animal is at-large. For purposes of this section, an offense
occurs without regard to any culpable mental state of the owner and there shall be an irrebuttable presumption
that any animal which is at-large shall have become so by the permission of its owner or harborer.
Sec. 2.1102 Confinement during estrus
Any unspayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a
house, building, or secure enclosure, and such enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat from
outside such enclosure may gain access to the confined animal, other than as intended for planned breeding.
Owners not complying may be ordered by the animal control authority to remove the animal in heat to a
boarding kennel, veterinary hospital, or animal shelter for the duration of estrus. All expenses incurred as a
result of such confinement shall be the responsibility of the owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of
the animal control authority shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog or cat may be impounded.
Sec. 2.1103 Impoundment
The animal control authority is authorized to impound any animal at-large.
ARTICLE 2.1200 IMPOUNDMENT
(a) Reasons for impoundment.
(1) Any animal found in violation of this chapter, any other ordinance of the city, or any law, rule
or regulation of the state or the United States may be impounded and taken to the city's animal
control facility.
(2) Any animal found being kept under conditions which could endanger the life or health of a
person or animal, such as a rabid animal may be impounded and taken to the city's animal control
facility.
(3) Any animal found abandoned within an enclosure in the city may be impounded and taken to
the city's animal control facility 48 hours after posting notice on the enclosure.
(4) Any officer enforcing this chapter may enter private property and impound any animal under
exigent circumstances if the officer reasonably believes it to be necessary to protect the life of the
animal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/562
(b) Notification of owner. Upon impoundment of an animal, the animal control officer shall make reasonable
efforts to contact the owner of the animal if the owner is known.
(c) Redemption of animal. Unless the animal is authorized to be held under another section of this chapter, the
owner of an animal may redeem the animal from the city's animal control facility upon providing proof of
compliance with the registration and vaccination requirements of this chapter and the payment of all
impoundment fees, handling fees, and any veterinary expenses incurred.
(d) Disposition of unclaimed animals.
(1) If the owner of an impounded animal does not redeem the animal within 72 hours after
notification of the owner, or within 72 hours from the time of impoundment if the owner is unknown,
the animal is deemed to be abandoned, the owner is divested of ownership of the animal, and the city
is deemed to be the owner of the animal.
(2) Any animals abandoned under this section shall be given away, put up for adoption, euthanized,
or disposed of in another humane manner, at the discretion of the animal control officer.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the animal control officer may
immediately transfer any cats believe to be feral cats to the Humane Society of North Texas for
treatment or other disposition.
(e) Adoption of animals.
(1) The animal control authority or the contracted veterinarian shall be the sole judge as to whether
a cat or dog is healthy enough for adoption, and its health and age adequate for vaccination.
However, such decision by the animal control authority shall not constitute a warranty of the health
or age of the animal.
(2) All dogs and cats which are adopted through the city animal shelter shall be sterilized/altered to
prevent reproduction in that animal provided the animal is eight weeks or older or two pounds or
more in body weight.
(3) All dogs and cats which are adopted through the city animal shelter and are over four months of
age shall be vaccinated for rabies.
(4) If an animal is already altered, the animal can be released from the shelter the same day of the
adoption.
(5) Adopted animals must be surgically altered by the date indicated in the adoption contract, at the
expense of the adopter.
(6) The animal control authority reserves the right to refuse to adopt any animal if it is believed
that the adoption may create a risk to the animal's health and safety.
(7) Failing to comply with the terms of the adoption contract will constitute violation of this
section.
(f) Disposal of dangerous wild animals. Any dangerous wild animal may be immediately, humanely disposed
of as deemed appropriate by the animal control authority if the dangerous wild animal cannot be safely
impounded.
(g) Baby animals. Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother or where the mother cannot or
refuses to provide adequate nutrition and the baby animal is suffering may be immediately euthanized or given
to a nonprofit humane organization for the purpose of veterinary care, as determined by the animal control
authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/562
(h) Owner relinquishing responsibility. An owner who no longer wishes responsibility for an animal may sign
a written waiver supplied by the animal control authority allowing the animal to be immediately euthanized in a
humane manner, adopted, sold, or care and custody may be transferred to a nonprofit animal welfare
organization approved by the animal control authority.
(i) Injured animals. Any impounded animal that appears to be suffering from injury or illness may be
transferred to a nonprofit animal welfare organization, approved by the animal control authority, for the purpose
of veterinary medical care, as determined by the animal control authority.
(j) Animals of prisoners.
(1) Any person who is taken into the custody of the city's police department or other law
enforcement personnel and having in his/her possession an animal shall be notified that the animal
will be transferred to the animal control authority shelter.
(2) During confinement of said person, the animal will be taken care of by the animal control
authority. The animal must be redeemed from impoundment within five business days from the time
of the incarceration of the owner, at no charge to the owner. If the animal has not been redeemed
within the five-day period, then the animal becomes the property of the city and may euthanized in a
humane manner, adopted, sold, or transferred to a nonprofit animal welfare organization approved by
the animal control authority.
(3) No person shall be able to redeem an animal taken possession of pursuant to this section,
except the owner or owner's duly authorized designee.
(4) An animal may be kept at the animal control authority shelter for a period of time exceeding
five business days if, in the discretion of the animal control authority, there is a possibility of
reuniting the animal with its owner within a reasonable amount of time.
ARTICLE 2.1300 NUISANCE
Sec. 2.1301 Offensive odors
A person commits an offense if the person keeps any animal in such a manner as to endanger the public health, or to annoy
a person of ordinary sensibilities by the accumulation of animal wastes which cause foul or offensive odors or are
considered to be a hazard to any other animal or human.
Sec. 2.1302 Animals defecating
An owner of an animal commits an offense if the person permits, either willfully or through failure to exercise
proper care and control, any animal to defecate upon the sidewalk or parkway or any public street, or upon the
floor of any common hall in any entrance way, stairway or wall of any public place or building or any private
property except the owner's. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the owner
immediately removes any excreta deposited by the owner's animal or the animals are performing in a parade or
circus.
Sec. 2.1303 Noise
A person commits an offense by keeping any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long, continued noise,
shall disturb the comfort of a person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/562
Sec. 2.1304 Bees
The keeping of bees in such manner as to deny the lawful use of adjacent property or endanger personal health
and welfare is prohibited.
Sec. 2.1305 Nuisance complaints
(a) Generally. The presence of nuisance animals should be reported to the animal control authority.
(b) Humane traps. If a person shall report a nuisance animal, the animal control authority may provide the
person a trap to set for the animal. The animal control authority may, upon capture, impound the animal.
(c) Nuisance barking or other animal noise. Animal noise nuisances should be reported to the animal control
authority or police department.
(d) In order for someone other than the animal control authority or a peace officer to file a formal complaint
regarding an animal-related noise nuisance, that person must:
(1) In the presence of either an animal control officer or a clerk of the city's municipal court,
complete and sign an official, notarized complaint form, alleging that the animal's owner has
committed the crime of violating the city's nuisance code.
(2) If called, appear in municipal court as a witness on the date specified by the court.
ARTICLE 2.1400 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Sec. 2.1401 Dangerous animal report
(a) The animal control officer may receive a report concerning a dangerous animal. Such report and any
supporting statement must be in writing and sworn to.
(b) The animal control officer shall investigate all reports filed under this section and may issue sworn reports
based on the animal control authority's investigation or observation.
Sec. 2.1402 Determination that animal is dangerous
(a) If a person reports an incident described by section 2.1401, the animal control officer shall investigate the
incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control officer determines the
animal is a dangerous animal, the animal control officer shall notify the owner in writing of the determination.
(b) An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that an animal owned by the
owner is a dangerous animal, may appeal the determination of the animal control officer to the municipal court.
(c) To file an appeal under section (b) above, the owner must:
(1) File a notice of appeal of the animal control officer's dangerous animal determination with the
court;
(2) Attach a copy of the determination from the animal control officer; and
(3) Serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the animal control officer by mailing the notice through
the United States Postal Service.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/562
(d) Upon filing an appeal under subsection (b) above, the owner shall immediately deliver the animal to the
city's animal control facility and the city shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane
conditions pending the result of a hearing under section 2.1406.
(e) If the owner fails to deliver the animal as required by section (d) above, the court shall issue a warrant
authorizing the seizure of the animal. The animal control officer shall seize the animal or order its seizure and
shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane conditions. The owner may be ordered to
pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the
animal. The city council of the city may prescribe the amount of the fees.
Sec. 2.1403 Knowledge of a dangerous animal
For purposes of this chapter, a person learns he or she is the owner of a dangerous animal and is subject to the
requirements in section 2.1404 upon the occurrence of any of the following:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in the definition of dangerous animal found in section
2.1401;
(2) The owner is notified by the animal control officer that the animal is a dangerous animal; or
(3) The owner is notified by the municipal court that the court has upheld the animal control
officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous animal.
Sec. 2.1404 Requirements of a dangerous animal
(a) Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous animal:
(1) The person shall:
(A) Register the dangerous animal with the animal control authority for the city;
(B) Restrain the dangerous animal at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person
capable of controlling the dangerous animal or in a secure enclosure;
(C) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at
least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal causing
bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or
financial responsibility to the animal control authority for the area in which the animal is kept;
and
(D) Comply with all other applicable city regulations, requirements, or restrictions on
dangerous animals; or
(2) The person shall deliver the animal to the animal control authority and the animal control
authority shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in humane and secure conditions.
(b) Once in compliance with subsection (a) above, the owner of a dangerous animal shall maintain compliance
with subsection (a) above at all times thereafter.
Sec. 2.1405 Failure to comply
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/562
(a) Any person may make a sworn application to the municipal court that the owner of a dangerous animal has
failed to comply with section 2.1404 or that a dangerous animal has attacked a person or another animal.
(b) Upon the filing of a sworn application under this section, the court shall order the animal control officer to
seize the dangerous animal and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control officer shall
seize the dangerous animal or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dangerous animal
in secure and humane conditions. The owner may be ordered to pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related
to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dangerous animal. The governing body of the city
may prescribe the amount of the fees.
(c) If, after a hearing on an application filed under this section, the municipal court finds that the owner of the
dangerous animal has failed to comply with section 2.1404 or that the dangerous animal has attacked a person or
another animal, the municipal court shall order the animal control officer to humanely destroy the dangerous
animal or that the dangerous animal be permanently removed from the city. The court shall also order the owner
of the dangerous animal to pay all costs or fees assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance,
impoundment, and destruction of the dangerous animal due to the sworn complaint filed under this section.
(d) If, after a hearing on an application filed under this section, the municipal court finds that the owner of the
dangerous animal has not failed to comply with section 2.1404 and that the dangerous animal has not attacked a
person or a domesticated animal, the municipal court shall order that the animal control officer immediately
release the dangerous animal to the owner, and the owner shall not be responsible for the costs of seizure or
impoundment of the dangerous animal due to the sworn complaint filed under this section.
(e) Notwithstanding any other law or local regulation, a dangerous animal shall not be destroyed during the
pendency of an appeal under section 2.1407.
(f) If the owner of a dangerous animal seized due to a sworn application filed under this section cannot be
located before the 15th day after the seizure and impoundment of the dangerous animal, the dangerous animal
shall be considered abandoned and the city shall be deemed the owner of the dangerous animal. The court may
order the humane destruction of a dangerous animal abandoned under this section upon application of the animal
control authority, without a hearing.
Sec. 2.1406 Hearing
(a) The court, on receiving notice of appeal under section 2.1402(b) or a sworn application under section
2.1405(a), shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the animal is a dangerous animal or whether the
owner of the animal has complied with section 2.1404 or has attacked a person or a domesticated animal. A
hearing under this section must be held not later than the 10th day after the date on which the animal is seized or
delivered.
(b) The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to:
(1) The owner of the animal or the person from whom the animal was seized or who delivered the
animal;
(2) The person who made the report or filed the application; and
(3) The animal control officer.
(c) Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing.
(d) The court shall determine the estimated costs to house and care for the impounded animal during any
appeal process and shall set the amount of bond for an appeal adequate to cover those estimated costs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/562
(e) An owner or the person who made the report or filed the application may appeal the decision of the
municipal court in the manner described by section 2.1407.
Sec. 2.1407 Appeal
(a) A party to an appeal under section 2.1402(b) or a hearing on an application filed under section 2.1405(a)
may appeal the decision to a county court or county court at law in the county in which the municipal court is
located and is entitled to a jury trial on request.
(b) As a condition of perfecting an appeal, not later than the 10th calendar day after the date the decision is
issued by the municipal court, the appellant must file a notice of appeal and, if applicable, an appeal bond in the
amount determined by the municipal court from which the appeal is taken.
(c) Notwithstanding subsection 30.00014, Government Code, or any other law, a person filing an appeal from
a municipal court under subsection (a) is not required to file a motion for a new trial to perfect an appeal.
(d) Notwithstanding any other law, a county court or a county court at law has jurisdiction to hear an appeal
filed under this section.
(e) A decision of a county court or county court at law under this section may be appealed in the same manner
as an appeal for any other case in a county court or county court at law.
Sec. 2.1408 Registration
(a) The city shall annually register a dangerous animal if the owner:
(1) Presents proof of:
(A) Liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by section 2.1404;
(B) Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous animal; and
(C) The secure enclosure in which the dangerous animal will be kept; and
(2) Pays the annual registration fee set forth in article 2.300.
(b) The city shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous animal a registration tag. The owner of the
dangerous animal shall attach the current registration tag to a collar or harness that is worn at all time by the
dangerous animal.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous animal sells or moves the dangerous animal to a new address, the
owner, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control officer of the
new address. On presentation by the new owner of the dangerous animal's prior registration tag and payment of
dangerous animal registration transfer fee, the city shall issue a new registration tag.
(d) An owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the animal control officer of any attacks the dangerous animal
makes on people or other animals.
Sec. 2.1409 Dangerous animal ordered removed from the city
(a) A dangerous animal ordered to be removed from the city under this chapter must be removed from the city
within ten (10) days of the date of the order.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/562
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person to harbor, keep, or have possession of a dangerous animal previously
ordered to be removed from the city under this chapter within the corporate limits of the city.
(c) The animal control officer or any officer enforcing this chapter shall seize any dangerous animal that has
been ordered to be removed from the city that is found to be at any location within the corporate limits of the
city and shall provide for the impoundment of the dangerous animal in humane and safe conditions.
(d) Upon application by the animal control officer, without a hearing, the court shall order that a dangerous
animal be humanely destroyed if it was previously ordered to be removed from the city and is later found to be
in the city.
Sec. 2.1410 Attack by dangerous animal
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous animal and the dangerous animal
makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dangerous animal's enclosure and causes bodily
injury to the other person.
(b) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor.
(c) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous animal
humanely destroyed by the animal control officer.
Sec. 2.1411 Violation
(a) A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal commits an offense if the person
fails to comply with section 2.1404 or any other applicable city regulation relating to dangerous animals.
(b) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor.
(c) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous animal
humanely destroyed by the animal control officer.
Sec. 2.1412 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.1410 or section 2.1411 that the person is a veterinarian, a
peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by the state or a political
subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the
animal in connection with that position.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.1410 or section 2.1411 that the person is an employee of the
institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses
dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.1410 or section 2.1411 that the person is a dog trainer or an
employee of a guard dog company under chapter 1702, Occupations Code.
ARTICLE 2.1500 FEES
Sec. 2.1501 Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/562
The city council shall establish fees for all animal-related services provided by the city's animal control authority, including
those for adoption, immunization, and multi-pet permits.
Sec. 2.1502 Impoundment and boarding
The owner must pay all fees for impoundment, quarantine, and boarding, as well as veterinary bills and other fees that are
due to the designated animal shelter.
Schedule of Animal Shelter Fees
Dogs, Cats and Other Small Animals Fee Each Additional Day
City registration and tags - 1 year tag $3.00
City registration and tags - 3 year tag $6.00
Dangerous animal registration and tag (annual) $100.00
Owner animal surrender $25.00
Multi pet - $25.00
1st impound $35.00 $0.00
2nd impound $50.00 $0.00
3rd or more impounds $100.00 $0.00
Animal quarantine - resident $150.00
Animal quarantine - nonresident $200.00
Micro chip - resident $10.00
Micro chip - nonresident $20.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/562
ARTICLE 2.1600 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY AGENTS
(a) A person commits an offence if the person interferes with or hinders any agent of the city in the
performance of any duty pursuant to this chapter, or seeks to release any animal in the custody of the city or its
agents, except as provided in this chapter.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person fails to comply with any lawful order of the animal control
authority in the performance of any duty pursuant to this chapter.
(c) A person commits a class B misdemeanor offense under Texas Penal Code, section 38.15 if the person
with criminal negligence interrupts, disrupts, impedes, or otherwise interferes with an officer with responsibility
for animal control while the officer is performing a duty or exercising authority imposed or granted under
chapter 821 or 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
ARTICLE 2.1700 ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
(a) Creation. There is hereby created, pursuant to the Texas Health and Safety Code, section 823.005, an
animal shelter advisory committee.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of the committee shall be to assist animal shelters located within the city limits
regarding compliance with chapter 823 of the Health and Safety Code. Additionally, upon request of the city
council, the committee may:
(1) Provide recommendations to the city regarding its compliance with the Texas Rabies Control
Act; and
(2) Recommend ways to improve the efficiency and cost effectiveness of the city's animal control
program.
(c) Terms. The committee shall consist of five members appointed by a majority vote of the city council.
Committee members shall serve two-year terms except as provided below. Appointments shall be as follows:
(1) Places 1, 3, and 5. Terms expire on October first, each odd-numbered year.
(2) Places 2 and 4. Terms expire on October first, each even-numbered year.
(d) Members. The composition of the committee shall include at least one licensed veterinarian, at least one
municipal official, at least one person whose duties include the daily operation of an animal shelter, and at least
one representative from an animal welfare organization. The same person shall not be appointed to fulfill more
than one of these requirements. Committee members are not required to reside in the city.
(e) Vacancies. Members of the committee shall be subject to removal at any time and for any reason by the
city council. Any vacancy in the membership of the committee shall be filled by the city council for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has, by removal or otherwise, become vacant.
(f) Meetings. The committee shall meet a minimum of three times per calendar year, as outlined in Texas
Health and Safety Code, section 823.005.
(g) Quorum. A quorum of the committee shall consist of a majority of the members, excluding any vacancies.
The presence of a quorum of the committee shall be required prior to a meeting being called to order.
(h) Voting. Approval of all items before the committee shall require a majority vote of those in attendance.
(i) Rules. The committee may adopt rules, subject to city council approval, for conduct of its meetings.
(Ordinance 1089 adopted 7/11/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/562
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Editor's note—Ordinance 766 adopted November 9, 2004 repealed Articles 3.100 Building Code, 3.200 Plat Required Before
Building, 3.300 Electrical Code Adopted, 3.400 Plumbing Code, 3.500 Mechanical Code Adopted, 3.600 Systems Required for Multi-
Story Building, 3.1900 Uniform Sign Code Adopted, 3.2000 Uniform Building Security Code Adopted, 3.2200 Uniform
Administrative Code Adopted, 3.2300 Adoption of International Codes and Section 3.105 Uniform Administrative Code Adopted. To
maintain continuity, this chapter has been renumbered in its entirety.
ARTICLE 3.200 DANGEROUS AND SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.201 Purpose and Scope
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative
with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the residential code, building code, electrical code, fire
code, mechanical code, plumbing code, property maintenance code, chapter 214 of the Texas Local Government
Code, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings, as defined herein, which from any cause endanger the
life, limb, health, property, safety, morals or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to
be repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured.
(b) Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings which are hereinafter defined as dangerous
or substandard, whether now in existence or whether they may hereafter become dangerous or substandard.
Sec. 3.202 Definitions
Administrator. The city manager or his designee.
Building. Includes any building, fence, awning, canopy, sign, shed, garage, house, tent or other structure
whatsoever. The enumeration of specific types of structures shall not be deemed to exclude other types of
structures to which the sense and meaning of the provisions hereof in context reasonably have application.
Building Board of Appeals (Sometimes Referred to as “the Board”). The city council of the City of Lake Worth,
Texas.
Building Code. The International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the city.
Building Official. The building official of the city or other designee of the administrator.
Electrical Code. The National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the city.
Fire Code. The International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the city.
Fire Marshal. The fire marshal of the city or his designee.
Mechanical Code. The International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/562
Person. Any individual, proprietorship, corporation, firm, association, or other legal entity.
Plumbing Code. The International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the city.
Property Maintenance Code. The International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the city.
Residential Code. The International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the city.
Sec. 3.203 Enforcement
(a) General.
(1) Administration. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this
article. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this article. Such
interpretations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article.
(2) Inspections. The building official and the fire marshal are hereby authorized to make such
inspections and take such further actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article.
(3) Right of Entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
article, or when the building official has a reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building
or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this article which makes the
building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official and his designated
assistants may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties
imposed by this article, provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be
presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises are unoccupied, the
building official or his designee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the
building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(b) Abatement of Dangerous or Substandard Buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined
after inspection by the building official to be dangerous or substandard as defined by this article are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, vacation, demolition, removal or securing in
accordance with the procedures specified in this article.
(c) Unlawful to Violate Article. It shall be unlawful for any person, to erect, construct, use, occupy or
maintain any building that is deemed herein to be a nuisance or cause or permit the same to be done in violation
of this article.
(d) Inspection Authorized. All buildings within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which
a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official.
Sec. 3.204 Substandard Buildings Declared
(a) For the purposes of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all
of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a substandard building, and a nuisance:
(1) Whenever any building is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard
to the public health, safety and welfare in the opinion of the building official.
(2) Whenever any building, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners,
lessees or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/562
entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or
used by children.
(3) Any building that is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(A) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or
use of the building.
(4) Whenever any building, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage,
inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard.
(5) Whenever any building is in such a condition as to create a public nuisance known under
common law or in equity jurisprudence.
(6) Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the
building.
(7) Whenever any building is abandoned so as to make such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
(8) Any building existing in violation of any provision of the residential code, building code, fire
code, plumbing code, mechanical code, electrical code, or property maintenance code of the city to
the extent that the life, health or safety of the public or any occupant is endangered.
(b) For the purposes of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all
of the conditions or defects hereinafter described to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property,
safety, morals or welfare of the public or the occupants of the building shall be deemed and hereby is declared to
be a substandard building, and a nuisance:
(1) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient
width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or
panic.
(2) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so
warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in
case of fire or panic.
(3) Whenever the stress in any materials, or members or portion thereof, due to all dead and live
loads, is more than one and one half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(4) Whenever any portion of the building has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by
any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less
than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(5) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become
detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
(6) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in
place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the building code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/562
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses
permitted in the building code for such buildings.
(7) Whenever any portion of a building has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent
that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is
required in the case of similar new construction.
(8) Whenever the building, or any portion thereof, is likely to partially or completely collapse
because of:
(A) Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
(B) Faulty construction;
(C) The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building;
(D) The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
(E) Any other cause.
(9) Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the
purpose for which it is being used.
(10) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third
of the base.
(11) Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent or more damage or deterioration of
its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
(12) Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood or any other
cause, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:
(A) An attractive nuisance to children; or
(B) A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons.
(13) Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any
specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building provided by the building code, or of
any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
(14) Whenever any building which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws
and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any
supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly
constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
(15) Whenever a building, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary,
unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease for reasons
including, but not limited to, the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/562
(A) Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or
lodging house.
(B) Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of
guests in a hotel.
(C) Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
(D) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.
(E) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging
house.
(F) Lack of adequate heating facilities.
(G) Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment.
(H) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this code.
(I) Room and space dimensions less than required by this code or the building code.
(J) Lack of required electrical lighting.
(K) Dampness of habitable rooms.
(L) Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
(M) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
(N) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
(O) Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities.
(P) Accumulation of animal or human urine or feces, mold, or any condition that could likely
harbor or spread disease.
(c) For purposes of this article, any building, regardless of its date of construction, which exists in violation of
chapters 3 through 7 of the property maintenance code, or similar provisions in any later version of the property
maintenance code which may hereafter be adopted or amended by the city, to an extent that endangers the life,
limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby is
declared to be a substandard building and a nuisance.
Sec. 3.205 Determination by Building Official
When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined
that the building is substandard, the building official may take any or all of the following actions, as he deems
appropriate:
(1) Issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard and must be repaired, listing
the deficiencies, or issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard, and that the
nature and/or the extent of the deficiencies make repair infeasible, so that the building must be
demolished, listing the deficiencies;
(2) Issue citation(s) for violation(s) of this article;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/562
(3) Secure the building if permitted by Section 3.212(a) below;
(4) Recommend to the board that abatement proceedings be commenced pursuant to Section 3.206
below.
Sec. 3.206 Public Hearing for Abatement of Substandard Buildings
(a) Commencement of Proceedings. When the building official has found and determined that a building is a
substandard building, the building official may commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, relocation
of occupants, removal, demolition or securing of the building.
(b) Public Hearing to be Held. Except when the building official finds that a building is likely to immediately
endanger persons or property, a public hearing before the board shall be held to determine whether a building
complies with the standards set out in Section 3.204 above. If the building official determines that the building
constitutes an immediate danger, the procedures set forth in section 3.212(b) shall be followed.
(c) Notice. Not less than ten days prior to the date on which the hearing is set, the building official shall issue
a notice of the public hearing directed to the record owner of the building and to all mortgagees and lienholders.
The city shall use diligent efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of
the building through search of the county real property records; appraisal district records; records of the
secretary of state; assumed name records of the county; tax records of the city; and utility records of the city. The
notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the record owner.
(2) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located.
(3) A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard or dangerous,
with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous or
substandard under the provisions of Section 3.204 above.
(4) A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing
proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will
take to reasonably perform the work.
(5) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing.
(6) A statement that if the building is found to be in violation of this article, the board may order
that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time.
(d) Additional Notice of Public Hearing. Prior to the public hearing, the city may file a copy of the notice
mailed pursuant to subsection (c) above in the official public records of real property in the county.
(e) Burden of Proof. At the public hearing, the city has the burden of proof to establish that the building or
structure at issue is not in compliance with applicable city codes, and is substandard as defined by this article,
and to identify the specific deficiencies or code violations; and the owner, lienholder and mortgagee have the
burden of proof to establish the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, the time it
will take to reasonably perform the work, and the financial ability and willingness of the owner, lienholder
and/or mortgagee to perform the work with diligence and dispatch.
(f) Conduct of Public Hearing. At the public hearing, the owner of the building, and all other interested
persons may make their appearance and be heard. Any evidence may be received and considered by the board,
provided, however, that the board shall not consider evidence as to the existence or extent of any deficiencies or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/562
code violations which were not identified in the notice to the record owner described in this section. The hearing
may be adjourned from day to day or continued upon a majority vote of the board.
Sec. 3.207 Order of Building Board of Appeals
(a) Findings of the Board.
(1) If the board, by a majority vote, finds upon evidence presented at the public hearing that the
building is not in violation of standards set out in Section 3.204, the board shall order that the
enforcement action cease; provided, however, that such order shall neither prevent the building
official from instituting a new enforcement action for other violations the building official alleges
have been determined to exist, nor shall such order prevent the building official from instituting a
new enforcement action for the same violations if the building official later determines that the
conditions as determined by the board have materially changed as to such violations.
(2) If the board, by a majority vote, finds upon evidence presented at the public hearing that the
building is in violation of standards set out in Section 3.204, that such conditions can reasonably be
remedied by repair within a reasonable time, and that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee is
financially able and is willing to conduct or cause such repairs to be made within a reasonable time,
the board shall identify the specific violations found to exist, and order that the owner, mortgagee
and/or lienholder repair such violations, and, if necessary to the public safety, vacate, secure, or
relocate the occupants, within such reasonable times as determined by the board to be appropriate, as
provided herein.
(3) If the board, by a majority vote, finds upon evidence presented at the public hearing that the
building is in violation of standards set out in Section 3.204, and that such conditions cannot
reasonably be remedied by repair, or that neither the owner, lienholder, nor the mortgagee are
financially able or willing to conduct or cause such repairs to be made within a reasonable time,
board shall identify the specific violations found to exist, and order that the owner, mortgagee or
lienholder remove or demolish the building, and, if necessary to the public safety, vacate and secure
the building and/or relocate the occupants, within such reasonable times as determined by the board
to be appropriate, as provided herein, or order such other relief as is permitted by this article.
(b) Time Allowed to Complete Work.
(1) Unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that the work cannot
reasonably be performed within 30 days, the order shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of
the building to, within 30 days, take one or more of the following actions:
(A) Vacate the building;
(B) Secure the building from unauthorized entry;
(C) Repair the violations; or
(D) Remove or demolish the building.
(2) If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that the work cannot
reasonably be performed within 30 days, and the board allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee
more than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board shall establish specific time
schedules as the board determines are appropriate for the commencement and performance of the
work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable
manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/562
(3) The board may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair,
remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless
the owner, lienholder or mortgagee:
(A) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(B) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably completed within 90 days
because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(4) If the board allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part
of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board shall require the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building official to demonstrate
that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for
commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee appear before the board or the building official to:
(A) Demonstrate compliance with the time schedules; and
(B) If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee, owns property, including structures and
improvements on property within the city's boundaries of a value that exceeds $100,000.00, to
post cash, a surety bond, a letter of credit or third-party guaranty to cover the cost of the work
ordered by the board.
(c) Contents of Order. The order of the board must contain at minimum:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of each violation of minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A description of each of the ordered actions, including a statement that the owner may repair, if
determined feasible by the board, or demolish or remove, the building at his option;
(4) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed, and charge the
costs of such actions to the owner, and impose a lien against the property for all such costs; and
(5) If the board has determined that the building will endanger persons or property and that the
building is a dwelling with ten or fewer dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the
building and charge the costs to the to the owner, and impose a lien against the property if the ordered
action is not taken within the time allowed.
Sec. 3.208 Notice of Order of Building Board of Appeals
(a) Order Shall be Mailed. After the public hearing, the building official shall promptly mail, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the record owner of the building, and each identified lienholder
and mortgagee of the building.
(b) Order Shall be Filed with City Secretary. Within ten days after the date that the order is issued by the
board, the building official shall file a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary.
(c) Order Shall be Published. Within ten days after the date the order is issued by the board, the building
official shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice containing:
(1) The street address or legal description of the property;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/562
(2) The date the hearing was held;
(3) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(4) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
Sec. 3.209 Enforcement of the Order of Building Board of Appeals
(a) If the order is not complied with, the city may take action as provided herein. If the building is not vacated,
secured, repaired, removed or demolished within the time specified by the order, the city may vacate, secure,
repair, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense; provided, however that
remedial action by the city does not limit the ability of the city to collect on a bond or other financial guarantee
that may be required by Section 3.207(b)(4) of this article.
(b) Posting of Notice to Vacate Building. If the order requires vacation and if compliance is not had with the
order within the time specified therein, the building official is authorized to require that the building be vacated.
Notice to vacate shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the occupant of the building and it
shall be posted at or upon each entrance to the building and shall be in substantially the following form:
“SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
____________________
Building Official
City of Lake Worth”
(c) Remedial Action by City. Any repair, demolition work, or securing of the building shall be accomplished
and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized from the sale of
such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and cleaning of the lot,
shall be paid to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.
(d) Failure to Obey Order. Any person to whom an order pursuant to Section 3.207 is directed who fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in
municipal court in addition to any other remedies available to the city provided herein.
(e) Interference Prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in
the building which has been ordered repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured under the provisions of
this article; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this
article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an
interest or estate in such building, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or
demolishing, removing or securing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this article, or in performing
any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article.
(f) Permit Required. Any work of securing, repair, removal or demolition by the property owner or any
lienholder or mortgagee or their agents must be performed pursuant to valid unexpired permits issued by the
city. All permits issued pursuant to an order of the board shall expire upon expiration of the time for compliance
set forth in the order.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/562
Sec. 3.210 Performance of Work by the City
(a) Procedure. When any work of repair, removal, demolition or securing is to be performed by the city
pursuant to the provisions of any order of the board, the work may be accomplished by city personnel or by
private contract as may be deemed necessary. Rubble and debris shall be removed from any premises and the lot
cleaned if removal or demolition is ordered. The building or building materials may be sold if removal or
demolition is ordered, and the proceeds shall be used to offset other costs of the work.
(b) Repair to Minimum Standards Only. In the event repair by the city is permitted by this article, the city may
repair the building at its own expense and assess the expenses on the land on which the building stands or is
attached to only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with minimum standards.
Sec. 3.211 Recovery of Cost of Securing, Repair, Removal or Demolition
(a) Costs. The cost of any work to repair, remove, demolish, or secure a building shall be paid from city funds
and shall constitute a special assessment and a lien against such property to secure payment thereof, together
with ten percent interest on such amount from the date on which the work is performed; provided, however that
no lien may be filed against a homestead protected by the state constitution.
(b) Itemized Account and Notice of Lien. The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses
incurred by the city in the securing, repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to this article. Upon
completion of the work, the building official shall prepare and file with the city secretary a sworn account and
notice of lien containing the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable
effort;
(2) A legal description of the real property on which the building is or was located;
(3) The type of work performed; and
(4) The amount of expenses incurred by the city in performing the work and the balance due.
(c) Notice Filed in County Records. The city secretary shall file the notice of lien along with a copy of the
order of abatement issued by the board in the official public records of real property in the county.
(d) Personal Obligation of Property Owner. The expenses incurred by the city as set forth in the sworn
account of the building official shall be a personal obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien
upon the property. The city attorney may bring an action in any court of proper jurisdiction against the owner or
property to recover the costs incurred by the city.
(e) Lien Shall be Valid and Privileged. Upon filing of the notice of lien in the official public records of real
property in the county, the lien shall be valid against the property so assessed. The lien shall be privileged and
subordinate only to tax liens and shall be paramount to all other liens. The lien shall continue until the
assessment and all interest due and payable thereon has been paid.
(f) Assessment Must be Paid. No utility service, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed
on any such property until the assessment is paid and such lien is released by the city.
(g) Release of Lien. After the expenses incurred by the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the building
official, have been fully paid with interest of ten percent per annum from the date the work was performed, the
building official shall execute a release of lien which shall be filed in the official public records of real property
in the county.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/562
Sec. 3.212 Additional Authority to Secure Certain Substandard Buildings Prior to Public Hearing and
Secure, Demolish, Repair or Remove Certain Dangerous Buildings
(a) Securing of Unoccupied, Substandard Building. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the
city may secure a building if the building official determines:
(1) That the building violates the minimum standards set forth in this article; and
(2) That the building is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have the right of
possession of the building.
(b) If Building Creates Immediate Danger. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if the building
official finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger persons or property the building official may:
(1) Order the owner of the building, or the owner or occupant of the property on which the
building is located, to repair, remove, or demolish the building, or the dangerous part of the building,
within a specified time; or
(2) Repair, remove, or demolish the building, or the dangerous part of the building, at the expense
of the city, on behalf of the owner of the building or the owner of the property on which the building
is located, and assess the repair, removal, or demolition expenses on the property on which the
building was located.
(c) Notice of Action.
(1) Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured pursuant to subsection (a) above, or
action is ordered pursuant to subsection (b)(1) above, or the building is repaired, removed or
demolished pursuant to subsection (b)(2) above, the building official shall give notice to the owner
by:
(A) Personally serving the owner with written notice; or
(B) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post
office address; or if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is
unknown, by:
(i) Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county; and
(ii) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service
cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; and
(2) In addition to the above, the building official shall deposit notice in the United States mail to all
lienholders and mortgagees who can be determined from a reasonable search of instruments on file in
the office of the county clerk.
(d) Notice. The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of each of the violations of the minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building, or that the
city has taken or will take the action ordered pursuant to subsection (b) above;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/562
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the
city's securing, removing, demolishing or repairing of the building.
(e) Hearing. The board shall conduct a hearing at which the owner, lienholder and mortgagee may testify or
present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing, repairing, removing or
demolishing of the building, if, within 30 days after the date the city has taken action pursuant to subsections (a)
or (b) above, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee files with the city a written request for the hearing. The hearing
shall be conducted within 20 days after the date the request is filed.
(f) Lien. If the city incurs expenses under this section, such expenses incurred shall be a personal obligation of
the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the property, and costs shall be recovered as provided by
Section 3.211 of this article.
(g) Violation. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with an order issued pursuant to this section.
Sec. 3.213 Additional Authority to Vacate and Secure Certain Unsanitary Substandard Buildings Prior
to Hearing
(a) If Unsanitary Conditions Create Danger. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if the
building official determines that the interior of a building is in such an unsanitary condition as to be unfit for
human occupancy because of trash, garbage, filth, vermin or rat infestation, an accumulation of animal or human
urine or feces, mold, any condition that could likely harbor or spread disease, or any other condition that is to
likely to endanger the health and safety of occupants or citizens of the city, then the building official shall order
the building immediately vacated and secured from entry and occupation.
(b) Notice of Hearing. At the time a building is vacated pursuant to this section, the building official shall
personally serve all occupants with written notice of a right to request a hearing with the city manager. The city
manager shall conduct a hearing at which the occupant or the occupant's representative may testify or present
witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's vacating and securing of the building, if,
within 30 days after the date the city has taken action pursuant to subsection (a) above, the occupant or the
occupant's representative files with the city manager's office a written request for the hearing. Written requests
for a hearing may only be filed Monday through Thursday during normal city business hours, and the hearing
shall be conducted within 24 hours after the date the written request is filed. The city manager will preside over
the hearing; however, in the event the city manager is unable to preside, the assistant city manager shall preside.
(c) Hearing. After considering all information and facts presented, the city manager or his replacement shall
make a determination and issue an order instructing the building official to do any of the following:
(1) Reverse the order to vacate and secure the building.
(2) Modify the duration of the order to vacate and secure if the occupant or the occupant's
representative provides evidence that the interior of a building can be brought into compliance with
the minimum standards of this article.
(3) Continue to enforce the order vacating and securing the building until a hearing is set with the
board.
(4) Initiate proceedings pursuant to Section 3.206 of this article.
(d) Violation. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with an order issued pursuant to this section.
Sec. 3.214 Judicial Review
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/562
(a) Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee jointly or severally aggrieved by a board order issued under this
article may file in district court a verified petition setting forth that the order is illegal, in whole or in part, and
specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within
30 calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the final order of the board is mailed to them by certified
mail with return receipt requested, or such order shall become final as to each of them upon the expiration of
each such 30 calendar day period.
(b) On the filing of the petition, the court may issue a writ of certiorari directed to the city to review the order
of the board and shall prescribe in the writ the time within which a return on the writ must be made, which must
be longer than 10 days, and served on the relator or the relator's attorney.
(c) The city may not be required to return the original papers acted on by it, but it is sufficient for the city to
return certified or sworn copies of the papers or of parts of the papers as may be called for by the writ.
(d) The return must concisely set forth other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the
order appealed from and shall be verified.
(e) The issuance of the writ does not stay proceedings on the order appealed from.
(f) Appeal in the district court shall be by trial de novo. The court may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part,
or may modify the order brought up for review.
(g) Costs may not be allowed against the city.
(h) If the order of the board is affirmed or not substantially reversed but only modified, the district court shall
allow to city all attorney's fees and other costs and expenses incurred by it and shall enter a judgment for those
items, which may be entered against the property owners, lienholders, or mortgagees as well as all persons
subject to the proceedings before the board.
Sec. 3.215 Civil Penalty
(a) Civil Penalty Authorized. In addition to any other enforcement authority provided for by law, the board
may, by order, approved after a hearing, assess a civil penalty against a property owner as provided for herein for
failure to comply with an order issued by the board pursuant to Section 3.207 of this article.
(b) Showing Required. The civil penalty may be assessed if it shown at the hearing that:
(1) The property owner was notified of the contents of the order issued pursuant to Section 3.207
of this article; and
(2) The property owner committed an act in violation of the order or failed to take an action
necessary for compliance with the order.
(c) Amount of Penalty. The civil penalty may be assessed in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for
each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to
exceed ten dollars per day for each violation.
(d) Notice of Hearing. Not less than ten days prior to the date on which the hearing is set, the property owner
shall be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail/return receipt requested. The notice shall contain:
(1) A copy of the order issued by the board pursuant to Section 3.207 of this article;
(2) A statement that the building official has determined that the property owner committed an act
in violation of that order, or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with that order, together
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/562
with a description of the acts that violated the order, or a description of what actions the owner failed
to take that were necessary for compliance with the order;
(3) A statement that at the hearing the board may assess a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per
day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an
amount not to exceed $10.00 per day for each violation; and
(4) Notice of the time and place of the hearing.
(e) Copy of Order Filed with District Clerk. If a civil penalty is assessed, the city secretary shall file with the
district clerk of the county in which the property is located, a certified copy of the order assessing the civil
penalty stating the amount and duration of the penalty.
(f) Enforcement. The civil penalty may be enforced by the city in a suit brought by the city in a court of
competent jurisdiction for a final judgment in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under this
subsection is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any suit.
Sec. 3.216 Immediate Demolition
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of
the city to summarily order the demolition of any building or structure where it is apparent that the immediate
demolition of such building or structure is necessary to the protection of life, property or general welfare of the
people in the city.
(Ordinance 1042 adopted 5/12/15)
ARTICLE 3.300 BUILDING PERMIT NOT ISSUED IF TAXES IN ARREARS
No building permit shall be issued by the city for the purpose of placing a structure of any kind, or remodeling a
structure of any kind, upon real property upon which city ad valorem taxes are in arrears. This rule pertains to
structure permits of any type including carports, signs, sidewalks, temporary buildings, etc. (Ordinance 766
adopted 11/9/04)
ARTICLE 3.400 RENTAL RESIDENTIAL UNITS
Sec. 3.401 Inspection of Rental Residences
There shall be a rental inspection requirement for rental residential units.
(1) Rental Residence. Any single-family or two-family residence which is rented, leased, or
otherwise occupied by a person other than the owner at the time the residence becomes vacant. A
rental residence shall be vacant when:
(A) The prior occupants vacate the residence, regardless of the period of time before new
occupants occupy the residence; or
(B) When any utility service is shut off or transferred to a new occupant's name because of a
change of occupants.
(2) Rental Inspection.
(A) All rental residences will be subject to inspection for the purposes of ensuring
compliance with the minimum housing standards set forth in the 2004 Code of Ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/562
(B) Each rental residence shall be inspected by the city not more than once annually. Followup
inspections shall be conducted as necessary to verify compliance with the minimum housing
standards set forth in the 2004 Code of Ordinances.
(C) The city is authorized to obtain a warrant to conduct an inspection permitted by this
section when consent to enter the property has been refused or otherwise cannot be obtained.
(3) Enforcement.
(A) If the inspection by the building inspector reveals the building is not in compliance with
the building code, the building inspector shall give notice of noncompliance to the owner who
shall bring the building into compliance within 10 days of the date of the notice. If corrections
are not made within the 10 days, the building inspector shall pursue correction in accordance
with the building code.
(B) The owner must obtain all permits required for the work needed to bring the building into
compliance with the building code.
(C) A building that is under a substandard building order by the city council shall be repaired
or demolished pursuant to that order rather than this subsection.
(4) Inspection Fees.
(A) When a residence is inspected under the provisions of this section, the owner of the
property shall complete an application for rental inspection release and pay an inspection fee to
the city. An additional inspection fee will be charged for each time (up to two inspection trips):
(i) The owner or the owner's representative fails to meet the inspector at the residence at
the appointed time;
(ii) The owner has not completed all repairs required and calls for reinspection; or
(iii) The inspector is otherwise prevented from inspecting the building through no fault
of the city.
(B) The building inspector will not inspect a building unless the owner or a representative of
the owner, who is at least 18 years of age, is present.
(C) The following fees will be charged for inspections under this section:
(i) Application and inspection fee: $25.00.
(ii) Inspection to authorize electricity only to be turned on: $10.00.
(iii) Inspection to authorize gas only to be turned on: $10.00.
(iv) Third or more additional inspection trips: $50.00.
(Ordinance 853 adopted 1/9/07)
Sec. 3.402 Smoke Detectors
In addition to the other requirements set forth in this article, before the first tenant takes possession of a dwelling
unit that is rented, smoke detectors shall be installed in such dwelling unit in accordance with Section R313 of
the 2003 International Residential Code and Section 92.255 of the Texas Property Code. Notwithstanding the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/562
above, if the dwelling unit was occupied as a residence on or before September 1, 1981, or the building permit
for the dwelling unit was issued on or before that date, smoke detectors shall be installed in such dwelling unit in
accordance with Sections 92.255 and 92.257 of the Texas Property Code.
ARTICLE 3.500 TRENCH SAFETY*
Sec. 3.501 Plans and Specifications
On construction projects in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five (5) feet, the bid documents and
contract must include detailed plans and specifications for trench safety systems that meet Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA) standards. The plans and specifications shall include a pay item for these
same safety measures.
Sec. 3.502 OSHA Requirements
The bid document and contract requirements that are subject to this portion of the building code shall call for a
trench safety system which complies with said OSHA standards in effect at the time of bidding. If this article is
construed to be invalid as an unlawful delegation of legislative power, or for any other reason, then the OSHA
standards in effect at the time of the passage of this section shall be met.
(Ordinance 766 adopted 11/9/04)
ARTICLE 3.600 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
Sec. 3.601 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to install an irrigation system within the city without
first obtaining an irrigator's permit from the city and being registered per Section 3.702.
Sec. 3.602 Rules and Regulations
Irrigation systems shall be installed in accordance with the 2003 edition of the International Plumbing Code and
shall comply with the latest state commission on environmental quality (Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality) rules and regulations.
Sec. 3.603 Backflow Prevention Assemblies
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed as required per Article 13.1000, Backflow Prevention of
Chapter 13, Utilities.
(Ordinance 830, sec. 2, adopted 6/13/06)
Sec. 3.604 Rain Sensing Devices and Freeze Gauges
(a) Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system installed within the city on or after the
effective date of this section (ordinance adopted June 13, 2006) must be equipped with rain and freeze sensors.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/562
(b) Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system installed before the effective date
(ordinance adopted June 13, 2006) of this section may not be operated after June 1, 2007, without being
equipped with rain and freeze sensors.
(c) The potable water supply to any lawn irrigation system shall be protected against backflow in accordance
with the city's backflow and cross-connection control program. All rain and freeze sensors for commercial class
lawn irrigation systems shall undergo annual inspection and testing.
(d) Any residential customer class irrigation system installed within the city on or after June 1, 2007, must be
equipped with rain and freeze sensors.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly install, operate, or cause or permit the
installation of or the operation of, an irrigation system in violation of subsections (a) through (d) above on
premises owned, leased, or managed by that person.
(Ordinance 831, sec. 1, adopted 6/13/06)
Sec. 3.605 Variances
(a) The director of public works may grant variances from the provisions of Section 3.604 to persons
demonstrating extreme hardship and need as determined by the director of public works and only under the
following conditions:
(1) The applicant must sign a compliance agreement on forms provided by the director of public
works, agreeing to irrigate or water a lawn or landscape only in the amount and manner permitted by
the variance;
(2) Granting of a variance must not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water
supply;
(3) The extreme hardship or need requiring the variance must relate to the health, safety, or welfare
of the person requesting it; and
(4) The health, safety or welfare or other persons must not be adversely affected by granting the
variance.
(b) The director of public works may revoke a variance granted when the director determines that:
(1) The conditions of subsection (a) above are not being met or are no longer applicable;
(2) The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or
(3) The health, safety or welfare of other persons requires revocation.
(c) No variance shall be permitted for an action or purpose that violates those rules promulgated by the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, contained in Chapter 344, Subchapter A, Section 344.1, Subchapter C,
Section 344.30-344.38, Subchapter D, Sections 344.40-344.43 and Subchapters E and F, Section 344.50-344.65
Texas Administrative Code (effective January 1, 2009), and as adopted by reference by the City of Lake Worth
as Section 315 of the International Plumbing Code, 2003 edition, and Section P2609 of the International
Residential Code, 2003 edition and in this section, above.
Sec. 3.606 Essential Service
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/562
The governmental use of water for essential services such as police, fire and emergency services which are
necessary to preserve or protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city are exempt from any and
all restrictions or mandates set forth in this article.
Sec. 3.607 Administrative Fee
The director of public works may assess an administrative fee, in addition to any criminal penalty assessed for a
violation of this article as described below. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(1) In-Ground Irrigation Systems Violations.
(A) The director of public works may install a locking device on a double check valve to the
irrigation system found to be operating in violation of this article and shall assess an
administrative fee as approved by city council;
(B) Notice shall be left on the premises to advise the owner/operator that the double check
valve to the irrigation system has been turned off; and
(C) Notice shall also be sent by United States Postal Service to the person recorded as the
city's water customer notifying that person that the irrigation system has been turned off and
locked. The notice shall also state the amount of the assessed administrative fee and shall advise
the person of the procedures for payment of the fee and the procedure to request a hearing to
contest the assessment of the administrative remedy.
(2) Violations for Systems Without Double-Check Valves or In-Ground Irrigations Systems.
(A) The director of public works shall leave notice on the premises to advise the
owner/operator that the person was in violation of watering restrictions and may assess an
administrative fee as approved by city council.
(B) Notice shall also be sent by United States Postal Service to the person recorded as the
city's water customer notifying that person of the assessment of administrative fee and advising
the person of the procedures for payment of the fee and the procedure to request a hearing to
contest the assessment of the administrative remedy.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, cause damage to or remove a locking device
placed on a check value by the director of public works.
Sec. 3.608 Procedures for Paying Administrative Fees or Requesting a Hearing on the Fees
(a) A person assessed an administrative fee who wishes to re-establish service to the irrigation system is
required to make payment of the assessed fee.
(b) A person may request a hearing to protest the assessment of an administrative fee. To request a hearing,
the water customer must make the request in person to the water department within fifteen (15) business days
from the date on the written notice of violation. If a locking device was installed it shall remain in place until the
conclusion of the hearing and payment of any required fee.
(c) The director of public works shall act as the hearing officer. The director of public works shall evaluate all
information offered by the petitioner at the hearing. The petitioner making the request for a hearing shall bear
the burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence why the administrative fee should not be
assessed. The hearing officer will provide a decision at the time of the hearing or within three (3) business days
following the conclusion of the hearing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/562
(d) Payment of any fees assessed at the hearing must be made within seven (7) business days of the decision.
Any fees not paid within this time limit shall be added to the customer's next water bill.
(e) A person may elect to pay the administrative fee without requesting a hearing. Any fees not paid within
fifteen (15) business days from the date of the written notice shall be added to the person's next water bill.
Sec. 3.609 Re-establishment of Service to Double Check Valves that Have Been Locked Off
The locking device will be removed by the director of public works or his designee within three (3) business
days after payment is received from customer.
(Ordinance 909, sec. 3, adopted 4/14/09)
ARTICLE 3.700 REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
Sec. 3.701 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester. A person who has met all of the requirements of TCEQ to be recognized
as a certified tester in the state and is registered with the city. Only a certified tester who is employed by a stateapproved
fire line contractor shall test fire line assemblies.
Electrical Contractor. A person, or entity, licensed as an electrical contractor, that is in the business of
performing “electrical contracting” as defined by Texas Occupations Code 1305.002(5).
Fire Alarm Contractor, Installer, or Planner. A state-licensed individual who shall be designated by a registered
firm to:
(1) Inspect and certify that each fire alarm or detection system as installed meets the standards as
provided for by law; or
(2) Perform or directly supervise the servicing or maintaining of a previously installed fire alarm
device or system and to certify such service or maintenance.
A fire alarm contractor may perform or supervise monitoring.
Fire Pump Contractor. A person or organization that offers to undertake, represents itself as being able to
undertake, or does undertake the plan, sale, installation, maintenance, or servicing of a fire suppression system
or any part of such a system. The contractor shall have a license issued to a responsible managing employee
authorizing the company to engage in the fire suppression system business in this state.
Fire Sprinkler Contractor. A person or organization that offers to undertake, represents itself as being able to
undertake, or does undertake the plan, sale, installation, maintenance, or servicing of a fire protection sprinkler
system or any part of such a system. The contractor shall have a license issued to a responsible managing
employee authorizing the company to engage in the fire protection sprinkler system business in this state.
Fire Standpipe System Contractor. Fire standpipe system contractor means a person or organization that offers to
undertake, represents itself as being able to undertake, or does undertake the plan, sale, installation,
maintenance, or servicing of a fire suppression system or any part of such a system. The contractor shall have a
license issued to a responsible managing employee authorizing the company to engage in the fire suppression
system business in this state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/562
Fire Suppression Contractor. A person or organization that offers to undertake, represents itself as being able to
undertake, or does undertake the plan, sale, installation, maintenance, or servicing of a fire suppression system
or any part of such a system. The contractor shall have a license issued to a responsible managing employee
authorizing the company to engage in the fire suppression system business in this state.
Fuel Tank Contractor. A person who offers to undertake, represents itself as being able to undertake, or
undertakes the installation, repair, or removal of a UST, and who meets the registration requirements and are
licensed by the TCEQ.
General Contractor. An organization or individual that contracts with another organization or individual (the
owner) for the construction of a building, road, or other facility. A general contractor is defined as such if it is
the signatory as the builder of the prime construction contract for the project.
Home Builder. Any business, entity, or individual who, for a fixed price, commission, fee, wage, or other
compensation, constructs, supervises, or manages the construction of a new home.
Home Remodeler. Home remodeler is any business, entity, or individual who, for a fixed price, commission, fee,
wage, or other compensation, constructs, supervises, or manages the construction of a material improvement to
an existing home.
Irrigation Contractor. An individual who sells, designs, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, or services an
irrigation system; provides consulting services relating to an irrigation system; or connects an irrigation system
to any water supply.
Mechanical Contractor. A contractor that performs or offers to perform the design, installation, construction,
repair, maintenance, service, or modification of equipment or a product in an environmental air-conditioning
system, a commercial refrigeration system or a process cooling or heating system.
Plumbing Contractor. A person licensed through the state plumbing board, and is skilled in the plumbing,
superintending of plumbing, and in the practical installation, repair, and servicing of plumbing.
Roofing Contractor. A contractor whose services are unlimited in the roofing trade and who has the experience,
knowledge, and skill to install, maintain, repair, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, and use
material and items used in the installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of all kinds of roofing,
waterproofing, and coating, except when coating is not represented to protect, repair, waterproof, stop leaks, or
extend the life of the roof.
Sign Contractor. A person who is qualified to install, repair, alter and/or change nonelectrical signs according to
the adopted building codes.
Sign Electrical Contractor. A person, or entity, licensed as an electrical sign contractor, that is in the business of
performing “electrical sign contracting” as defined by Texas Occupations Code 1305.002(9).
Swimming Pool Contractor. Constructs swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs, including installation of solar heating
equipment using those trades or skills necessary for such construction.
Water Well Contractor. Installs and repairs water wells and pumps by boring, drilling, excavating, casing,
cementing, and cleaning to provide a supply of uncontaminated water.
Sec. 3.702 Registration Required
(a) No person, firm, or corporation shall install or alter any plumbing, electrical, mechanical, irrigation, fire
protection, water well, permanent sign, or construct any structure within the city unless that person, firm, or
corporation is registered with the city manager or his/her designee. This section shall not apply to the sale,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/562
installation, maintenance, or servicing of a “fire protection sprinkler system,” “fire detection system,” or “fire
alarm devise” as those terms are defined by state law.
(b) The following contractor types must register with the city manager or his/her designee:
(1) Mechanical contractor.
(2) Electrical contractor.
(3) Plumbing contractor.
(4) Irrigation contractor.
(5) Backflow prevention assembly tester.
(6) General contractor.
(7) Roofing contractor.
(8) Home builder.
(9) Home remodeler.
(10) Sign contractor.
(11) Sign electrical contractor.
(12) Swimming pool contractor.
(13) Water well contractor.
(14) Fire suppression contractor.
(15) Fire pump contractor.
(16) Fuel tank contractor.
(17) Fire standpipe system contractor.
(c) These contractor types must present the following items for copies to be made in order to register with the
city manager or his/her designee:
(1) Contractor registration form.
(2) State professional license (where applicable).
(3) Driver's license.
(4) Certificate of General Liability Insurance. Minimum limit $300,000.00, listing the city as the
certificate holder.
(5) Gauge calibration certificate (backflow prevention assembly testers only).
(6) Certificate of registration with state residential construction commission (home builder and
home remodeler only).
(7) Registration fee as set out in fee schedule in Section 3.703.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/562
Sec. 3.703 Registration Fees
(a) Contractor registrations are valid for one year from the date payment is made. Contractors must renew
their city registrations annually to keep registration active. Renewal letters are issued on the first of every month
in which renewal is due. A contractor has thirty (30) days from the date of expiration to renew with the city,
regardless of whether a renewal letter was issued or received. Renewals must be received within thirty (30) days
of registration expiration dates to receive renewal rate. Proof of current state professional license (if applicable)
is required for renewal. If renewal is not received in this time frame, contractor registration is cancelled and
contractor information is discarded; contractor must then reregister pursuant to Section 3.702 of this article.
(b) The schedule of fees for registration which are valid for one year is as follows:
Annual Registration
Contractor Type Initial Fee Renewal Fee
Plumbing $100.00 $50.00
Irrigation $100.00 $50.00
Mechanical $100.00 $50.00
Backflow testers $100.00 $50.00
Electrical $100.00 $50.00
Sign electrical $100.00 $50.00
Sign contractor $100.00 $50.00
Home builder $100.00 $50.00
Home remodeler $100.00 $50.00
General $100.00 $50.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/562
Water well $100.00 $50.00
Roofing $100.00 $50.00
Swimming pool $100.00 $50.00
Fire supression $100.00 $50.00
Fuel tank $100.00 $50.00
Fire standpipe system $100.00 $50.00
Fire pump $100.00 $50.00
Sec. 3.704 Contracting Work Without Registering Deemed Misdemeanor
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates this article by performing work in the city without a current
registration shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in accordance with the general penalty
provisions found in Section 1.109 of this Code. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ordinance 830, sec. 3, adopted 6/13/06)
ARTICLE 3.800 MOVING BUILDINGS
Sec. 3.801 Permit Required for Moving or Wrecking Buildings
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move or cause to be moved a house or
building from one location to another within the city or to move a house or building from without the city to a
location within the city or to move a house or building within the city to a point outside the city without first
securing a permit therefor as hereafter provided.
(b) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to wreck or dismantle any house or
building, the value of which exceeds $100.00, within the city without securing a permit therefor as hereafter
provided.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 9A)
Sec. 3.802 Deposit or Bond Required
(a) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to move a house or building as provided in Section 3.801 of this
article shall deposit with the city manager or his/her designee of the city the sum of $200.00 upon condition and
with the express agreement that the city is to retain said money for a period of five (5) days after the house or
building reaches its new location. If within said time it shall appear to the governing body of the city that any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/562
damage has been done to the streets or any wires, or any trees, or any other private or public property, in the
opinion of said governing body, then the governing body shall, by resolution, assess the amount of such damage,
after viewing the alleged property injured, either in favor of the city or the owner of the property in front of
which the trees or other injured property may be situated or the owner of any private property alleged to have
been injured; and the finding of said governing body shall be final. The deposit of the money above referred to
with the city shall be held to be an express agreement to the terms and provisions of this article. Should the city
manager or his/her designee upon compliance with this article by any person, firm or corporation decline to
issue such permit, an appeal may be had to the governing body of the city which may, if it deems proper, by
resolution, authorize such use of the street, avenue or alley.
(b) In lieu of the deposit herein required those regularly engaged in house moving may file a surety bond or
other bond as may be approved by the governing body of the city, in the amount of $200.00 and such bond shall
insure to the benefit of any persons damaged as well as to the city. It shall be conditioned that the principal will
pay to the city or any other person or persons damaged thereby, all such damages as may accrue to it or them by
reason of moving such house or houses or building along the streets permitted.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 9B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 3.803 Permit; Fee
(a) The city manager or his/her designee of the city will issue the permit required in Section 3.801(a) above
upon the payment of a fee of $50.00.
(b) The permit required in Section 3.801(b) above will be issued by the city manager or his/her designee of the
city upon payment of a fee of $50.00.
(Ordinance 830, sec. 4, adopted 6/13/06)
Sec. 3.804 Penalty for Violations
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of
this code. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 9D)
ARTICLE 3.900 FENCES
Sec. 3.901 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings, respectively, as set forth
below.
Fence. A mesh, solid, or systematically spaced and adjoined barrier so positioned as to confine, separate or
enclose, regardless of the material of which same is made, constructed or grown, which is not a part of or
enclosed within any building.
Person. Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation.
Swimming Pool. Any enclosure holding two feet of water or more for purposes of recreational swimming or
bathing; this shall include spas, saunas, hot tubs, and both above-ground and below-ground pools; this shall not,
however, include any such enclosure that is contained entirely within an enclosed building equipped with doors
and windows and/or gates equipped with locks sufficient to secure same against unauthorized entry.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 11A)
Sec. 3.902 Permit Required
(a) No person shall build, erect or maintain any new fence, as defined in this article, without first obtaining a
permit for such fence from the city.
(b) No person shall rebuild any existing fence, as defined in this article, which existing fence is not in
conformity with the requirements of this article, without first obtaining a permit for rebuilding such fence from
the city.
(c) No permit, however, shall be required for the repair or reconstruction, in whole or in part, of an existing
fence which does conform to the requirements of this article, provided the rebuilding does not increase the
original perimeter of the fence.
(d) No permit is required for minor repairs of existing nonconforming fences, and such repairs will be deemed
minor if they do not involve more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the aboveground area of the fence,
measured from ground to top and from corner to corner, or end to end, or end to corner, on any straight line of
the fence.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 11B)
Sec. 3.903 Restrictions and Requirements for Fences
(a) Fence materials. Permitted construction materials are brick, stone, masonry, natural and treated woods,
ornamental metal, PVC fence material, metal tubing, or wrought iron, decorative aluminum or metal having a
factory applied nonmetallic matte finish, and chainlink. Vinyl or fiberglass composite materials may be utilized
if the material is listed, designed, and constructed for fencing materials. Metal posts will be allowed on wood
fences.
(1) Prohibited construction materials are rope, string, wire products including, but not limited to
chicken wire, hog wire, wire fabric, barbed wire (except as allowed in other sections of this code),
razor ribbon wire and similar welded or woven wire fabrics, chain, netting, cut or broken glass,
paper, metal panels, corrugated metal panels, galvanized sheet metal, plywood, fiberglass panels or
plastic panels or any other materials that are not specifically manufactured as fencing materials. No
person shall weave or use slats of any material, including but not limited to metal, fiberglass,
bamboo, or mesh through a chainlink fence to create a blind or screening fence in a residential zoning
district. No person shall construct a fence, retaining wall, screen or barrier of used, damaged, or
unsafe material. The building official may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer's
standards to establish the intended use of a proposed fencing material.
(2) The following setback restriction applies:
(A) Front yard. No fence, retaining wall, screen, or barrier may be built nearer to the street
onto which the main house or building faces than the main house or building itself. Exceptions
to this restriction may be made for schools and in commercial and industrial zoning districts, if
required for topographical or structural support.
(Ordinance 1128 adopted 10/9/18)
(b) Gates. At least one gate must provide access into the fenced area. A gate must also provide access by a
reasonable route to any adjoining alley. Swimming pool gates have additional requirements as hereinafter
provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/562
(c) Height. The following height requirements shall apply to fences erected in the city:
(1) Residential Zoning Districts. Maximum Height = eight (8) feet; Minimum Height = four (4)
feet
(2) Nonresidential Zoning Districts. Maximum Height = eight (8) feet; Minimum Height = six (6)
feet
(d) Easements - Property Lines. A fence may extend up to and include the property line, at the rear and side
yards, but shall not violate the set back line on the front yard. No fence, guy wire, brace, vee arm, barbed wire,
base or any other structure on a fence shall extend outside the property line of the applicant-owner, or into or
across any alley or sidewalk.
(e) Floodplains - Drainage Easements. No fence may be built into, across or within a floodplain area or
drainage easement in any manner which will alter, raise or impede the flow of water in these areas.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 11C)
(f) Construction Fences. Fences required to protect pedestrian traffic around construction sites shall comply
with the requirements of Section 3306.1 of the current International Building Code. (Ordinance 830, sec. 5,
adopted 6/13/06)
(g) Animal Pens. Fences which will create a dog run or similar small enclosures for animals must be kept five
(5) feet from any adjoining property line; provided, however, if the animal has the run of the entire yard of the
premises (excluding the front yard), this restriction will not apply.
(h) Barbed-wire Fences. Barbed-wire fences used in conjunction with agricultural and related uses in
agricultural zoning districts shall be permissible, without restriction, but barbed-wire fences are expressly
prohibited in all other zoning districts; provided, however, barbed-wire strands may be placed on top of
permitted fences and screening elements in any zoning district for the purpose of security from theft, injury and
hazard, such as around utility substations and similar uses, if the top strand is not higher than eight (8) feet, nor
the bottom strand not lower than six (6) feet, from the adjacent grade line.
(i) Razor-wire. Razor-wire fences or razor wire on top of fences for any purpose is expressly prohibited in all
zoning districts.
(j) Electric Fences. Electric fences are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts except where agricultural
and related uses are permitted, and provided such fences in agriculture zoning districts are plainly marked at
appropriate intervals with warnings as to the nature of the fence.
(k) Corner Lots. In order to prevent blind intersections, no fence shall be built to extend into the triangular
area formed by the extension of the two curb lines to a point:
(1) 25 feet from their intersections, for the intersection of a street and an alley, and connecting the
points to form a 45 degree triangle; or
(2) 45 feet from the intersection, for the intersection of two streets, and connecting the points to
form a 45 degree triangle.
This restriction shall not apply in agricultural zoning districts or undeveloped areas, provided the fence is of wire
strands or open mesh wire or similar construction that will not be any impediment to vision.
(l) Reconstruction of Existing Fences. When a permit is required for the reconstruction or repair of any
existing fence by prior provisions of this article, such existing fence must be updated to meet all of the
requirements of this article in the making of such repairs and/or reconstruction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/562
(m) Screening. Nonresidential uses shall be screened from view by any adjacent residential uses by solid
fencing or walls along the length of the property on the side and rear yards and within the property required to
erect the fencing. These fences or walls shall not encroach on any setbacks.
(n) Trash Receptacles. Outside storage areas of trash/recycling receptacles shall be at the rear or side of the
building and completely screened by a solid fence or wall, which includes the gate. These areas of receptacles
shall not encroach on any setbacks or buffer strip.
(o) Maintenance. No wall or fence shall be constructed or maintained in a manner that would endanger the
health and safety of the general public. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the fence
or wall to ensure that it is neat and functional.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 11C)
Sec. 3.904 Fence Requirements Around Swimming Pools
(a) It shall be unlawful to build or maintain a swimming pool that is not completely enclosed within a building
within the city, unless said swimming pool is enclosed with a fence that meets the requirements herein set forth.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 11D)
(b) Every such swimming pool within the corporate limits of the city must be enclosed with an approved
fence that is:
(1) At least 6 feet in height and so constructed that children cannot crawl under it;
(2) Be of materials having no opening, other than for doors and gates, larger than 4 square inches;
and
(3) Be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors in good working condition, with
the self-latching devices attached to the top one third (1/3) of the door or gate.
(Ordinance 830, sec. 6, adopted 6/13/06)
NOTE: All doors and gates to the pool fence must be so equipped and merely locking a nonselflatching/
nonself-closing gate or door does not meet this requirement. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3,
Section 11D)
Sec. 3.905 Inspection; Red Tag
Every fence hereafter constructed, materially repaired or reconstructed within the corporate limits of the city
shall be subject to inspection by the city at any time. If such inspection reveals that no permit has been obtained
for such fence as herein required, or that such fence is not being constructed or repaired or reconstructed so as to
conform to the requirements of this article, the city inspector will place a red tag thereon forbidding further work
upon such fence. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such red tag until all requirements of this article
have been met, or the inspector has removed such tag and given permission to proceed. It shall also be unlawful
for any person to do further work upon such fence, or in furtherance of its construction, repair or reconstruction
until such red tag has been lawfully removed from the fence site. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section
11E)
Sec. 3.906 Violations and Penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/562
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or fail to comply with any
requirement hereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that any violation of any provision of
this article continues is expressly declared to constitute a distinct and separate offense, and this provision is
particularly intended to apply to the continued work upon or the continued existence of any fence not meeting
the requirements of the section or built without a permit required by this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 3, Section 11F)
Sec. 3.907 Variance or Waiver
(a) The city council may grant a variance or waiver from the requirements of this article in accordance with
this article. The city council may grant a variance or waiver after a public hearing, by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the city council members present and voting on the matter.
(b) The applicant for a variance or waiver must provide in the application, a specific explanation of the
grounds or reasons upon which the variance or waiver request is based.
(c) At the time the variance or waiver application is filed, the applicant shall pay a fee of $100.00 to defray the
costs of handling and processing the application. This fee shall not be refundable regardless of the disposition of
the application.
(d) Notice shall be sent by United States mail, return receipt requested, not less than 10 days before the public
hearing, to all property owners (as the ownership appears in the most current tax rolls for the city) whose
property is located within 200 feet of any portion of the boundary of the property for which a variance or waiver
has been requested.
(e) In order to grant a variance or waiver, the city council must determine that a literal enforcement of the
regulations will create an unnecessary hardship or a practical difficulty for the applicant, that the situation
causing the unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty is unique to the affected property and is not selfimposed,
that the variance or waiver will not injure and will be wholly compatible with the use and permitted
development of adjacent properties, and that the granting of a variance or waiver will be in harmony with the
spirit and purpose of this article.
(f) The terms and conditions of the variance or waiver, if granted, shall be noted on the permit. If a variance or
waiver application is denied by the city council, no other variance or waiver or like kind relating to the same
building or proposed building, shall be considered or acted upon by the city council for a period of six (6)
months subsequent to the denial.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 11G)
ARTICLE 3.1000 STREET EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 3.1001 Warning Devices Required
Any person, firm, or corporation making any excavation or embankment in any street, alley, or public easement
in the city shall provide, erect, place, and maintain all warning signs, lighting devices, and barricades and
channelizing devices required in part VI Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction and Maintenance
Operation of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. Failure to provide
or maintain warning devices shall be considered a misdemeanor. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section
12A)
Sec. 3.1002 Restoration of Work Areas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/562
Upon completion of any work involving excavation in any street, alley, or public easement in the city, the
person, firm, or corporation making such excavation, shall remove all equipment, men, materials, and debris as
soon as possible and restore the street and premises in as good a condition as existed prior to the excavation.
Failure to restore such streets or premises shall be considered a misdemeanor. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 3, Section 12B)
ARTICLE 3.1100 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 3.1101 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings, respectively, as set forth:
Alarm Notification. A notification intended to summon the police or fire department, which is designed either to
be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of
unauthorized intrusion or fire.
Alarm Site. A single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are
under the control of one owner.
Alarm Systems. Any mechanical or electrical device which is used to protect buildings or premises from criminal
acts or unauthorized entries by warning persons of a crime or unauthorized entry through the emission of a crime
or unauthorized entry, or fire through the emission of a sound or the transmission of a signal or message. Alarm
systems does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site.
Automatic Alarm Notification. An alarm notification sent over telephone lines, by direct connection or
otherwise, a prerecorded voice message, synthesized voice message, or coded signal indication the existence of
the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
Central Station. An office to which remote and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators
supervise the circuits, and/or where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
Chief. The chief of police of the city or his authorized representative.
City. The City of Lake Worth.
False Alarm Notification. An alarm notification to the police department, when the responding officer finds no
evidence of unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an attempt to
take a person hostage, or fire.
Licensed Installer. A person, contractor or repairman licensed by the city to install, repair or maintain an alarm
system within the city.
Local Alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a
structure.
Permit Holder. The person designated in the application as required in Section 3.1102 hereafter who is
responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is also responsible for proper
maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13A)
Sec. 3.1102 Permit Required; Application; Transferability; False Statements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/562
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without an alarm
permit issued by the chief. A separate permit is required for each alarm system.
(b) An initial fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) shall be charged for the issuance of each permit for both
residential and commercial. A renewal fee for residents shall be ten dollars ($10.00) after their first initial fee.
The renewal fee for commercial shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
(c) Upon receipt of a completed application form and the required fee, the chief shall issue an alarm permit to
an applicant unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under Section 3.1114 hereof or has had
an alarm permit for the alarm system revoked, and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected.
(d) Each permit application must contain the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the permit holder who will be responsible for the
proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this
article;
(2) Classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial;
(3) For each alarm system located at the alarm site the purpose of the alarm system, i.e., burglary,
robbery, or personal hostage robbery or fire;
(4) Other information required by the chief which is necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(e) Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit
shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit.
(f) An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another alarm system except by authorization of the chief. A
permit holder shall inform the chief of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application
within two (2) business days. No fee will be assessed for such changes.
(g) A permit holder shall cancel a permit for any alarm systems which is removed from an alarm site or which
otherwise ceases to come under the permitting requirements of this article. Cancellation may be accomplished
by returning the permit to the chief.
(h) All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13B)
Sec. 3.1103 Permit Duration and Renewal
A permit is issued for one (1) year and must be renewed every year upon submission of an updated application.
It is the responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. The chief
shall determine the first expiration date of a permit. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13C)
Sec. 3.1104 Revocation of Permit
(a) The chief shall revoke an alarm permit if the determines that:
(1) There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a permit;
(2) The permit holder has violated any part of this article;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/562
(3) The permit holder has failed to make payment of a service fee assess under subsection N hereof
within thirty (30) days of receiving notice to do so.
(b) A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is
revoked.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13D)
Sec. 3.1105 Appeal From Denial, Revocation, or Suspension of Permit
(a) If the chief refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit
holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an
appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief to the city manager or his/her
designee by written request for a hearing, setting forth the reason for the appeal, within ten (10) days after
receipt of the notice from the chief. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager or his/her
designee stays an action of the chief in revoking a permit until the city manager or his/her designee or his or her
designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten
day period, the action of the chief is final.
(b) The city manager or his/her designee shall set a time and place for the hearing which shall be served upon
the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested. The city manager or his/her designee,
or his or her representative, shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal and consider evidence by any interested
person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. All parties to the hearing shall have the
right to present evidence and shall have the right to present evidence and shall have the right of crossexamination.
The hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence within
fifteen (15) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The time for hearing an appeal may be extended
by agreement of the parties. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the chief. The
decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13E; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 3.1106 Proper Alarm System Operation and Maintenance
(a) A permit holder shall:
(1) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that insures proper operation of
the alarm system;
(2) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notification;
(3) Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time when
requested by the chief to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the
premises or to provide security for the premises;
(4) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the
alarm system was intended to report;
(5) Notify the police department prior to activation of an alarm for maintenance purposes.
(b) A permit holder shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal
will sound for no longer than thirty (30) minutes after being activated.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13F)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/562
Sec. 3.1107 Alarm Reset Required
A permit holder of an alarm system that utilizes a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the
mechanism to be adjusted so that, upon activation, the local alarm will not transmit another alarm signal without
first being reset. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13G)
Sec. 3.1108 Indirect Alarm Reporting
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall:
(1) Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the chief;
(2) Comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the
chief.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13H)
Sec. 3.1109 Recorded Message Alarm Notification Prohibited
Following the effective date of this article, no permit will be issued for the use of systems using automatic
telephone dialing to report an alarm condition by means of a recorded message directly to the police department.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13I)
Sec. 3.1110 Alarm System Operating Instructions
A permit holder shall maintain at each alarm site, a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm
system. Special codes, combinations, or passwords must not be included in these instructions. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13J)
Sec. 3.1111 Requirements; Application for a License; Revocation; Suspension
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of installing, causing to be
installed, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing or moving in or on any building, place, or
premises with the city, any device known as a burglar or hold-up alarm, without first being registered and
licensed with the state, or licensed by the city and then having made application and received a permit for the
installation of new alarms or the repair of existing alarms that have not heretofore been permitted. An installer,
constructor or repairman may be issued a license by making application to the city and paying required fee of
$50.00. Homeowners may obtain a homeowners license for $10.00. (Ordinance 799, sec. 3, adopted 7/12/05)
(b) License shall be issued upon written application to the city or its designated agent. License shall not be
issued to any person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(c) License shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year.
(d) The license issued hereunder is nontransferable.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13K)
(e) No burglar alarm system contractor or installer, shall employ an individual who has been convicted of a
felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. However, any burglar alarm system contractors desiring to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/562
avail themselves of knowledge and expertise of a person who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude, must first receive prior approval to hire such individuals from the chief of police.
(Ordinance 799, sec. 3, adopted 7/12/05)
(f) Any such license may be revoked, suspended or denied renewal for cause which shall include the
following:
(1) Conviction of a felony or any offense involving moral turpitude; or
(2) Violation of an provision of this article.
(g) Duty of Installer. Installers of alarm systems shall make the user aware that a permit must be obtained
from the city for which a fee is required.
(h) The installer shall also instruct the user regarding the operation of the system, including but not limited to
the criteria for use of the police alert button device, stressing it is for the summoning of police only in the event
of a real and immediate threat to life.
(i) The installer shall not install an alarm system contrary to the provisions of the section. Alarm systems that
are installed that are contrary to the provisions of this article are in violation of this article for the day the alarm
system is installed and each day or portion of a day thereafter are separate offenses until the alarm system
adheres to the provisions of this article.
(j) Any keyless configuration activating or deactivating device which contains only a single button to activate
a police alert alarm, shall provide for a design of such equipment that accidental activation will not occur and
that activation is a deliberate act.
(k) Alarm systems shall include a delay code which will be so engineered so as an alarm will not be sent due
to momentary breaks in electrical current caused by lightning.
(l) All electrical equipment used for the installation of alarm systems shall be Underwriters Laboratories Inc.,
approved.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13K)
Sec. 3.1112 Alarm Dispatch Records
(a) The police dispatcher receiving the alarm notification and/or the police officer responding to a dispatch
resulting from a burglar, robbery, personal hostage or fire alarm notification shall cause to be recorded in the
police information systems such information as necessary to permit the chief to maintain records, including but
not limited to the following information:
(1) Identification of the permit holder;
(2) Identification of the alarm site;
(3) Dispatcher received time, dispatch time and officer arrived at scene time;
(4) Date of occurrence;
(5) Name of permit holder's representative on premises, if any.
(b) The responding police officer shall prepare and submit the appropriate reports in regard to any criminal
offenses, attempts, fire or other incidents which contributed to the alarm notification as determined by
investigation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13L)
Sec. 3.1113 System Performance Reviews and Consultations
(a) If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that insures
proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the chief may require a conference with an alarm permit holder to
review circumstances of each false alarm.
(b) If there is belief that an alarm is the result of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the permit
holder, the permit holder or the permit holder's representative may request a conference with the chief.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13M)
Sec. 3.1114 Service Fees
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d) below, the holder of an alarm permit shall pay a service
fee of $25.00 for each false alarm notification emitted from an alarm system that is in excess of five (5) false
alarms during the preceding twelve (12) month period.
(b) If a person notifies the chief and applies for an alarm permit before a new alarm system is put into service,
no service fee will be assessed during the first sixty (60) days after the system is put into service, and alarm
notifications during that period will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed.
(c) If the responding police officer determines that an alarm notification was caused by unauthorized
intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an attempt to take a person hostage or
fire (to include smoke) that notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed.
(d) An alarm notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed if the
permittee can prove that the alarm notification was the result of a severe weather condition, such as a tornado,
hurricane or earthquake or other weather condition that causes physical damage to the alarm site, or the result of
a malfunction in the operation of telephone lines for the transmission of alarm signals, proof of the latter being
documented in the form of telephone company work orders or time stamped records from the alarm company
showing the periods of interrupted service.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13N)
Sec. 3.1115 Inspection of Alarm Devices; Systems
(a) For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the city or its designated agent shall have the
authority, at reasonable oral notice, to enter any premises in the city in or upon which the alarm system subject
to this article is located, to inspect the installation and operation of such alarm system.
(b) If such inspection reveals any violations of provisions of this article a written report detailing such
violations shall be promptly sent to the owner, lessors, or other person responsible for the alarm system. Such
report shall require the correction within thirty (30) days after receipt of a notice of the violation discovered, and
shall state that a failure to comply may result in permit being suspended.
(c) It shall be unlawful to continue to operate such alarm system until the violation is corrected.
(d) The city or its designated agent shall have the authority to revoke or suspend the operation of an alarm
system if the inspection reveals violations of this article which are not corrected.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13O)
Sec. 3.1116 Liability; City to be Held Harmless
The application to the city or its designated agent shall contain a provision that the city shall not be liable for any
failure of service or damages including damages resulting from breaking to gain entrance, that might result from
the installation or operation of any receiving station alarm, automatic dialing device, or local alarm. All
applicants must agree to indemnify the city for all claims, demands, judgments, liability. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13P)
Sec. 3.1117 Violations; Penalty; Corporations, Partnerships and Associations
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other association to violate any of the provisions
of this article, and any such person, corporation, partnership or other association which violates a provision of
this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13Q)
Sec. 3.1118 Implementation of Provisions; Exemptions
(a) This section shall apply to any person who operates or causes to be operated an alarm system at any alarm
site.
(b) This section shall not apply to alarm systems operated by local, state or federal governmental entities.
(c) Alarm systems which are presently in operation within the city must be approved and a permit issued in
accordance with this article within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this article. The person operating
such system shall remove and cause it to be inoperative unless a permit is issued.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 13R)
ARTICLE 3.1200 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS*
Sec. 3.1201 Definitions
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed:
Building Official. A person authorized by the city council to perform the duties prescribed in this article.
Licensee. A person to whom a license for construction and/or operation and maintenance of a park has been
issued.
Mobile Home (or HUD Code-Manufactured Home). A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities. This term
specifically excludes modular homes.
Mobile Home Park. A plot of land under single person ownership, upon which two (2) or more mobile homes,
occupied for dwelling purposes, are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such
accommodation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/562
Mobile Home Space. The ground area allocated for occupancy by one (1) mobile home in the layout of a park.
Off-Street Parking Space. An unobstructed area of minimum nine feet (9') by eighteen feet (18') dimensions,
allocated for parking a vehicle in the layout of a park.
Permittee. A person to whom a nonconforming use permit for operation and maintenance of a park has been
issued.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 14A)
Sec. 3.1202 Mobile Homes Outside Licensed Park
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a mobile home as living quarters if such mobile home is located
outside a licensed mobile home park or trailer park. The license referred to herein is a city license issued
pursuant to the article governing such matters. A mobile home is defined as any vehicle or structure constructed
for use as a sleeping quarter mounted or constructed to be mounted on wheels and propelled by its own power or
by another power driven vehicle, regardless of size or square footage. It shall include house trailers, travel
trailers, recreational vehicles and motor homes, regardless of size or square footage. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 3, Section 14B)
Sec. 3.1203 Construction of Mobile Parks Must be in Accordance with City's Zoning, Building, and
Development Regulations
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a mobile home park within the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction in violation of the city's zoning, building and development regulations. Mobile home parks may be
located in any zoning district allowed in the city's zoning ordinance, provided any applicable restrictions have
been met. All proposed mobile home parks shall also be platted in accordance with the city's development
regulations. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 14C)
Sec. 3.1204 License (or Permit) Required to Operate Mobile Home Park
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home park within the city limits without a
license therefor. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required for each mobile home park license.
The license shall be issued by the city manager or his/her designee upon approval of the city council, subject to
compliance with the terms and provisions of this article. No utility service shall be provided until the license
herein provided for shall have been issued. All applications for a license shall be made upon prescribed forms
provided by the city. In considering the disposal of any such application, the city council may take into account
the character of the neighborhood, with respect to present and anticipated land use and development, wherein the
park is located or is in operation. Upon approval of an application by the city council, the city manager or his/her
designee will issue a license.
Sec. 3.1205 Renewal or Transfer of Mobile Home Park License or Permit
For validity, a license shall be renewed each year. Upon inspection by the building official and with his approval
and payment of an annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) by the licensee, renewal will be effected by the
city manager or his/her designee. To transfer a license, a written request to do so shall be submitted to the city
manager or his/her designee. Upon inspection of the park by the city inspector, and with his or her approval, the
city manager or his/her designee will issue a transfer, the fee therefore being one hundred dollars ($100.00). The
city manager or his/her designee shall refuse to issue a renewal or transfer if the mobile home park is in violation
of any condition contained in the original license or any regulation contained herein applicable to operation and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/562
maintenance of the mobile home park. In the event of denial by the building official, the applicant may appeal
such denial to the city council by written notice to the city manager or his/her designee within ten (10) days of
such denial.
(Ordinance 830, sec. 7, adopted 6/13/06)
Sec. 3.1206 Revocation of Mobile Home Park License or Permit
A license may be revoked by the city council when the licensee is found to be in violation of any provision of
this article. After a hearing is held before the city council according to written notice given to licensee at least
ten (10) days prior to such hearing. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 14F)
Sec. 3.1207 Posting of License
The license shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile home park at all
times. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 14G)
Sec. 3.1208 Mobile Home Park Design and Construction Standards
After the effective date of this article, all mobile home parks shall at least meet the following design and
construction standards:
(1) Size of Park; Spacing and Clearances for Mobile Homes. The minimum size of a park shall be
one-half (½) acre. A mobile home space shall be at least three (3) times larger than the mobile home
to be placed thereon and no less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area. Such spaces shall be
clearly delineated on the ground in accordance with the final plat approved. A minimum clearance of
twenty feet (20') between mobile homes shall be provided and a minimum clearance of fifteen feet
(15') between any mobile home and a park boundary that does not abut upon public street. When a
park boundary abuts upon a public street, no mobile home shall be closer thereto than twenty-five
feet (25').
(2) Off-Street Parking Spaces. At least two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
mobile home space. Such off-street parking may be in the form of parking bays, provided that such
bays are within two hundred feet (200') of the mobile home space, or individual parking on each lot.
Where individual parking spaces are used, parking may be in tandem. In addition, an additional one
hundred fifty (150) square feet for each two (2) mobile home spaces shall be provided in common
area for the storage of boats and trailers and for visitor parking. All parking areas shall be constructed
in accordance with the general construction standards provided in the city's development regulations,
and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other mobile homes
and common parking areas within the park. Each parking space shall be maintained by the owner or
agent free of cracks, holes or other hazards.
(3) Streets and Walkways. Internal streets, no-parking area signs, and street name signs shall be
privately owned, built, and maintained, unless dedicated to and accepted by the city. Streets shall be
designed for safe and convenient access to all mobile home spaces and in accordance with the
general design standards of the city's development regulations. All internal streets shall be kept open
and free of obstruction in order that police and fire vehicles may have access to any areas of the
mobile home park. The police department shall be authorized to issue citations for the violation of the
provisions hereof and to remove and impound offending vehicles on all private streets. All internal
streets shall be paved and constructed to the general construction standards established in the city's
development regulations, and shall be maintained by the owner or agent free of cracks, holes, and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/562
other hazards. Every mobile home park shall have direct access from a public street and each mobile
home space shall have direct access to a public street or to an internal street. Where a private internal
street provides access, the same shall be dedicated to the public as an emergency access easement to
allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used for the purpose of providing emergency
health or public safety purposes. Each emergency access easement shall have a clear unobstructed
width of at least thirty feet (30') and shall connect at each end of a dedicated public street, or shall
have a turnaround of minimum sixty feet (60') diameter. Internal streets shall be named, and mobile
home spaces numbered to conform with block numbers on adjacent public streets. Private street signs
shall be of a color and size contrasting with those on public streets so that there is no confusion
regarding which are private and which are public streets. These signs and numbers shall be of
standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. All parks shall provide
concrete walkways of minimum thirty inches (30") in width for pedestrian access to each mobile
home from a street constructed to specifications approved by the city.
(4) Electrical and Telephone Service. All electrical wiring in the mobile home park shall be
underground and in accordance with the city's electrical regulations. All telephone lines in the mobile
home park shall also be installed underground.
(5) Water Supply. An adequate supply of potable water shall be supplied through the city's water
supply system to each mobile home space through piping conforming with the city's plumbing
regulations and general design and construction standards provided in the city's development
regulations. No common drinking cups shall be permitted. An outdoor water faucet shall be installed
at each mobile home space, at least four inches (4") above the ground and all mobile homes shall be
within five hundred feet (500') of a fire hydrant. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at
all times in the service buildings for all washing, cleansing and laundry facilities.
(6) Sewage Disposal. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sewer riser pipe of
minimum of four inches (4") diameter. The individual sewer connections and all diameter. The
individual sewer connections and all other elements in the park sewer system shall conform with the
city's plumbing regulations and the general design and construction standards provided in the city's
development regulations. Disposal shall be into the public sewer system.
(7) Drainage. The park shall be located and graded as to drain away all surface water in a safe and
efficient manner. Accumulations of stagnant water will not be permitted. Culverts and drainage
ditches shall be maintained free of dirt and debris by the owner or agent.
(8) Fire Protection. Every park shall be equipped at all times with one fire extinguisher in good
working order and recharged annually for every ten (10) mobile home spaces located not further than
two hundred (200) feet from each mobile home space. Also, service buildings (office, laundry
facilities, etc.) shall be provided with emergency fire extinguishing apparatus of such types and sizes
as may be prescribed by the city's fire prevention regulations. Fire resistant skirting with the
necessary vents, screens, and/or openings shall be installed on each mobile home within thirty (30)
days after its placement in the park. Each mobile home shall be equipped with an operable smoke
detector. To insure compliance by the mobile home owner with these requirements, licensee shall
make such compliance and conformation thereof a condition in the agreement for rental of a mobile
home space.
(9) Fuel Supply. Gas piping systems shall be installed underground in accordance with the city's
plumbing regulations. Gas outlets shall be capped when the mobile home spaces they serve are
vacant. Natural gas shall be supplied except that a liquefied petroleum gas system may be installed if
the nearest available natural gas supply is more than one thousand feet (1,000') from the park. LPG
systems shall conform with applicable codes and regulations by the state railroad commission
pertaining thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/562
(10) Extensions of Mobile Homes. No structural extension shall be attached to a mobile home in
violation of the spacing and clearance requirements of this article.
An extension that does not violate those requirements may be installed if it meets all applicable
city codes and ordinances and if it meets the following requirements:
(A) Constructed of metal, fire resistive, double-wall panels with mechanically connected
joints;
(B) Length no greater than that of mobile home to which it is accessory; and
(C) To be dismantled on removal from the park of the mobile home to which it is accessory.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 14H)
Sec. 3.1209 Operation and Maintenance of Mobile Home Parks
All mobile home parks shall comply with the following operation and maintenance regulations:
(1) The licensee shall keep up-to-date and have available for inspection at the park, a register of
park occupancy that shall contain the following information:
(A) Name and address of park residents;
(B) Mobile home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture and
identification number; and
(C) Location of each mobile home by park street name and number.
A new register shall be initiated on January 1st each year and the old register retired but
retained on the park premises for at least three (3) years thereafter. The register(s) shall be made
available for inspection, at all times, by law enforcement officers, public health officials and
other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register.
(2) The licensee shall be responsible for keeping the park in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition
free of accumulations of rubbish and of rank growth of grass or weeds that might constitute a fire
hazard or give harborage to noxious insects. Walks, streets, and parking spaces shall be maintained in
a serviceable all-weather condition.
(3) The licensee shall not allow any open fire or burning within the park except for outdoor
cooking or camper-type stoves or charcoal grills. Also, the licensee shall not allow the storage of
flammable liquids beneath mobile homes. The fire resistant skirting specified in Section 3.1208(8)
shall be maintained intact to prevent accumulations of flammable materials beneath mobile homes.
The licensee shall also be responsible for inspecting and testing all emergency fire extinguishing
apparatus at intervals of time suggested by the manufacturer.
(4) The licensee shall ensure the storage, collection and disposal of refuse and garbage shall be
conducted so as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding grounds, fire hazards,
litter or air pollution. Each mobile home space must utilize the city's refuse collection services.
(5) The licensee shall provide that all mobile homes located in the park be installed and anchored
in accordance with state department of housing and community affairs rules and regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/562
(6) The licensee shall ensure that all mobile homes have a fire resistant skirting around the bottom
of the perimeter of the mobile home.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 14I)
Sec. 3.1210 Liability of City Under This Article
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability
by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 3, Section 14J)
ARTICLE 3.1300 DEVELOPMENT POLICIES, PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS ADOPTED*
The updated “City Development Policies, Procedures, and Standards” is hereby approved as amended,
incorporating increases in fees and establishment of a development procedure and fee. The policies, procedures
and standards set out in said document shall be enforced by the city council and administrative staff of the city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Section 15)
ARTICLE 3.1400 TEMPORARY OR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
Sec. 3.1401 Defined
For the purpose of this article “temporary building” shall be defined as any structure intended to be used only for
a specific and limited period of time or which is not attached to a permanent foundation. (Ordinance 805, sec. 1
(3.1404), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 3.1402 Temporary Buildings Permitted
Where the city council finds that because of emergency circumstances the use of a temporary building is
necessary, it may permit such a temporary building subject to the provisions of this article. The permit shall be
limited to the period of time that the council determines is the probable duration of the emergency. The council
may, in its discretion, authorize extensions of time if the owner or occupant of the temporary building
demonstrates that the emergency justifying the use continues. (Ordinance 805, sec. 1 (3.1402), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 3.1403 Certain School Purposes Declared an Emergency
For the purposes of this article, school construction or expansion that creates a need for temporary additional
classroom space is declared to be an emergency. (Ordinance 805, sec. 1 (3.1403), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 3.1404 Regulations
Temporary buildings permitted under this article are subject to the following conditions:
(1) Plans for the permanent structure must have been submitted to the building permit department
for approval and the building permit must be issued within sixty (60) days from the date that the
temporary building is permitted.
(2) An applicant for a temporary building permit and the property owner shall submit in writing a
statement that they will remove the temporary building at the end of the permit period or sooner if so
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/562
ordered by the city manager or his/her designee. The building official, under the direction of the city
manager or his/her designee, may cancel the temporary building permit and cause the temporary
building to be removed:
(A) For violation of any city ordinance or code;
(B) If work does not start within thirty (30) days of issuance of the building permit (simple
lot grading does not constitute work); or
(C) If work ceases for thirty (30) consecutive days.
(3) Temporary buildings must be constructed and maintained in compliance with all applicable
technical construction codes of the city, including the current building code, electrical code, and
plumbing code.
(4) In authorizing a temporary building, the city council may impose such reasonable conditions or
restrictions as it deems appropriate to enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the community or to
promote the aesthetic appeal of the use. By way of illustration, such conditions may include
landscaping, skirting, fencing, or setback requirements, or a requirement that the temporary building
be placed in a particular location on the lot.
(5) Inspections may be required to the extent necessary to ensure compliance with the conditions
set out above.
(Ordinance 805, sec. 1 (3.1404), adopted 8/9/05)
ARTICLE 3.1500 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
ADOPTED
The current version of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction as published from time to time
by the North Central Texas Council of Governments is adopted as the specifications governing all public works
construction within the city. (Ordinance 766 adopted 11/9/04)
ARTICLE 3.1600 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.1601 Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, Section 16.315, delegated
the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. This article
is adopted pursuant to that authority.
Sec. 3.1602 Findings of Fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/562
Sec. 3.1603 Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.1604 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.1605 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial Fan Flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/562
Appurtenant Structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of Future Conditions Flood Hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base Flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year-also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical Feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing Construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood Elevation Study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/562
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Protection System. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or Floodprone Area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally Dependent Use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include
longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/562
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee System. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured Home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New Construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new
construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/562
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Roadway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of Construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97448), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date, The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water Surface Elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/562
riverine areas.
Sec. 3.1606 Lands to Which This Article Applies Within
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.1607 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas,” dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated September
25, 2009, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
Sec. 3.1608 Establishment of Development Permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.1609 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.1610 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.1611 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Sec. 3.1612 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/562
Sec. 3.1613 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement
the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance–
National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.1614 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 3.1607, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
this article.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/562
Sec. 3.1615 Permit Procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on
forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard, Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Section 3.1618(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Section 3.1614(1);
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
Sec. 3.1616 Variance Procedures
(a) The appeal board appointed by the city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances
from the requirements of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/562
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures
set forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section 3.1615 of this article have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article.
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)–(i) are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 3.1617 General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/562
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Sec. 3.1618 Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section
3.1607, Section 3.1614(8), or Section 3.1619(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two (2) feet above the base
flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Section
3.1615(a)(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured Homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/562
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two (2) feet
above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsections (4)(A) or (4)(B) of this
section be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational Vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (A) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (C) meet the permit requirements of Section
3.1615(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection (4)
of this section, A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system,
is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
Sec. 3.1619 Standards for Subdivision Proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with Sections 3.1602, 3.1603, and 3.1604 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Section 3.1608; Section 3.1615; and
the provisions of Sections 3.1617, 3.1618, 3.1619, 3.1620, 3.1621 of this article.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated with subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 3.1607 or Section 3.1614(8) of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/562
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all zone A areas, within
100 feet of the contour lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the
community's FIRM.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(f) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
Sec. 3.1620 Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.1607, are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on
the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of
effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in Section 3.1615 are satisfied.
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
Sec. 3.1621 Floodways
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.1607, are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/562
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
(Ordinance 920 adopted 7/14/09)
ARTICLE 3.1700 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED
Division 1. International Building Code*
Sec. 3.1701 Adopted
The 2012 edition of the International Building Code (chapters 1–35) is hereby adopted as the official building
code of the city, and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this division in its entirety. The
material contained in such code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall
be maintained as a public record in the office of the building official and will be available for public inspection
and copying during regular business hours.
Sec. 3.1702 Local Amendments
The 2012 edition of the International Building Code, as adopted herein is hereby amended by adoption of those
local amendments shown on exhibit “A” attached to Ordinance 1002.
Sec. 3.1703 Public Record
The material contained in exhibit A to Ordinance 1002, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference,
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material contained in such
ordinances shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the building
official. This exhibit will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. The
purpose of maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the inclusion
of detailed technical construction materials, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably lengthen the
code.
(Ordinance 1002, sec. 1, adopted 6/11/13)
Sec. 3.1704–3.1710 Reserved
Division 2. International Residential Code*
Sec. 3.1711 Adopted
The 2012 edition of the International Residential Code (chapters 1–43) is hereby adopted as the official
residential construction code of the city, and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
division in its entirety. The material contained in such code shall not be included in the formal municipal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/562
codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the building official and will
be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours.
Sec. 3.1712 Local Amendments
The 2012 edition of the International Residential Code, as adopted herein is hereby amended by adoption of
those local amendments shown on exhibit B attached to Ordinance 1002.
Sec. 3.1713 Public Record
The material contained in exhibit B to Ordinance 1002, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference,
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material contained in such
ordinances shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the building
official. This exhibit will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. The
purpose of maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the inclusion
of detailed technical construction materials, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably lengthen the
code.
Sec. 3.1714 Resolution of Conflicts between Building Code and Residential Code
To the extent of any conflict between the International Building Code and International Residential Code as
applied to residential property, the International Residential Code shall control.
(Ordinance 1002, sec. 2, adopted 6/11/13)
Secs. 3.1715–3.1720 Reserved
Division 3. International Plumbing Code*
Sec. 3.1721 Adopted
The 2012 edition of the International Plumbing Code (chapters 1–14) is hereby adopted as the official plumbing
code of the city, and fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this division in its entirety. The
material contained in such code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall
be maintained as a public record in the office of the building official and will be available for public inspection
and copying during regular business hours.
Sec. 3.1722 Local Amendments
The 2012 edition of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted herein is hereby amended by adoption of those
local amendments shown on exhibit C attached to Ordinance 1002.
Sec. 3.1723 Public Record
The material contained in exhibit C to Ordinance 1002, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference,
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material contained in such
ordinances shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the building
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/562
official. This exhibit will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. The
purpose of maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the inclusion
of detailed technical construction materials, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably lengthen the
code.
(Ordinance 1002, sec. 3, adopted 6/11/13)
Sec. 3.1724–3.1730 Reserved
Division 4. International Mechanical Code
Sec. 3.1731 Adopted
The 2012 edition of the International Mechanical Code (chapters 1–15) is by adopted as the official mechanical
code of the city, and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this division in its entirety. The
material contained in such code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall
be maintained as a public record in the office of the building official and will be available for public inspection
and copying during regular business hours.
Sec. 3.1732 Local Amendments
The 2012 edition of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted herein is hereby amended by adoption of
those local amendments shown on exhibit D attached to Ordinance 1002.
Sec. 3.1733 Public Record
The material contained in exhibit D to Ordinance 1002, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference,
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material contained in such
ordinances shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the building
official. This exhibit will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. The
purpose of maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the inclusion
of detailed technical construction materials, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably lengthen the
code.
(Ordinance 1002, sec. 4, adopted 6/11/13)
Sec. 3.1734–3.1740 Reserved
Division 5. International Fuel Gas Code
Sec. 3.1741 Adopted
The 2012 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code (chapters 1–8) is hereby adopted as the official fuel gas
code of the city, and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this division in its entirety. The
material contained in such code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall
be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and
copying during regular business hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/562
Sec. 3.1742 Local Amendments
The 2012 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted herein is hereby amended by adoption of those
local amendments shown on exhibit E attached to Ordinance 1002.
Sec. 3.1743 Public Record
The material contained in exhibit E to Ordinance 1002, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference,
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material contained in such
ordinances shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the building
official. This exhibit will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. The
purpose of maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the inclusion
of detailed technical construction materials, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably lengthen the
code.
(Ordinance 1002, sec. 5, adopted 6/11/13)
Sec. 3.1744–3.1750 Reserved
Division 6. International Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 3.1751 Adopted
The 2012 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (chapters C1–10, R1–10) is hereby adopted as
the official energy conservation code of the city, and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
division in its entirety. The material contained in such code shall not included in the formal municipal
codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the building official and will
be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours.
Sec. 3.1752 Local Amendments
The 2012 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted herein is hereby amended by
adoption, of those local amendments shown on exhibit F attached to Ordinance 1002.
Sec. 3.1753 Public Record
The material contained in exhibit F to Ordinance 1002, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference,
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material contained in exhibit F
shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the building official. This
exhibit will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. The purpose of
maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the inclusion of detailed
technical construction materials, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably lengthen the code.
(Ordinance 1002, sec. 6, adopted 6/11/13)
Sec. 3.1754–3.1760 Reserved
Division 7. National Electrical Code*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/562
Sec. 3.1761 Adopted
The 2011 National Electrical Code (chapters 1–9) is hereby adopted as the official electrical code of the city, and
is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this division in its entirety. The material contained in
such code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a
public record in the office of the building official and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours.
Sec. 3.1762 Local Amendments
The 2011 edition of the National Electrical Code, as adopted herein is hereby amended by adoption of those
local amendments shown on exhibit G attached to Ordinance 1002.
Sec. 3.1763 Public Record
The material contained in exhibit G to Ordinance 1002, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference,
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material contained in such
ordinances shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the building
official. This exhibit will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. The
purpose of maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the inclusion
of detailed technical construction materials, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably lengthen the
code.
(Ordinance 1002, sec. 7, adopted 6/11/13)
Sec. 3.1764–3.1780 Reserved
Division 8. Permits and Fees*
The fees adopted in the following fee schedules shall be applicable to work and projects under the uniform
[International] codes adopted by the city. (Ordinance 766 adopted 11/9/04)
Sec. 3.1781 Building Permit Fee Schedule
(a) Building Permits.
Fees for new construction/tenant finishouts/additions/remodels/miscellaneous building
permits
(including carports, fences, accessory buildings, porches/patios, inground pools):
Total Valuation Fee Amount
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/562
$1.00–$500.00 $23.50
$501.00–$2,000.00 $23.50 for the first $500.00, plus $3.05 for
each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to
and including $2,000.00
$2,001.00–$25,000.00 $69.25 for the first $2,000.00, plus $14.00 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof,
to and including $25,000.00
$25,001.00–$50,000.00 $391.75 for the first $25,000.00, plus $10.10
for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction
thereof, to and including $50,000.00
$50,001.00–$100,000.00 $643.75 for the first $50,000.00, plus $7.00 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof,
to and including $100,000.00
$100,001.00–$500,000.00 $993.75 for the first $100,000.00, plus $5.60
for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction
thereof, to and including $500,000.00
$500,001.00–$1,000,000.00 $3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00, plus $4.75
for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction
thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 and up $5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00, plus
$3.65 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof
(b) Construction Value, New Construction/Tenant Finishouts.
(1) Single-family residential projects shall be based on a cost per square foot of the total footage of
the new construction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/562
(2) Nonresidential projects shall be based on a cost per square foot based on the total footage and
type of construction of the new construction.
(c) Plan Review Fee (In Addition to Building Permit Fee) [for New Construction].
(1) Single-family residential projects shall be assessed 25% of the building permit fee.
(2) Nonresidential projects shall be assessed 65% of the building permit fee.
(d) Construction Value, Remodels/Additions/Miscellaneous.
(1) Single-family residential projects shall be based on the construction value supplied by the
applicant, unless questionable, then value may be determined by building official.
(2) Nonresidential projects shall be based on the construction value provided by applicant unless
questionable, then value may be determined by building official.
(e) Plan Review Fee (In Addition to Building Permit Fee) [for Remodels/Additions/Miscellaneous].
(1) Single-family residential will not be assessed a plan review.
(2) Nonresidential projects shall be assessed 65% of the building permit fee.
(Ordinance 830, sec. 8, adopted 6/13/06)
Sec. 3.1782 Square Foot Construction Cost
TABLE 2 SQUARE FOOT CONSTRUCTION COSTS a,b,c
TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION
Group 2003
International
Building Code
IA IB IIA IIB IIIA IIIB IV VA VB
A-1 Assembly,
theaters, with
stage
160.69 153.29 149.76 143.55 133.59 132.9 138.98 123.75 119.25
A-1 Assembly,
theaters,
without stage
148.41 141.02 137.48 131.28 121.31 120.63 126.71 111.47 106.98
A-2 Assembly,
nightclubs
118.34 115.03 112.14 107.94 100.98 99.75 104 91.98 88.94
A-2 Assembly, 117.34 114.03 110.14 106.94 98.98 98.75 103 89.98 87.94
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/562
restaurants,
bars, banquet
halls
A-3 Assembly
churches
149.66 142.27 138.73 132.52 122.51 121.82 127.96 112.67 108.17
A-3 Assembly,
general,
community
halls,
libraries,
museums
119.71 111.78 107.24 102.03 91.08 91.39 97.46 81.24 77.74
A-4 Assembly,
arenas
117.34 114.03 110.14 106.94 98.98 98.75 103 89.98 87.94
B Business 119.85 115.54 111.79 106.56 95.15 94.65 102.31 84.79 81.61
E Educational 128.37 124.05 120.5 115.17 106.24 103.73 111.36 94.92 91.38
F-1 Factory and
industrial,
moderate
hazard
74.13 70.68 66.42 64.36 55.62 56.61 61.75 47.42 45.06
F-2 Factory and
industrial, low
hazard
73.13 69.68 66.42 63.36 55.62 55.61 60.75 47.42 44.06
H-1 High hazard,
explosives
69.75 66.29 63.04 59.97 52.43 52.42 57.36 44.23 N.P.
H-2, -3,
-4
High hazard 69.75 66.29 63.04 59.97 52.43 52.42 57.36 44.23 40.88
H-5 HPM 119.85 115.54 111.79 106.56 95.15 94.65 102.31 84.79 81.61
I-1 Institutional,
supervised
119.19 115.1 112.01 107.47 98.61 98.56 104.22 90.64 87.06
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/562
environment
I-2 Institutional,
incapacitated
200.36 196.04 192.3 187.07 175.32 N.P. 182.81 164.96 N.P.
I-3 Institutional,
restrained
137.99 133.67 129.93 124.7 114.47 112.98 120.44 104.12 98.94
I-4 Institutional,
day care
facilities
119.19 115.1 112.01 107.47 98.61 98.56 104.22 90.64 87.06
M Mercantile 88.15 84.83 80.95 77.74 70.26 70.02 73.81 61.26 59.22
R-1 Residential,
hotels
120.33 116.24 113.15 108.61 99.8 99.75 105.41 91.83 88.25
R-2 Residential,
multiple
family
100.33 96.24 93.15 88.61 79.95 79.9 85.56 71.98 68.4
R-3 Residential,
one- and twofamily
96.19 93.52 91.22 88.71 84.51 84.3 87.22 80.46 74.68
R-4 Residential,
care assisted
living
facilities
119.19 115.1 112.01 107.47 98.61 98.56 104.22 90.64 87.06
S-1 Storage,
moderate
hazard
68.75 65.29 61.04 58.97 50.43 51.42 56.36 42.23 39.88
S-2 Storage, low
hazard
67.75 64.29 61.04 57.97 50.43 50.42 55.36 42.23 38.88
U Utility,
miscellaneous
52.28 49.43 46.49 44.17 38.31 38.31 41.69 31.5 29.99
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/562
Note a. Private garages use utility, miscellaneous
Note b. Unfinished basements (all use group) = $15.00 per sq. ft.
Note c. N.P. = Not permitted
The building official has adopted the ICC Building Valuation Data Table as published by the ICC periodically in
the Building Safety Journal as the basis for evaluation. The table is also available on the ICC web site at
iccsafe.org. The table may be used to determine the valuation per square foot for various types of construction
and occupancies, This table is based on the national average construction cost and should be reduced to 90% of
the tables value for the Dallas/Fort Worth area. Once your value is determined go to table 1 for permit fee.
Shell building without interior finish use: 60% of the value.
Interior finish of space in a shell building use: 40% of the value.
(Ordinance 766 adopted 11/9/04)
Sec. 3.1783 Sign Permit Fee Schedule
(a) Permanent Signage. All permanent signage permits will be assessed a plan review fee of 65% of the permit
fee. This fee is in addition to the sign permit fee.
Total Square Footage(s) Permit Fee Plan Review Fee
1 to 50 sq. ft. in area $50.00 $32.50
51 to 100 sq. ft. in area $100.00 $65.00
101 to 200 sq. ft. in area $200.00 $130.00
201 to 300 sq. ft. in area $300.00 $195.00
301 sq. ft. and over in area $300.00 + $1.00 per sq. ft. To be determined by permit
amount
(b) Temporary/Portable/Grand Opening/Banner Signage. Only one type of permit is allowed at any one
specific time.
Signage Type Permit Fee Permit Valid For
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/562
Temporary signs $10.00 30 days
Portable signs $10.00 30 days
Grand opening $10.00 30 days
Banners $10.00 30 days
Sec. 3.1784 Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Irrigation, and Miscellaneous Permit/Inspection Fees
(a) Mechanical Permits.
(1) Type I and II kitchen hood: $50.00.
(2) Replace/install complete A/C and heating system: $60.00.
(3) Miscellaneous: $50.00.
(b) Electrical Permits.
(1) Service upgrade, adding circuits, signs, T-pole, pools: $50.00.
(2) Miscellaneous: $50.00.
(c) Plumbing Permit.
(1) Replace sewer/water line, gas line, water heater: $50.00.
(2) Miscellaneous: $50.00.
(d) Irrigation Permit.
(1) Lawn sprinkler system, including backflow device: $40.00.
(e) Temporary business permit: $25.00 per 30 days.
(f) Aboveground pool/hot tub permit: $25.00.
(g) Parade/circus/tent show permits: $10.00, nonrefundable.
(h) Backflow prevention device permit (adding/replacing any type device): $40.00.
(i) Sewer tie-in permit (tie into city sewer): $45.00.
(j) Demolition permit: $50.00.
(k) Certificate of occupancy permit: $100.00.
(l) Move-In House/Building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/562
(1) Deposit: $200.00.
(2) Permit fee: $50.00.
(m) Mobile home operators license: $100.00 per year.
(n) Electrical/gas release: $10.00 per inspection.
(o) Sign permits: See Section 3.1783.
(p) Beverage license permit: See Section 4.107.
(q) Solicitor Permit.
(1) Nonrefundable: $50.00.
(2) Per solicitor: $25.00.
(r) Reinspection fee: $50.00.
(s) Permit reactivation fee: $100.00.
(Ordinance 830, sec. 8, adopted 6/13/06; Ordinance 863 adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 3.1785–3.1790 Reserved
Division 9. International Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 3.1791 Adopted
The 2012 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted, and is fully incorporated by
reference as though copied into this division in its entirety. The material contained in such code shall not be
included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the
office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours.
Sec. 3.1792 Local Amendments
The 2012 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted herein is hereby amended by
adoption of those local amendments shown on exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1043.
Sec. 3.1793 Public Record
The material contained in exhibit A to Ordinance 1043, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference,
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material contained in such exhibit
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public
record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular
business hours.
(Ordinance 1043 adopted 5/12/15)
ARTICLE 3.1800 SIGNS*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/562
Sec. 3.1801 Intent and Purpose
Signs use private land near public rights-of-way to inform and persuade the general public by publishing a
message. This article provides standards for the erection and maintenance of private signs. All private signs not
exempt as provided herein shall be erected and maintained in accordance with these standards. These standards
are intended to be the minimum necessary and least burdensome to accomplish the purposes stated in this
section. The general objectives of these standards are to promote health, safety, welfare, convenience and
enjoyment of the public and, in part, to achieve the following:
(1) Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs:
(A) Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment;
(B) Do not obstruct firefighting or police surveillance; and
(C) Do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists or by impairing the
driver's ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles, or to read traffic signs.
(2) Communications Efficiency. To promote the efficient transfer of information in sign messages
by providing that:
(A) Businesses, services, and individuals may identify themselves and communicate their
message;
(B) Customers and other persons may locate a business or service;
(C) No person or group is arbitrarily denied the use of the sight lines from the public rightsof-
way; and
(D) Persons exposed to signs are not overwhelmed by the number of messages presented and
are able to exercise freedom of choice to observe or ignore said messages, according to the
observer's purpose.
(3) Landscape Quality and Preservation. To protect the public welfare and to enhance the
appearance and economic value of the cityscape, by providing that signs:
(A) Do not interfere with scenic views;
(B) Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
(C) Do not create a nuisance to occupants of adjacent and contiguous property by their
illumination, size, height or movement; and
(D) Are not detrimental to land or property values.
Sec. 3.1802 Administration
The requirements of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building official of the city.
Sec. 3.1803 Definitions
As used in this article:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/562
Abandoned Sign. A sign which:
(1) For at least 12 continuous months, does not identify or advertise:
(A) An existing or bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity on the
premises on which the sign is located; or
(B) An upcoming or current event or message.
(2) If the premises is leased, relates to the tenant and at least two years have elapsed since the date
the most recent tenant ceased to operate on the premises.
Awning. A structure made of cloth, metal or other material possessing characters, letters, illustrations or
ornamentations affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted to a position
against the building.
Balloon. An inflatable sign that is filled with a gas lighter than air to remain elevated.
Banner. A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or
ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind, excluding flags, emblems and insignia of political,
professional, religious, educational or corporate organizations.
Building Official. The building official of the city or his/her designated representative.
Business Sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, activity, product, service or event
conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or within the building to which such
sign is affixed.
Canopy. A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or other material possessing characters, letters,
illustrations or ornamentations, with frames affixed to a building and carried by a frame, which is supported by
the ground.
Commercial Message. A message which refers to the offer for sale or existence for sale of products, property,
accommodations, services or attractions or attracts attention to a business or to products, property,
accommodations, services, or activities that are offered or exist for hire.
Construction Sign. A sign identifying individuals or companies involved in the design or construction, wrecking,
financing or development of premises where such sign is placed.
Developed Property. A tract of land upon which a structure is located.
Directional Sign. A sign which provides direction or instruction to guide persons to facilities, intended to serve
the public (restrooms, parking, etc.) and which provides no advertisement of any kind other than the identity of
the business or premises to which it applies.
Directory Sign. A sign which indicates the names and/or addresses of the occupant(s), the address of the
premises, and/or identification of any lawful businesses or the occupations which may exist at the premises.
Flashing Sign. An illuminated sign on which the artificial source of light is not maintained stationary or constant
in intensity and/or color at any time when such sign is illuminated.
Grand Opening. The period beginning with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and extending for ninety
(90) days.
Gross Surface Area. The area enclosed by the smallest imaginary regular shapes that will encompass the extreme
limits of the writing representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/562
integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed. “Gross surface area” includes such features as decorative or ornamental elements or features, borders,
trims, but does not include any supporting structure which is used solely for support of the sign, such as poles,
columns and cable, or decorative fence, screening device or wall.
Inflatable Sign. An object of any shape or size, constructed of any material, that holds its shape through being
filled with air or another gas, or by the operation of any battery, electrical, or gas motor that supplies air to the
inside of the structure.
(Ordinance 820 adopted 2/14/06)
Kiosk Sign. A kiosk sign is a freestanding structure located in city rights-of-way, which feature a city logo
identification panel at the top of each structure. The body of the kiosk sign contains individual panels which
display directional information to homebuilders, subdivisions/developments, municipal or community facilities,
community events, Lake Worth Independent School District facilities, churches and businesses within the city
limits. (Ordinance 958 adopted 2/8/11)
Leasable Space. The front and, if applicable, side walls which enclose a building or a portion thereof, and which
abut a public street.
Letter Sign. A sign created by the attachment of any individual letter or group of letters to a building. The area of
such sign shall be the smallest area encompassing the word in the form of a square, rectangle, triangle, circle or
combination thereof.
Marquee. A permanent structure extending from part of the roof or wall of a building but not supported by the
ground, and constructed of durable material such as metal, plastic or glass.
Monument Sign. A sign permanently affixed to the ground, not elevated to any pole or structure and not attached
to or dependent upon any building for support.
Noncommercial Message. Any message that is not a commercial message.
Nonconforming Sign. A sign lawfully existing or under construction on the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this article (ordinance adopted February 14, 2006) which does not conform to one or more of the
provisions of this article.
Nonresidential Zoning District. Any of the following zoning districts as designated by Chapter 14 of the Lake
Worth City Code: C Commercial District, P-C Planned Commercial District, I Industrial District, P-I Planned
Industrial District, or M-PD Mixed Planned Development District.
Obscene. A material or performance defined in Section 43.21 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
Off-Premises Sign. A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, activity, product, service, or event other
than one conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or within the building to
which the sign is affixed.
(Ordinance 820 adopted 2/14/06)
On-Premises Sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, activity, product, service, or event
that is conducted, sold, or offered on the property where the sign is located. (Ordinance 868, sec. 1, adopted
9/4/07)
Person. An individual, organization, corporation, agency, partnership, trust, association, and any other legal
entity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/562
Pole Sign. A sign supported by one or more structures or supports placed upon the ground and not attached to or
dependent for support from any building.
Political Sign. A temporary sign which addresses a political issue.
Portable Sign. A sign not permanently affixed to the ground, a building, or another structure, and which is
designed to be moved from place to place.
Premises. A single tract or platted lot. In addition, multiple adjoining tracts or platted lots under common
ownership will be deemed to be a single premises if they meet the following requirements:
(1) Lots or tracts are not separated by intervening streets, alleys, utility or railroad rights-of-way or
other interruption;
(2) The property contains a single primary use; and
(3) The property is not used for one- or two-family dwelling purposes. Tracts or platted lots that
are at cross corners or that are connected by narrow strips of land too small to serve as emergency
access easements shall not be considered to be “adjoining.”
Real Estate Sign. A sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent, the premises or portions of the premises
upon which the sign is placed.
Residential Zoning District. Any of the following zoning districts as designated by Chapter 14 of the Lake Worth
City Code: SF-1 One-Family District, MD Moderate Density District, P-MF Planned Multi-Family District, or
MH Manufactured Housing District.
Sign. Every sign, name, number, identification, description, and announcement, declaration, demonstration,
device, display, flag, banner, pennant, illustration, logo, balloon, streamer, valance, advertising display, poster,
beacon, light or insignia, and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any
building, window, or outdoor structure or approved sign poles, or erected or maintained upon a piece of land,
which directs attention to any object, project, service, place, activity, event, cause, person, institution,
organization, or business.
Temporary Real Estate Directional Sign. A temporary off-premises sign used to direct traffic to a residential
section or subdivision or location in the city.
Temporary Sign. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other like materials,
with or without frames, and any type sign not permanently attached to the ground, wall, or building, intended to
be displayed for a short period of time only.
Undeveloped Property. A tract of land upon which no structure is located.
Visibility Triangle. An imaginary triangle which has two sides which start at the center point of the intersection
of two streets or a driveway and a street along the curb line and measuring ten feet in length down each
respective street or driveway along the nearest edge of the driving surface. The line connecting the end points of
these two lines forms the third side of the triangle.
Wall Sign. A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a building for support
with the exposed face of the sign located in a place substantially parallel to the exterior building wall to which
the sign is attached or by which it is supported. Awning, canopy, marquee and letter signs shall be considered
wall signs for purposes of calculating the sign area.
Sec. 3.1804 General Provisions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/562
(a) Permit Required. A person commits an offense if the person erects, constructs or relocates a sign upon any
property within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city, except as otherwise provided in this
article.
(b) Permit Application. A person shall file an application with the building official on forms provided by the
city. An application for a sign permit shall include a drawing, to scale, of the proposed sign and all existing signs
maintained on the premises and visible from the right-of-way, a drawing of the lot plan or building facade
indicating the proposed location of the sign(s), and sign specifications.
(c) Fee Required. Fees for a permit to erect, construct, or relocate a sign shall be established by the city's sign
permit fee schedule.
(d) Permit Issuance or Denial. The building official shall, within ten working days of the date of receipt of the
application, either approve or deny the application, refer the application to the appropriate authority for approval
or granting of a variance, or refer the application back to the applicant in any instance where insufficient
information has been furnished. The building official shall deny an application if it does not comply with the
requirements of this article. A denial and the reasons for the denial shall be noted on the application, and the
applicant shall be notified of the denial by notice mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application
or the last known address.
(e) Maintenance and Repairs. All signs shall be maintained in good appearance and structural condition, in
compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this article at all times. No permit
shall be required to perform normal maintenance operations or changing of parts or copy of a sign, provided that
the maintenance or change of parts does not alter the gross surface area, height or otherwise render the sign
nonconforming with the requirements of this article.
(f) Measurement of Sign Area.
(1) Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted, textured or
constructed as a background for the sign copy, shall be measured as the area contained within the
outside dimensions of the background panel or surface.
(2) Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a wall, fence, screening device,
awning or fascia of a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise
altered to provide a distinctive background of the sign copy, shall be measured as the area enclosed
by each individual word or graphic.
(3) For three-dimensional signs such as spherical, free form, sculptural, or other nonplanar signs,
the area enclosed by the smallest imaginary regular shape or combination of shapes which would
fully contain all portions of the sign when rotated horizontally around the sign shall be measured to
determine sign area.
Sec. 3.1805 Prohibited Signs
(a) A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Illuminates a sign to an intensity to cause glare or brightness to a degree that could constitute a
hazard or nuisance. Moving, flashing, intermittently lighted, changing color, strobe lights, rotating
beacons, revolving or similarly constructed signs are prohibited;
(2) Displays on a sign pictures, gestures or words which are obscene as defined in this article;
(3) Paints a sign, other than a nameplate and address showing street number, to a fence, railing or
wall which is not a structural part of the building in or facing a residential zoning district, whether or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/562
not on the property line;
(4) Attaches a sign, paper, material, or paint; stencils or writes any name or number (except house
or street address numbers); or otherwise marks on any public sidewalk, curb, gutter or street. The city
council may grant an exception for special events. City department of public works or public safety
are exempt from this subsection.
(Ordinance 820 adopted 2/14/06)
(b) A person commits an offense if the person attaches, erects or maintains any sign:
(1) Upon any public utility pole or structure, or on any tree that is located on public land, including
a public easement, or in a public right-of-way;
(2) Over or on public land, including a public easement, or in a public right-of-way. No sign shall
be erected in the right-of-way except movement control, traffic-control devices, street signs,
directional signs, or kiosk signs placed by the city or state;
(3) Within twenty (20) feet of a paved surface other than a parking lot; or
(4) Within twenty (20) feet of a driveway or other ingress to or egress from a property, unless the
sign has a ground clearance of greater than eleven (11) feet.
(Ordinance 958 adopted 2/8/11)
(c) A person commits an offense if the person erects or displays a sign in such a manner as to:
(1) Prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind
shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape;
(2) Obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where by reason of position, shape, color,
degree, manner or intensity of illumination it may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
(3) Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic-control device;
or
(4) Encroach upon the visibility triangle of any street intersection.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person makes use of words, phrases, symbols or characters, or employs
any lamp or light in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person erects or displays an off-premises sign containing a commercial
message, except as specifically provided by this article.
Sec. 3.1806 Political Signs
(a) A person commits an offense if the person erects or displays a sign which contains primarily a political
message if the sign is:
(1) Is more than eight feet in height;
(2) Has a gross surface area of greater than 36 square feet;
(3) Is illuminated;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/562
(4) Has any moving elements; or
(5) Is located within the public right-of-way, a public easement, or a visibility triangle.
(b) A person who erects or maintains a sign which contains primarily a political message on a temporary basis
on a sign generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not
primarily political shall comply with the regulations applicable to that type of sign.
Sec. 3.1807 Pole Signs
Pole signs are permitted in nonresidential zoning classifications subject to the following regulations:
(1) No more than one pole sign shall be permitted for every three hundred (300) feet of street
frontage on each premises, except that a lot that has frontage on more than one street may have one
pole sign for each street on which the property fronts. Only one (1) pole sign or monument sign shall
be erected along the same street frontage.
(2) A pole sign shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and shall have a minimum of eleven
(11) feet of ground clearance.
(3) The gross surface area per side of a pole sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet of gross
surface area for each linear foot of street frontage, with a maximum of four hundred (400) square
feet.
(4) A pole sign may be located next to, but not into the public right-of-way provided that the sign
does not create a hazard to traffic or pedestrians.
(5) A pole sign may be illuminated internally, or by an external light source if that light source
cannot be seen from the public right-of-way. An electronic or message board is permitted if it does
not occupy more than twenty-four (24) square feet of the area of the sign face.
Sec. 3.1808 Monument Signs
Monument signs are allowed in both residential and nonresidential zoning classifications, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Monument Signs in Nonresidential Zoning Districts. Monument signs in nonresidential zoning
districts are subject to the following restrictions:
(A) No more than one monument sign shall be permitted for every three hundred (300) feet
of street frontage on each premises, except that a lot that has frontage on more than one street
may have one sign for each street on which the property fronts. Only one (1) monument sign or
pole sign shall be erected along the same street frontage.
(B) A monument sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot of gross surface area for every two
(2) feet of street frontage, or a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
(C) A monument sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, plus a maximum of two (2)
feet of sign base.
(D) A monument sign may be illuminated internally, or by an external light source if that
light source cannot be seen from the public right-of-way. An electronic or message board is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/562
permitted if it does not occupy more than twenty-four (24) square feet of the area of the sign
face.
(E) The base of the sign shall be covered or constructed with the same masonry material,
stone, or brick as the principal building, or with a material approved by the city council. The
sign shall be made of metal, masonry, routed wooden planks or beams, durable plastic or
similar materials, which complement the architecture of the principal building.
(2) Monument Signs in SF-1 One-Family Zoning Districts. Monument signs shall only be
permitted in SF-1 One-Family zoning districts for purposes of identifying a residential subdivision or
for nonresidential uses that are permitted in such district. Monument signs shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
(A) No more than one monument sign shall be permitted for every three hundred (300) feet
of street frontage on each premises, except that a lot that has frontage on more than one street
may have one sign for each street on which the property fronts; provided however, up to two (2)
monument signs shall be permitted at each residential subdivision entrance. If two signs are
erected at one entrance, the signs shall be constructed to match each other.
(B) A monument sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot of gross surface area for every two
(2) feet of street frontage, or a maximum of fifty (50) square feet.
(C) A monument sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height, plus a maximum of two (2) feet
of sign base.
(D) A monument sign may be illuminated internally, or by an external light source if that
light source cannot be seen from the public right-of-way.
(E) The base of the sign shall be covered with the same masonry material, stone, or brick as
the principal building, or with a material approved by the city council.
(3) Monument Signs in Other Residential Zoning Districts. Monument signs shall be allowed in
residential zoning districts other than SF-1 One-Family District, and are subject to the following
restrictions:
(A) No more than one monument sign shall be permitted for every three hundred (300) feet
of street frontage on each premises, except that a lot that has frontage on more than one street
may have one sign for each street on which the property fronts.
(B) A monument sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot of gross surface area for every two
(2) feet of street frontage, or a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
(C) A monument sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, plus a maximum of two (2) feet
of sign base.
(D) A monument sign may be illuminated internally, or by an external light source if that
light source cannot be seen from the public right-of-way. An electronic or message board is
permitted if it does not occupy more than twenty-four (24) square feet of the area of the sign
face.
(E) The base of the sign shall be covered or constructed with the same masonry material,
stone, or brick as the principal building, or with a material approved by the city council. The
sign shall be made of metal, masonry, routed wooden planks or beams, durable plastic or
similar materials, which complement the architecture of the principal building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/562
Sec. 3.1809 Wall Signs
Wall signs are permitted in both residential and nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Wall Signs in Nonresidential Zoning Districts. Wall signs are allowed in all nonresidential
zoning districts, subject to the following regulations:
(A) (i) The wall area of each side of a building or leasable space abutting a public
street shall be measured to determine the amount of wall sign area permitted on a wall by
using the following formula:
Width x Height x Ten Percent
(ii) For buildings or leasable space with a wall height of less than twenty feet, measured
from ground level to the bottom of the roof line, the following method of measurement
shall be used:
Width x Twenty Feet x Ten Percent.
(B) For multioccupant structures, only the area of leasable space shall be used to determine
maximum allowable sign area.
(C) All wall signs and sign copy shall be mounted parallel to the building surface to which
they are attached, and shall project no more than eighteen inches from the building surface.
(D) Signs attached to fences shall be calculated as part of the maximum amount of wall
signage and shall be in conformance with the requirements of this article.
(2) Wall Signs in Residential Zoning Districts. Wall signs shall be allowed in residential zoning
districts other than SF-1 One-Family District for nonresidential uses that are permitted in such
district, subject to the following restrictions:
(A) A wall sign is permitted for building identification only, i.e., address or building
numbers.
(B) A maximum of two (2) signs per building are permitted.
(C) All signs and sign copy shall be mounted parallel to the building surface to which they
are attached. Signs shall not be mounted on roofs and shall not project above the roof.
(D) No sign or sign copy shall exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height.
Sec. 3.1810 Awning, Canopy, Marquee and Letter Signs
(a) Awning, canopy, marquee and letter signs are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts, provided that
awning, canopy, marquee and letter signs are calculated as part of the maximum permitted wall signage.
(b) Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow additional wall signage other than that allowed in this
article.
Sec. 3.1811 Temporary and Portable Signs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/562
(a) Temporary on-premises and off-premises signs are permitted in all zoning districts except for SF-1 One-
Family District, subject to the following restrictions:
(1) A temporary sign permit must be obtained from the city prior to erecting or placing the sign.
Permits for temporary signs shall be granted only with the written consent of the owner of the
property or the person in charge of such property.
(A) A temporary sign permit for property in a nonresidential zoning district shall be valid for
thirty (30) days. No additional temporary sign permit shall be granted for the property for a
period of thirty (30) days after the expiration of the previous permit. No more than four
temporary signs may be placed on any property during any calendar year.
(B) Temporary signs in residential zoning districts other than SF-1 One-Family District shall
be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days per calendar year.
(2) No more than five (5) temporary signs shall by authorized by any one (1) temporary sign
permit.
(3) The total square footage of all temporary signs placed by one permit holder shall not exceed
fifty (50) square feet.
(4) The maximum permitted height of a temporary sign is six (6) feet.
(5) The temporary sign permit fee shall be waived where the applicant is a nonprofit organization
that can demonstrate current IRS tax-exempt status.
(b) Portable on-premises and off-premises signs are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts and are
subject to the following regulations:
(1) A person may display a portable sign for a new on-premises business for a continuous period of
six (6) months, beginning no earlier than ninety (90) days before the date that the new business
receives a certificate of occupancy from the city.
(2) Thereafter, a person may erect and display a portable sign for a period of up to thirty (30) days.
The portable sign shall be removed for not less than thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of another
permit. No more than four portable signs may be placed on any property during any calendar year.
Permits for such signs shall be granted only with the written consent of the owner of the property or
the person in charge of such property.
(3) A portable sign must be removed before the permit authorizing the sign expires. If the event,
activity, or product advertised on the sign terminates before the permit expires, then the sign must be
removed within three days of when this occurs.
(Ordinance 868, sec. 2, adopted 9/4/07)
Sec. 3.1812 Construction Signs
Construction signs are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following restrictions:
(1) One construction sign is allowed on any premises on which construction is taking place.
(2) No construction sign shall be erected prior to the issuance of a building or development permit
for the project to which the sign pertains, and the sign shall be removed at the time of final approval
of the construction or development by the building official.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/562
(3) No construction sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in gross surface area per side or
exceed six (6) feet in height.
Sec. 3.1813 Real Estate Signs
Real estate signs are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Developed Property.
(A) One real estate sign is permitted on each street frontage.
(B) The total gross surface area of each sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per
side.
(C) Each sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.
(2) Undeveloped Property. Real estate signs may be erected on undeveloped property as follows:
(A) No more than one real estate sign shall be permitted for every three hundred (300) feet of
street frontage on each premises, except that a lot that has frontage on more than one street may
have one sign for each street on which the property fronts.
(B) The total gross surface area for each sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet for
each side.
(C) Each sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.
(Ordinance 820 adopted 2/14/06)
Sec. 3.1814 Kiosk Signs
Kiosk signs are permitted within the city subject to the following regulations:
(1) Kiosk signs are intended to create a uniform coordinated method of providing direction for
homebuyers and citizens to the location of home subdivisions, housing developments, and
homebuilders. The signs are also intended to provide direction to municipal or community facilities,
community events, Lake Worth Independent School District facilities, churches and businesses
within the city limits while discouraging the placement of other unsightly and hazardous off-site
directional signs.
(2) The city council may, by duly executed license agreement(s) grant the exclusive right to design,
erect, and maintain kiosk signs within the city limits. The city council shall determine the number of
kiosk signs to be allowed in the city and in doing so shall consider the policy stated in this section.
(3) Kiosk signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the specifications contained
in the aforementioned license agreement in addition to the following general specifications.
(4) Prior to erecting any kiosk sign, the licensee shall submit a sign location map to the city
manager or his/her designee for approval.
(5) Kiosk sign installations shall include breakaway design features as required for traffic signs
located in rights-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/562
(6) No additional or extraneous signs, pennants, flags, or other devices for visual attention or other
appurtenances shall be attached to the kiosk signs.
(7) Sign design shall be approved by the city manager or his/her designee prior to fabrication. The
individual sign panels shall be approved by the city manager or his/her designee in accordance with
the standards set forth in this section.
(8) Kiosk signs shall not be illuminated.
(9) Kiosk signs shall not interfere with the use of sidewalks, walkways, bike and hiking trails; shall
not obstruct the visibility of motorists, pedestrians, or traffic-control signs; shall not be installed in
the immediate vicinity of street intersections; and shall comply with the 20' x 20' visibility triangle or
other visibility easements.
(10) In accordance to the specifications contained in the aforementioned license agreement, a
percentage of the kiosk sign individual sign panels shall be reserved for the city to use as directional
signage to municipal or community facilities or locations of community events. If no space is
available on a current kiosk sign, a new sign will be provided for the city's use at a location
designated by the city.
(11) There shall be at least 100 feet from any kiosk sign to another kiosk sign.
(12) Licensee(s) shall be responsible for all construction, installation, maintenance and repair of
the kiosk signs at no cost to the city.
(13) Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any sign authorized under this
article to contain commercial copy may contain noncommercial copy in lieu of commercial copy.
(Ordinance 958 adopted 2/8/11)
Sec. 3.1815 Directional Signs
Directional signs are permitted in the city subject to the following regulations:
(1) The maximum permitted height is three (3) feet.
(2) The maximum area is eight (8) square feet with a maximum of four (4) square feet of gross
surface area per sign face.
(3) The maximum number of signs is two (2) signs per premises.
Sec. 3.1816 Inflatable Signs and Balloons
Inflatable signs are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Inflatable signs shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height or ten (10) feet in width, and shall be
fastened securely in place. No balloon shall be flown at a height exceeding one hundred (100) feet
above ground level.
(2) No inflatable sign shall be attached to the roof of a building or other structure.
(3) An inflatable sign permit shall be valid for fourteen (14) days. No more than four (4) inflatable
sign permits shall be issued per calendar year for any one premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/562
(4) No inflatable sign shall be located within twenty (20) feet of a roadway or a driveway or other
ingress or egress from a property.
Sec. 3.1817 Flags
(a) No premises within the city shall have more than three (3) permanent flag poles, and no flag pole shall
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, measured from ground level.
(b) No more than one (1) flag per premises shall display any commercial message, which shall be limited to
the logo of the business.
Sec. 3.1818 Grand Openings
In the event of a grand opening in a nonresidential zoning district, the signs authorized by this section may be
erected in addition to any other signs permitted under this article.
(1) A grand opening sign permit shall be valid for thirty (30) days, which must be completed
within the ninety (90) day period following issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) A grand opening sign permit may authorize the use of pennants, flags, banner signs, an
inflatable sign, and a portable sign that comply with the general provisions of this article, and that are
specifically identified in the permit application. No more than three (3) banners, one (1) inflatable
sign, and one (1) portable sign shall be allowed.
Sec. 3.1819 Exempt Signs
The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this article:
(1) Protective signs that have as their purpose, the protection of life and property.
(2) Signs or markers giving information about the location of underground electric transmission
lines, telegraph or telephone properties and facilities, pipelines, public sewers or water lines or other
public utilities.
(3) Signs erected by an agency of the state or a political subdivision of the state.
(4) The display of a national flag or state flag, emblem, insignia, legal notices or informational,
directional or traffic signs which are legally required or necessary to the essential functions of
government agencies (state, federal, and city).
(5) Signs with street names and/or street numbers.
(6) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry
surface or when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material.
(7) Temporary or portable decorative displays for holidays, public demonstrations, civic, school or
religious events, or community service announcements which do not contain advertising.
(8) Signs which state the name of the company which constructed a fence, not to exceed one
square foot in size.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/562
(9) Signs on vehicles, unless used or intended to be used to direct attention to a business,
profession, activity, product, service or event conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the
vehicle is located. It shall be prima facia evidence that a vehicle is intended to be used for this
purpose if the vehicle is parked on the premises for a continuous period exceeding seventy-two (72)
hours.
Sec. 3.1820 Noncommercial Message
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any sign that may display a commercial message may
also display a noncommercial message, either in place of or in addition to the commercial message, so long as
the sign complies with the other requirements of this article and other city ordinances.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, or other ordinance, any sign that may display one type
of noncommercial message may also display any other type of noncommercial message, so long as the sign
complies with the other requirements of this article and other city ordinances.
Sec. 3.1821 Nonconforming Signs
(a) A sign lawfully existing or under construction on the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted
February 14, 2006) or any amendment thereto which does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this
article may be continued in operation and maintained as a legal nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign
shall be allowed to remain until such time as:
(1) The sign is abandoned;
(2) The property owner or tenant changes or alters the sign in any manner other than by normal
maintenance to the configuration existing at the time of enactment or amendment of this article; or
(3) It is determined by the building official or his designee that the sign is a threat to health, safety,
or welfare of the citizens and/or a public nuisance.
(b) A nonconforming sign which has been blown down or otherwise destroyed by wind, fire or damages from
any other source, may be repaired, if the sign is not abandoned, provided that the cost of repairing the sign is
sixty (60) percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, or less. If the cost of
repairing the sign is more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same
location, the sign may not be altered, reconstructed, repaired or replaced, and the owner shall remove the sign or
bring it into compliance with this article.
Sec. 3.1822 Illegal Signs
A sign erected without a permit, either prior to or after the adoption of this article (ordinance adopted February
14, 2006) is an illegal sign if a permit was required for its erection at the time the sign was erected. A person
commits an offense if the person maintains an illegal sign.
Sec. 3.1823 Abandoned Signs
(a) Abandoned Signs. A sign that is visible from a public place and that is abandoned is declared a public
nuisance.
(b) Offense. A person commits an offense if the person maintains an abandoned sign on property he owns or
controls.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/562
Sec. 3.1824 Abatement Procedures
(a) If the building official shall determine that any sign is abandoned, or requires a permit but none has been
issued, he shall give written notice to the property owner, sign owner, lessee, or sign erector to remove such sign.
If the property owner, sign owner, lessee, or sign erector fails to remove the sign within ten (10) days after such
notice, the building official shall remove the sign at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the
sign is located. The building official shall cause to be removed without notice any sign which is an immediate
hazard to persons, and the cost of same shall be paid by the property owner, sign owner, lessee or sign erector.
(b) Any sign which is removed by the building official pursuant to this section shall be impounded and stored.
Records of where such signs are located and when removed shall be kept. The building official shall send a letter
to the owner of such sign, if known, or, if not known, to the owner or person in control of the premises where
such sign was located, giving notice of such impoundment.
(c) The building official shall hold the sign in storage for at least thirty (30) days after notice of impoundment
has been mailed. Any sign may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the costs of removal of and hauling
the sign to storage, as determined by the building official, plus a per day storage fee. Such fees shall be
established by the city council.
(d) Any sign not reclaimed by the owner thereof within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice of
impoundment shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable law.
Sec. 3.1825 Appeals and Variances
The city council shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or interpretation made in the enforcement of this article and to hear requests for variances
from the literal provisions of this article for the erection of new signs in instances where strict enforcement of
this article would cause unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties due to circumstances unique to the
property or the individual sign under consideration. The city council may grant such variances only when it is
demonstrated that such action will not injure and will be compatible with the use and permitted development of
adjacent properties and that the granting of the variance will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this
article.
Sec. 3.1826 Fees
The fees to be charged under this article are set forth in Section 3.1783 pertaining to sign permit fees.
(Ordinance 820 adopted 2/14/06)
ARTICLE 3.1900 VESTED RIGHTS
Sec. 3.1901 Recognition
(a) Law. Under state law, each application for a permit or plat approval shall be processed pursuant to the
regulations in effect at the time of the application unless the applicant has applied for and obtained a letter of
recognition of vested rights for the permit or project for which the permit is sought.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights recognition application is to determine the regulations by which an
application for approval of a permit or plat is to be processed.
(c) Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/562
(1) Chapter 245. Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as may be amended.
(2) City Manager. The City Manager of Lake Worth or the city manager's designated
representative.
(3) Permit. Has the meaning set forth in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, as may be
amended.
(4) Progress. Has the meaning set forth in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, as may be
amended.
(5) Project. Has the meaning set forth in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, as may be
amended.
(6) Vested Right. The right of a person to develop a project that complies only with ordinances and
other development regulations in effect on the date a plan for development or the first application for
the project was filed with the city.
(d) Applicability. An owner of property, or the owner's authorized agent, may submit an application for
recognition of vested rights for the property:
(1) With an application for approval of a plat, zoning change, building permit or any other permit
relating to development of land; or
(2) To prevent expiration of a plat.
(e) Effect. If recognition of vested rights is issued in whole or in part, the city manager shall issue a letter
which shall specify the regulations which apply to an application and the application shall be processed in
accordance with the regulations specified in the letter. If the application for recognition is to prevent expiration
of an approved plat, the plat otherwise subject to expiration shall be extended as provided in the letter.
(f) Types of Vested Rights. A person may claim vested rights under common law, a federal or state statute, the
state or federal constitution, or Chapter 245. For vested rights claimed under Chapter 245, the definitions of
permit in Chapter 245 shall apply to applications submitted pursuant to this article.
(g) Exemptions. This article shall not apply to the types of ordinances or other governmental action
enumerated in Texas Local Government Code Section 245.004 regardless of the effective date of the ordinance
or the existence of vested rights for a project.
(h) Duration. This article and any letter of recognition issued hereunder shall not extend the time of validity
for any permit or project. Any rights recognized by a letter issued pursuant to this article shall not extend beyond
the expiration date prescribed by ordinance for the permit(s) submitted for recognition.
(Ordinance 874, sec. 1, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 3.1902 Requirements for Application
(a) Who May Apply. A property owner or the owner's authorized agent may submit an application for
recognition of vested rights with an application for approval of a plat or building permit, or at any time for a plat
prior to its expiration date established by the subdivision ordinance.
(b) Fee. The applicant shall submit a completed application together with a permit application review fee in
the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00). The applicant shall also be responsible for any professional fees
incurred by the city in connection with the processing of the application. The applicant shall submit three (3)
copies of any documents on which the applicant is relying to establish vested rights.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/562
(c) Form of Application. The application shall state that the applicant has a vested right for some or all of the
land for which the permit is sought under Chapter 245 or another statute, or other state or federal law that
requires the city to review and decide the application under regulations in effect prior to the effective date of the
currently applicable regulations. The application shall include the following:
(1) The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the applicant;
(2) The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the property owner, if different
than the applicant;
(3) Identification of the property for which the applicant claims a vested right, including a legal
description of the exact boundaries of the property encompassed by the project;
(4) A description of the project for which the application is submitted, how the project was
commenced, and the date of commencement of the project;
(5) Layout of the site, including locations of buildings, streets, utilities and drainage facilities;
(6) Identification of the original application for the first permit in the series of permits required for
the project, as described in Local Government Code Section 245.001(1) and Section 245.002(a) and
(b), as may be amended;
(7) The date that the first permit in the series of permits required for the project was filed with the
city;
(8) Identification of the regulations which the applicant contends apply to the project and the
specific parts of the project which are subject to vesting;
(9) A copy of any prior recognition of vested rights by the city involving the same land; and
(10) If the applicant alleges that a plat subject to expiration under a city ordinance should not be
terminated, a description of the events, including any plat or other development applications on file
that should prevent termination,
(d) An application for recognition of vested rights shall not be considered to have been filed with the city until
such time as the application is administratively complete. To be administratively complete, the application must
meet the following requirements:
(1) Contain all materials and information required by this article; and
(2) Be accompanied by payment to the city for the application review fee.
(e) No letter of recognition of vested rights shall be issued unless the applicant has demonstrated compliance
with the following criteria, as applicable:
(1) For statutory vested rights:
(A) The applicant filed an application for a permit as provided in Chapter 245 prior to
adoption of the regulations against which vested rights are claimed; and
(B) The regulations against which vested rights are claimed are not subject to an exemption
as provided in Local Government Code Section 245.004; and
(C) The project has not become dormant as defined in Texas Local Government Code
Section 245.005; and/or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/562
(2) For recognition of vested rights under common law or the federal or state constitution,
applicant is in compliance with any other factor which may be required to establish vested rights
under the state or federal constitution.
(Ordinance 874, sec. 2, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 3.1903 Processing of Application
(a) Review and Determination. The city manager may require the submission of additional evidence relevant
to support the applicant's claim for recognition. The city manager shall process the application and forward a
copy of the application to the city attorney following acceptance. Upon review of the application and evidence,
the city manager shall determine whether the applicant is entitled, in whole or in part, to recognition of vested
rights for a permit. If the evidence presented by the applicant establishes that the permit for which approval is
sought is part of a project which is vested under Chapter 245, the city manager shall issue a letter of recognition
of such rights. If the city manager finds that the applicant is not entitled to recognition of vested rights, he shall
notify the applicant of the basis for his findings.
(b) Substantial Change. Where the city manager determines that the project for which the applicant seeks
vested rights has undergone a substantial change since its inception, recognition of vested rights shall be denied.
Examples of substantial change include, but are not limited to, modifications of the following characteristics of a
project:
(1) Gross surface area or acreage; or
(2) Gross floor area; or
(3) Gross number of buildings; or
(4) Density; or
(5) Living unit equivalents; or
(6) Land use classification; or
(7) Impervious cover; or
(8) Drainage pattern or volumes; or
(9) Street layouts; or
(10) Additional curb cuts or driveways; and/or
(11) Orientation of buildings.
(Ordinance 874, sec. 3, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 3.1904 Recognition Appeal
(a) Who May Appeal. The applicant may appeal the city manager's decision on the application for vested
rights determination to the city council. An appeal under this section stays acceptance by filing of any related
development applications.
(b) Process. The application for appeal shall be made in writing to the city secretary and shall state the basis
for requesting the appeal. The appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of the letter. The city secretary
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/562
shall schedule a hearing before the city council within 30 days of the date the appeal is submitted.
(c) Appeal of Council Decision. A person dissatisfied with the decision of the city council may appeal the
decision to a court within the county in which the property is located. The person shall file the appeal with the
court within 30 days of the decision of the city council. If no appeal is filed, the decision of the city council shall
be final.
(Ordinance 874, sec. 4, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 3.1905 Expirations
(a) A permit issued by the city that is subject to Chapter 245, but does not expressly contain an expiration
date, shall expire by operation of law two years after issuance. This subsection shall not apply to permits
pursuant to which progress has been made toward the completion of the project, as determined by Local
Government Code Section 245.005(c), as may be amended.
(b) A project subject to Chapter 245 shall expire by operation of law five years after an application was filed
for the first permit necessary for the project. This subsection shall not apply to permits for which progress has
been made toward the completion of the project.
(Ordinance 874, sec. 5, adopted 11/13/07)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.100 ESTABLISHMENTS SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4.101 Subject to Terms of This Article
Each tavern, beer parlor or any other establishment selling beer or intoxicating beverages for consumption on the
premises in the city, shall be subject to the terms and provisions of this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 4, Section 1A)
Sec. 4.102 Subject to Inspection
Each tavern, beer parlor or establishment selling beer or intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises
shall be subject to inspection by the police department of the city or such other persons designated by the city
council in order to insure that the provisions of this article are carried out. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
Section 1B)
Sec. 4.103 Unlawful to Sell to a Minor
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell intoxicating beverages to a minor. Lack of
knowledge on the part of the person serving beer or an intoxicating beverage to a minor that such person is, in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/562
fact, a minor shall not be a defense to any charge arising under this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
Section 1C)
Sec. 4.104 Not to Remain Open After Closing Hour
No tavern, beer parlor or establishment serving intoxicating beverages shall remain open for business after
closing hour provided by Section 4.106 hereafter, and no beer or intoxicating beverages shall be served after
such hour. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 1D)
Sec. 4.105 Police May Disperse Crowds in and Around Taverns, Etc.
The police department of the city shall be authorized to disperse crowds in, about and around taverns, beer
parlors or establishments serving intoxicating beverages after the closing hour, in order to prevent fights and
other breaches of the peace. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 1E)
Sec. 4.106 Closing Hour of Taverns, Etc.
The closing time for all taverns and places serving alcoholic beverages shall be the closing time shown upon the
state license of each such tavern or place of business. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 1F)
Sec. 4.107 Permit Fee
There is hereby levied a permit fee on each premises within the city for which an alcoholic beverage permit is
required under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. The amount of the fee shall be one-half of the state fee for
each permit issued for premises located within the city. The fee shall be paid to the city at the time an application
for a permit, or a renewal thereof, is made to the state. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 1G)
Sec. 4.108 Sale of Alcoholic Beverages Near Church, School or Hospital Prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell alcoholic beverages within three hundred
feet (300') of a church, public school or public hospital.
(b) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a
church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door,
and in a direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and a public school shall be from the nearest property line of the public school to
the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in a direct line
across intersections. For any permit or license covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering
the premises under Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the measurement of the distance
between the premises and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front
door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections.
(c) No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation to sell alcoholic beverages if the place where
the alcoholic beverage is to be sold is within three hundred feet (300') of any church, public school or public
hospital.
(d) The city council may grant a variance to the distance restrictions in this section if it determines that
enforcement of the distance restrictions in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes
waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/562
permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the city council,
after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation is in the best
interest of the community.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 1H)
Sec. 4.109 Penalties; Civil Remedies, License Forfeiture
(a) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction therefor, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section
1.109 of this code for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
(b) In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this article, the city, in addition to
imposing the penalties above provided, may institute an appropriate action or proceeding in any court having
proper jurisdiction, to restrain, correct or abate such violations; and the definition of any violation of this article
as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the city from involving the civil remedies given by the laws of the state,
but same shall, be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such violations.
(c) Each day an establishment engages in business without a permit or payment of the fee required by this
article shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, the court may order the
forfeiture of such permit as may have been procured. In the event of forfeiture of a permit, any fees which may
have been paid for such permit shall be refunded on a proportionate basis for the remainder of the permit year.
No new or renewed permit shall be issued for the remainder of the permit year.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 1I)
ARTICLE 4.200 SOLICITORS*
Sec. 4.201 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to protect the citizens against deceptive practices and fraud; to minimize the
unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption of citizens' privacy; and to preserve the public health,
safety, and general welfare by registering and regulating solicitors. (Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.201), adopted
8/9/05)
Sec. 4.202 Definitions
In this article:
City Manager. The city manager of the city or the city manager's designated representative.
Handbill. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet,
or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any manner.
Minor. A person under the age of 18.
Nonprofit Organization. An organization or entity that is exempt from the payment of tax pursuant to Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Police Chief. The police chief of the city or the police chief's designated representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/562
Selling. To sell, dispense, peddle, hawk, display, offer to sell or solicit for sale by offering or exposing for sale
any goods, wares, merchandise or services.
Solicitation Activities. Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-door, house-to-house or building-tobuilding
personally contacting persons to ask, barter or communicate in any manner, whether orally, by written
or printed materials including but not limited to handbills or leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct
or implied, for the purpose of selling or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise or services or collecting
money for any purpose. The term does not include:
(1) The activity of a salesperson with an appointment calling upon or dealing with manufacturers,
wholesalers, distributors, brokers or retailers at their place of business or homes and in the usual
course of business;
(2) The activity of a person acting on behalf of an organization that is only directed at the members
of the organization; or
(3) The activity of a person collecting money or soliciting funds only from foundations.
Solicitor. A person who engages in solicitation activities.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.202), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.203 Registration Required
(a) A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation activities in the city without first
registering with the city and obtaining a registration certificate and city-issued identification badge from the city
manager.
(b) A registration certificate shall be valid for one (1) year following the date of its issuance unless a shorter
period is requested by the applicant.
(c) An applicant for a registration certificate shall pay a nonrefundable application fee at the time the
application is submitted, and if required, shall submit a bond.
(d) The amount of the nonrefundable application fee shall be $50.00. If a person, firm, corporation or
organization engages in solicitation activity through two or more agents, employees or volunteers the
nonrefundable application fee shall be $50.00 for the first solicitor plus an additional nonrefundable application
fee of $25.00 for each additional solicitor. The nonrefundable application fee shall be used for the purpose of
defraying administrative expenses incident to the issuing of registration certificates and identification badges.
(e) A nonprofit organization or a person conducting solicitation activity on behalf of a nonprofit organization
is exempt from payment of the application fee.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.203), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.204 Solicitation by Minors; Applications
(a) A minor who conducts solicitation activities shall be sponsored or employed by a person over the age of
eighteen, a corporation, firm or organization. The person, corporation, firm or organization that is sponsoring or
employing the minor(s) is responsible for controlling the conduct of the minors and the minors shall be under the
constant supervisor of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/562
(b) A person, corporation, firm or organization that sponsors or employs one or more minors as solicitors may
submit one (1) application and pay one $50.00 nonrefundable application fee for the registration of the minors
regardless of the number of minors who conduct solicitation activities. The sponsor or employer shall provide
the city manager the name(s), date(s) of birth, address(es) and driver's license number(s) (if applicable), and a
notarized parental consent for each minor that will be conducting solicitation activities. The parental consent
form, which shall be provided by the city manager, shall acknowledge the release of the information set forth
above and shall state that the city is authorized to photograph their minor child.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.204), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.205 Application
A person desiring to conduct solicitation activities within the city shall make a written application on a form
provided by the city manager for a registration certificate. The application shall contain or be submitted with the
following information:
(1) The full name, date of birth, phone number and address of the applicant;
(2) A valid state driver's license number or a state-approved identification card number (the city
manager will make a photocopy and attach to the application) of the applicant;
(3) If a vehicle or vehicles are used to conduct the solicitation activity, a description of each
vehicle, its license plate number and vehicle identification number, and the name and license number
of the driver who will operate each vehicle;
(4) Copies of all such licenses and permits which, under federal, state, or local laws or regulations,
the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed solicitation;
(5) If the applicant is acting as an employee, agent or volunteer, the name and physical street
address (not a post office box) and telephone number of the employer, principal or organization; with
credentials in written form establishing the relationship and authority of the employee, agent or
volunteer to act for the employer, principal or organization;
(6) If applicable, the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, the nature of the services to be
furnished;
(7) The approximate time period within which the solicitation is to be made, stating the date of the
beginning of the solicitation activity, its projected conclusion and the proposed dates and times of
solicitation;
(8) Whether the applicant, upon any order obtained, will demand, accept or receive payment or the
deposit of money in advance of final delivery, and if so, a copy of the bond required by Section
4.206;
(9) If the applicant, the applicant's employer or principal or minor solicitor who is 17 years of age
or older has plead guilty, or nolo contendere to, or has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
involving fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, within five (5) years preceding the date of application, a
description of each such conviction or plea and the date of the offense;
(10) If the solicitation activity is to be conducted on behalf of a nonprofit organization, proof of
such status shall be attached to the application;
(11) If the applicant is an entity or organization that sponsors or employs minors as solicitors and is
submitting one application for those minors, the information set forth in Section 4.204(b).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/562
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.205), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.206 Bond
(a) Solicitors who require cash deposits or advance payments for future delivery of goods or for services to be
performed in the future or who require an agreement to finance the sale of goods for future delivery or for
services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the city a bond with the application in the amount
determined in subsection (c), signed by the applicant and a surety company authorized to do business in the
state:
(1) Conditioned upon the final delivery of goods or services in accordance with the terms of any
order obtained;
(2) To indemnify purchasers for defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the goods
sold and that are discovered within 30 days after delivery; and
(3) For the use and benefit of persons, firms, or corporations that may make a purchase or give an
order to the principal of the bond or to the agent or employee of the principal of the bond.
(b) If a person, firm, or corporation is engaging in solicitation activities through one or more agents,
employees, or volunteers only one bond is required for the activities of all the agents, employees or volunteers.
(c) The amount of the bond is determined by the number of solicitors as follows:
1–3 solicitors $ 500
4–6 solicitors $ 750
7 or more solicitors $ 1,000
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.206), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.207 Application Review and Registration Acceptance
(a) Upon receipt of an application, the city manager shall review the application to ensure compliance with
this article.
(b) The city manager shall authorize the registration within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application
unless:
(1) An investigation reveals that the applicant or the applicant's employer, principal or organization
falsified information on the application;
(2) Within five years preceding the date of application, the applicant or the applicant's employer,
principal or organization has plead guilty or nolo contendere to, or has been convicted of, a felony or
misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit or misrepresentation;
(3) A judgment based upon fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation has been entered against the
applicant or the applicant's employer, principal or organization within five years preceding the date of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/562
application;
(4) The applicant provided no proof of authority to act on behalf of the employer, principal or
organization;
(5) The type of solicitation activity requires a bond, and the applicant or the applicant's employer,
principal or organization has not complied with the bond requirements; or
(6) The application does not contain the information or documents required by Section 4.205.
(c) The denial and the reasons for the denial shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be
notified of the denial by notice mailed to the applicant and the applicant's employer, principal or organization at
the address shown on the application or the last known address. The notice of denial shall be mailed within thirty
(30) days of the receipt of the application.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.208), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.208 Registration Certificate and Identification Badge
(a) Upon authorization of the registration, the city manager shall deliver a registration certificate and
identification badge for each solicitor, and shall forward a copy of the certificate to the police chief.
(b) The registration certificate shall show:
(1) The name and address of the solicitor;
(2) The solicitor's employer, principal or organization, if applicable;
(3) The kind of goods or services to be sold or offered for sale, if applicable;
(4) A description and license plate number of any vehicle to be used in carrying out the solicitation
activities, if applicable;
(5) A registration number; and
(6) The dates of issuance and expiration of the certificate.
(c) The original or copy of the registration certificate must be carried by a solicitor while engaged in
solicitation activities.
(d) The identification badge issued by the city shall be worn by a solicitor while engaging in solicitation
activities so that it may be easily read by those being solicited. Lost or damaged badges may be replaced for a
nonrefundable fee of $5.00 per badge.
(e) A registration certificate and an identification badge shall be used only by the solicitor to whom they were
issued and may not be transferred to another person.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.209), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.209 Regulations
(a) A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation activity at a residence before 8:30 a.m.
or after 9:00 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/562
(b) A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation activity at a premises with a posted
notice that such activity is not welcomed or invited. It shall be presumed that there is notice that solicitation
activity is not welcomed or invited when there is exhibited in a conspicuous place on or near the main entrance
of the premises, a sign, not less than four (4) inches by three (3) inches in size, containing the words “No
Solicitors,” “No Trespassing,” or words of similar meaning in letters not less than two-thirds (2/3) of one inch in
height.
(c) A person, who is not the owner or tenant of a residence, commits an offense if the person removes, defaces
or otherwise renders illegible a sign placed by the owner or tenant of the residence pursuant to subsection (b).
(d) A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation activities and remains or lingers on a
premises after being informed by the owner or tenant that they are not welcome.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation activities in an aggressive or intimidating
manner. The term “aggressive or intimidating manner” means:
(1) Blocking the path of a person who is the object of the activity; or
(2) Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from the solicitor after being
solicited, approached, accosted or offered a handbill, leaflet or any other item.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person solicits edible merchandise without keeping all articles for sale
to the public as well as the wagons, vehicles, or other conveyances used in the transportation of such
merchandise in a clean and sanitary condition.
(g) A person commits an offense if that person sells or offers to sell any unsound or unwholesome
merchandise or give a false weight or measure to such offered for sale.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.210), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.210 Solicitation from a Vehicle
(a) A person commits an offense if the person conducts solicitation activities from a vehicle and:
(1) The solicitation is conducted at a location within the right-of-way of any street or highway in
the city which is designated as an arterial or collector on the city's thoroughfare plan; or
(2) The person stops the vehicle within a roadway to conduct business before the vehicle has been
approached, called, or waved down by a prospective customer.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates a vehicle from which solicitation activities are
conducted upon any street or highway within the city in a manner that blocks or impedes access to or from any
alley, street or driveway, or impedes the flow of traffic on any public street or highway.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.211), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.211 Revocation or Suspension of Registration
A registration certificate issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the city manager, after
notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for registration;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/562
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by a solicitor in the course of conducting
solicitation activities;
(3) Plea or conviction of a crime described in Section 4.207(b)(2);
(4) A judgment involving a matter described in Section 4.207(b)(3); or
(5) A violation of the regulations described in Section 4.209.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.212), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.212 Appeals
(a) A person who is denied a registration certificate or whose registration is revoked or suspended by the city
manager, may appeal the decision to the city council by filing notice of appeal with the city manager within 15
days after the notice of the decision is mailed to the address indicated on the application or the last known
address.
(b) Within 10 days of the receipt of the notice of appeal, the city manager shall set a time and place for a
hearing on the appeal which shall be not later than 40 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
(c) Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be delivered to the person by mail, sent to the address
indicated on the application or the last known address of the appellant.
(d) The decision of the city council on the appeal is final. No other administrative procedures are provided by
the city.
(Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.213), adopted 8/9/05)
Sec. 4.213 Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined as provided in Section 1.109 of this code.
Each day a solicitor engages in solicitation activities without having obtained a registration certificate or a
continuing violation occurs shall be a separate offense. (Ordinance 804, sec. 1 (4.214), adopted 8/9/05)
ARTICLE 4.300 GARAGE SALES
Sec. 4.301 Definitions
The following terms used in this article shall be defined as follows:
Garage Sale. An occasional sale at retail, exchange, or barter to the general public, within a single-family zoning
district, for the purpose of disposing of surplus personal property. The term includes, but is not limited to all
sales entitled “garage,” “lawn,” “yard,” “room,” “estate,” “backyard,” “patio,” and “rummage.”
Right-of-Way. Is the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley,
waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a
right-of-way with regards to wireless communications.
Single-Family Residential Zoning District. A property that is shown on the city zoning map as single-family
residential.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/562
Signs. Signs shall only include those signs issued by the city for purposes of advertising a garage sale.
(Ordinance 803, sec. 1 (4.301), adopted 8/6/05)
Sec. 4.302 Permit Required
No person, firm, or corporation shall advertise, operate, or participate in a garage sale within the city limits
without first obtaining a garage sale permit. The fee for a garage sale permit shall be $5.00. (Ordinance 803, sec.
1 (4.302), adopted 8/6/05)
Sec. 4.303 Conditions of Permit
The following regulations apply when obtaining and conducting a garage sale:
(1) Garage sale permits must be obtained in person at Lake Worth City Hall, located at 3805 Adam
Grubb, Lake Worth, Texas 76135.
(2) Garage sale permits will be issued by the city manager or his/her designee(s).
(3) A valid picture ID will be required to obtain a garage sale permit.
(4) Garage sale permits are issued by property address, not applicant name.
(Ordinance 829, sec. 1, adopted 5/9/06)
(5) Garage sale permits shall only be issued for properties that are in a single-family residential
zoning district or properties that are being used for single-family detached dwellings regardless of the
zoning on the property. (Ordinance 965 adopted 6/14/11)
(6) Garage sale permits may be obtained no more than two (2) times per calendar year on the same
premises.
(7) Garage sale permits must be obtained at least one (1) business day before the first day of the
sale is to occur.
(8) A garage sale permit shall be valid for up to three (3) consecutive days.
(9) The garage sale permit must be posted on the property where sale is to be conducted and must
be displayed in a conspicuous location.
(10) No more than three (3) persons may combine their property for sale at a single garage sale.
(11) No new personal property, property that is acquired or consigned for the purpose of resale, or
any inventory or stock of goods in trade may be displayed, offered for sale, exchange, or barter, or
sold, exchanged or bartered.
(12) Garage sale items may be displayed for sale in the following areas: residential yard including
the front or back yard, garage, patio area, under a carport covering, driveway, or inside a residence in
the case of a sale to dispose of a deceased individual's personal belongings.
(13) Garage sale items must be placed at least fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb and at
least five (5) feet from each side property line.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/562
(14) Garage sale items including, but not limited to: items for sale, displays, tables, racks, tarps,
and boxes must be removed from the sale area by 8:00 a.m. the day following the last day of the sale.
Items are strictly prohibited from remaining in the sale area or located in the yard of the property.
(Ordinance 829, sec. 1, adopted 5/9/06)
(15) Permits shall be issued to charitable, religious, educational, fraternal, governmental, or
nonprofit organizations where the property does not meet the qualifications in subsection (5), only if
the following conditions are met:
(A) A maximum of two garage sale permits per year will be issued per nonprofit
organization;
(B) A maximum of two garage sale permits per year will be issued at the same nonsinglefamily
residential location; and
(C) The display area for the garage sale shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.
(Ordinance 965 adopted 6/14/11)
Sec. 4.304 Signs
The following regulations shall pertain to signage allowed when a garage sale permit has been issued:
(1) The city will issue three (3) signs for a “garage sale,” one yard sign to be posted on the
property in a conspicuous location, and two (2) directional signs to aid the public in locating the sale.
All other signage is strictly prohibited.
(2) Signs are strictly prohibited from being placed in city rights-of-way or on utility poles.
(3) The two (2) directional signs may be placed on private property with permission from the
property owner, to aid the public in locating the sale. The permission of the property owner must be
indicated by the property owner's signature on the back of the sign.
(4) All signage must be posted using a wood or metal stake. All other posting methods are strictly
prohibited.
(5) All signs may be posted no sooner than twelve (12) hours prior to the first day of the sale.
(6) All signs must be removed by 8:00 a.m. on the day following the last day of the sale.
(Ordinance 803, sec. 1 (4.304), adopted 8/6/05)
Sec. 4.305 Cancellations/Inclement Weather
The following regulations shall pertain to the cancellation of a garage sale:
(1) If inclement weather occurs on any part of two days of a scheduled sale, resulting in
cancellation, the sale shall not be charged against the number of sales permitted within one calendar
year.
(2) Applicant shall come in person on the next business day following cancellation due to
inclement weather to reschedule sale. If applicant does not do so, the sale shall be charged to the
number of sales allowed per calendar year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/562
(3) Garage sales will only be rescheduled due to inclement weather. No exceptions.
(4) Permit fees will not be refunded under any circumstances.
(Ordinance 803, sec. 1 (4.305), adopted 8/6/05)
Sec. 4.306 Charitable, Religious, Educational, Fraternal, Governmental or Nonprofit Organizations
The following regulations apply to charitable, religious, educational, fraternal, governmental, or nonprofit
organizations:
(1) These organizations may only conduct a garage sale on a property that does not meet the
requirements of section 4.303(5) if all of the conditions in section 4.303(15) are met.
(Ordinance 965 adopted 6/14/11)
(2) The organization must present a letter from the property owner authorizing the organization to
conduct a sale on their property to obtain a permit. The letter must include the organization
sponsoring the sale and the dates the sale is to take place and must be signed by the property owner.
(3) The fee for the garage sale permit will be waived for these organizations.
(4) A garage sale permit sponsored by these organizations will be charged as a sale against the two
(2) sales allowed annually per property address. The organization shall make the property owner
aware of these conditions.
(Ordinance 829, sec. 2, adopted 5/9/06)
ARTICLE 4.400 JUNK YARDS, DUMPING GROUNDS, ETC.
Sec. 4.401 Place to be a Public Nuisance Unless Conducted in Manner Prescribed
Hereafter any place used or maintained by any person, partnership, or corporation as a junk yard or dumping
ground, or for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for
the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked, or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any
kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the maintenance or operation of such place for the accumulation of
rubbish of any description, is hereby declared to be a public and common nuisance, being obnoxious and
offensive to the inhabitants of the city, because of its interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property by said inhabitants, and is prohibited within the city limits of said city, unless the same is conducted in
the manner hereafter stated, following the payment of the license fee hereafter prescribed. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4A)
Sec. 4.402 Application; License; Fee
Any person, partnership, or corporation desiring to use -or maintain any property within the city, for any of the
purposes mentioned in Section 4.401 hereof, shall make written application to the chief of police for a license
which said application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and a legal description of the
property or premises upon which said business is to be conducted, and the city manager or his/her designee shall
have the power either to grant or reject such application. If the application is granted, a license to operate such
business shall be issued by said city manager or his/her designee upon the payment of a fee of $25.00 per
annum. Any license so issued shall expire on January 1 next succeeding the date of its issuance, but may be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/562
renewed from year to year in like manner as is provided for the original license. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 4, Section 4B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.403 Bond Required
Each application shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of $2,000.00 payable to the city, with at least
two (2) good and sufficient sureties or sufficient collateral security, approved by the city council, conditioned
that during the term of the license the applicant will duly observe all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
which are now in force or which may hereafter become applicable to junk dealers. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 4, Section 4C)
Sec. 4.404 Inspection; Construction; Fire Hazard
When any such application has been made, the city manager or his/her designee shall at once report the same to
the chief of police, city health officer, fire chief, and building inspector. It shall thereupon become the duty of
each of said city officials to inspect or cause to be inspected the place where the business of such junk dealer is
to be carried on, and to determine whether such place of business complies with all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations. The place where such junk dealer conducts his business, and all buildings situated thereon,
shall be so constructed and maintained that such junk dealer may carry on his business in a sanitary manner. No
fire hazard shall be contained thereon, and said place of business shall be so arranged that a proper inspection
may be made at any time by the duly authorized health, fire, building, and police authorities. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4D; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.405 Place Designated in License to be Used
No junk dealer shall carry on his business at any place other than the one designated in his license, nor shall said
business be carried on at any time after the suspension, revocation, or expiration of said license. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4E)
Sec. 4.406 Not to Acquire Junk From Certain People
No junk dealer shall purchase, receive, or in anywise acquire any junk from any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years, or from any habitual drunkard, or from any insane person. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
Section 4F)
Sec. 4.407 To be Kept 48 Hours
All junk received by any junk dealer shall be retained for a period of forty-eight (48) hours before it is disposed
of by said dealer, but this provision shall not apply to old rags or paper. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
Section 4G)
Sec. 4.408 License to be Posted
Each holder of a junk dealer's license shall at all times cause the same to be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises described in the application for such license for such period of time as said license may remain in full
force and effect. No person shall post said license upon any property or premises other than those described in
the application therefor, and no person shall knowingly permit said license to be defaced or destroyed. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4H)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/562
Sec. 4.409 Parts of Motor Vehicles; Record to be Kept
In the case of motor vehicles, and in addition to the above requirements, said record shall contain all serial
numbers, engine numbers, or other identifying numbers, the make, style, model, color, and license number of the
automobile from which the same were taken. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4I)
Sec. 4.410 Motor Vehicles and Parts to be Kept 48 Hours
No licensee and no employee of any licensee shall wreck, tear down, paint, or otherwise destroy the identity of
any secondhand motor vehicle, nor allow the same, or any part thereof, to be taken out of his possession until
forty-eight (48) hours after the report has been made to the chief of police; provided, however, that the chief of
police may, after a proper report has been duly made to him, grant a special permit allowing said secondhand
motor vehicle, or part thereof, to be sold or disposed of and delivered to another within a period of time less than
said forty-eight (48) hours after said chief of police has satisfied himself that there is no question as to the
ownership of such motor vehicle, or part thereof. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4J)
Sec. 4.411 Motor Vehicles From Which Serial Number Has Been Removed, Etc.
No junk dealer shall buy, receive, sell or otherwise dispose of any motor vehicle, or part thereof, from which the
manufacturer's serial number or other identification mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered, or
destroyed. Any junk dealer to whom is offered for sale or delivery any motor vehicle or part thereof, from which
has been removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number or other
identification mark shall immediately notify the chief of police to that effect. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
4, Section 4K)
Sec. 4.412 Premises to be Kept Neat; Fence Required
Any person, partnership, or corporation granted a license as provided for in Section 4.402 hereof, shall keep the
premises used in the operation and maintenance of said business in a neat and orderly condition. The property
and premises on which such business is conducted shall be enclosed by a tight board fence at least eight (8) feet
high, and said fence shall be kept in a neatly painted condition, and no junk of any character, or parts, or
machinery of any kind shall be allowed to remain outside such fence; provided, however, that any existing
business of this character now being operated and maintained in the city shall be allowed six (6) months within
which to construct a fence of the kind and character required hereby. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
Section 4L)
Sec. 4.413 Revocation of License
The city council of the city shall have the power to revoke the license provided for herein at any time for good
cause, but only after notice has been given to the owner or owners of the business of a hearing to be held not less
than ten (10) days after the service of such notice. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4M)
Sec. 4.414 Vehicles of Junk Dealers
Each vehicle kept or used by a junk dealer in the pursuit of his business shall be plainly marked on each side
with the name of the licensee, the name and number of the street where his business is located, the word “junk
dealer” the “city, Texas,” and his license number in plain letters and figures at least two inches (2") high and of
such color as to be plainly legible at a distance of sixty (60) feet. The same information shall be contained in and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/562
displayed on a sign to be placed at the front of the place where each junk dealer carries on his business. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4N)
Sec. 4.415 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or who, having had his license revoked, continues his
business as a junk dealer, shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day during which any
violation of this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalties imposed
hereinabove, the offender's license as a junk dealer shall be cancelled, and his bond shall be forfeited. In the
event of such forfeiture, the amount due upon said bond may be recovered in an ordinary civil action. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 4O)
ARTICLE 4.500 GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION*
Sec. 4.501 Purpose
The exploration, development and production of gas in the city are activities which necessitate reasonable
regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to enjoy their property and its
benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform
limitations, safeguards and regulations for operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing,
transporting and storing of gas and other substances produced in association with gas within the city to protect
the health, safety and general welfare of the public, minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights
owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral, and
gas resources.
Sec. 4.502 Definitions
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of gas wells not specifically
defined in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable gas
industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Abandonment. “Abandonment” as defined by the state railroad commission and includes the plugging of the
well and the restoration of any well site as required by this article.
All-Weather Hard Surface. A permanent surface that as a minimum is a base course constructed such that is
meets the requirements of the International Fire Code, be at least twenty feet (20') wide, have an overhead
clearance of fourteen feet (14'), drains appropriately, remains water resistant, is free of litter, debris, weeds, grass
or other objectionable materials or objects and is visibly dust free.
Base Flood. The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Berm. A mound of soil, either natural or manmade, used to obstruct a view. The side slope shall not exceed a
three-foot (3') horizontal and a one-foot (1') vertical slope.
Blowout Preventer. A mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured
to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be
closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are
designed for preventing blowouts.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/562
Building. Any primary structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term
“building” shall be construed as if followed by the words “or portions thereof.”
Cathodic Protection. An electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current
to the structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential
in the immunity region. The required cathodic protection current is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by
an impressed current system.
City Code. The 2004 Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake Worth, Texas.
Commission. The state railroad commission.
Completion. The date the work is completed for the drilling, redrilling or reworking of a well and the crew is
released by completing its work or contract or by its employer.
Day. A calendar day.
Derrick. Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which is required or used in connection with
drilling or reworking a well for the production of gas.
Development Assistance Committee (DAC). An internal staff review committee that includes, but is not limited
to, representatives of the departments of planning and zoning, inspections, public works, fire, police, parks and
recreation, neighborhood services, economic development, and the gas inspector.
Drilling. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing gas or for the
purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
Drilling Equipment. The derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of
apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling.
Drill Site. The immediate area used during the drilling, redrilling or reworking of a well.
Emergency Response Plan. A plan put in place to deal with emergency situations that may occur at the site
during all stages of the drilling and production process.
Exploration. Geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for gas or other
subsurface hydrocarbons.
Fire Chief. The fire chief of the city.
Fire Department. The fire department of the city.
Fracturing. The injecting of a fluid into a well to cause pressure that ‘cracks' or opens up fractures already
present in the formation.
Gas. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and
which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous
components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.
Gas Well. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas.
Gas Inspector. An individual designated by the city manager or any other person or entity so designated as an
inspector by the city manager. The gas inspector will report to the public works director.
Operation Site. The area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with gas
after drilling activities are complete.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/562
Operator. For each well, the person listed on the railroad commission's form W-1 or form P-4 for a gas well that
is, or will be actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any
well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under a gas
lease of any premises affected by the provisions of the article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an
operator. In the event that there is no gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the
fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator.
Permit. Any written license granted by the city for the exploration, development, and production of gas wells
issued pursuant to rules and regulations of this article.
Person. Both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian,
partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind.
Planning and Zoning Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the city.
Planning and Zoning Department. The planning and zoning department of the city.
Production. The period between completion of drilling and the abandonment of the well.
Public Building. All buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of
persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include,
but shall not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls,
exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants, and
hospitals.
Public Park. Any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional park-like recreational
purposes, but shall not include privately-owned amusement parks.
Public Works Department. The public works department of the city.
Redrill. Recompletion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from the existing well bore.
Religious Institution. Any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities
intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious
belief.
Residence. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or other building designed for
dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a
gas well permit is filed and accepted by the planning and zoning department.
Reworking. Recompletion or reentry of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or
sidetrack operations which do not extend more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the existing well bore, or
replacement of well liners or casings.
Right-of-Way. Any area of land within the city that is acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the city in fee
simple, by easement, by prescriptive right or other interest and that is expressly or impliedly accepted or used in
fact or by operation of law as public roadway, sidewalk, alley, utility, drainage, or public access easement or
used for the provision of governmental services or functions. The term includes the area on, below, and above
the surface of the public right-of-way. The term applies regardless of whether the public right-of-way is paved or
unpaved.
Right-of-Way Maintenance Agreement. A written agreement obligating the operator to repair damage, excluding
ordinary wear and tear, if any, including but not limited to, public streets, sidewalks, pathways, trails, and
bridges, caused by the operator or its employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors, or representatives in the
performance of drilling or production of gas wells authorized by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/562
School. Any public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up through and
including the twelfth grade level and any licensed day-care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the state or by
the city that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six (6) children
under fourteen (14) years of age, and for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day.
Street. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way,
including the entire right-of-way.
Thoroughfare Plan. The thoroughfare plan approved by the city.
Well. Any single hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata, for the purpose of producing gas, liquid
hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or
production of gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. For each separate new hole a gas well permit is
required.
Sec. 4.503 City Oversight
The gas inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this
article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or directives of the city or state. Failure of any person to permit access to the gas inspector shall
constitute a violation of this article. Additionally, the gas inspector and other city officials shall have the
authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry the intent and purpose of this article and its
provisions. The gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any records
sent to the commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well
necessary to establish and determine compliance with the applicable permit. Failure of any person to provide any
such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article.
Sec. 4.504 Operator's Agent
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and
notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator
designating such agent shall within ten (10) days notify the planning and zoning department in writing of any
change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. Failure to do so
shall be deemed a violation of this article.
Sec. 4.505 Seismic Survey Permit Requirements
A permit shall be required for seismic surveys. No seismic survey permit shall be granted unless the applicant
shows proof of lease of mineral property within 200 feet of the right-of-way on which the survey is to be
conducted. All seismic survey permit applications shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department for
approval. The seismic survey shall not begin prior to the issuance of a seismic survey permit from the city. A
permit shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:
(1) Operator/applicant name, phone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, email
address; if the operator is a corporation, the state of the incorporation, and if the operator is a
partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners shall be provided.
(2) Detailed mapping of location and extent of seismic survey.
(3) Date and time the seismic survey will be conducted.
(4) Detailed explanation of the seismic survey method to be used on site.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/562
(5) Date and time the seismic survey will be completed.
(6) If the seismic survey is conducted in any right-of-way, then the operator must reimburse all
costs to the city for any damages associated with the seismic survey.
(7) The permit fee for a seismic survey on public property shall be 25 cents ($0.25) per linear foot,
plus the costs of barricade rental and personnel required to direct and divert traffic if city forces and
materials are used.
(8) An operator must submit a traffic safety and management plan as required by the public works
department with all seismic surveys that are conducted within the right-of-way.
(9) Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including, but not limited to, the use of
dynamite, be used in any way related to the preparation and/or operation of conducting a seismic
survey.
Sec. 4.506 Gas Well Permit Requirements
(a) A person wanting to engage in and/or operate in gas production activities shall apply for and obtain a gas
well permit under this article and shall indicate what type of well permit is requested. It shall be unlawful for any
person acting either for himself or acting as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any
person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, reworking, fracturing or operation of any such
well or to conduct any activity related to the production of gas without first obtaining a gas well permit issued by
the city in accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to, reworking, initial site
preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing.
(b) The operator must apply for and obtain a gas well permit for the drilling of each well. The operator shall
neither apply nor obtain a “blanket” permit for more than one (1) well if multiple wells are located on the same
tract of land. Each new well established at the ground surface will be considered a new gas well permit.
(c) An existing gas well permit shall not constitute authority for the reentering and drilling of an abandoned
well. An operator shall obtain a new well permit in accordance with the provisions of this article if the operator
is reentering and drilling an abandoned well.
(d) When a gas well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, reentering, activating or converting
of a well, such gas well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production gathering or
production maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other
activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well. An amended gas well permit shall be
obtained before such well may be modified for purposes of redrilling, deepening or converting such well to a
depth or use other than that set forth in the then current permit for such well.
(e) Any person who intends to rework a permitted well using a drilling rig, to fracture stimulate (fracturing) a
permitted well after initial completion shall give written notice to the gas inspector no less than ten (10) days
before the activities begin. The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the
activities in detail, including, but not limited to, whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the
activities and the time the activities will be conducted. The notice must also provide the address and twenty-four
(24) hour telephone number of the person conducting the activities. The person conducting the activities shall
post a sign on the property giving the public notice forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the fracturing activities.
The sign shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.513, On-site and Technical Regulations; subsection
(y), Signs; subsubsection (1).
(f) Well Setbacks for Gas Well Permits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/562
(1) It shall be unlawful to drill, redrill, deepen, reenter, activate or convert any well, the center of
which, at the surface of the ground, is located:
(A) Within six hundred feet (600') from any residence, religious institution, public building,
school, retail or commercial building or hospital building for which a building permit has been
issued on the date of the application for a gas well permit is filed with the planning and zoning
department.
(B) Within fifty feet (50') of any public street, road, highway, or right-of-way line.
(C) Within one hundred feet (100') of any existing potable water well.
(D) Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any property line.
(E) The measurement of all distances shall be calculated from the proposed well bore, in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of
the object listed in subsections (A) through (D), above. The above calculations shall be
prepared by a registered professional land surveyor.
(2) Tank batteries, separators and compressors shall be located at least three hundred feet (300')
from any residence, religious institution, public building, school, hospital building, or any other
building used, or designed and intended to be used, for human occupancy, for which a building
permit has been issued on the date of the application for a gas well permit is filed. The distance shall
be calculated from the closest tank batteries, separators or compressors, in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest part of the playground, competition athletic
field, picnic area, residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or schools, or any
other building used or designed and intended to be used for human occupancy.
(3) The distances set out in subsections (f)(1) and (2) above may be reduced at the discretion of the
city council, but never less than three hundred feet (300') except as provided by subsection (4) below.
All distance reductions shall be documented as exceptions to the requested permit prior to issuance.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, wells may be drilled no closer than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from existing residences that are occupied by persons who in writing consent to the
request to drill the well if approved by a majority vote of the city council. Said written consent is
required from all residences occupied by persons within three hundred feet (300') of a proposed well
bore prior to an application for a well permit being processed by city staff. Wells may be redrilled,
deepened, reentered, activated or converted if no closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any
residence constructed after the well was originally drilled without such consent.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, new residences may be built no closer than one
hundred and fifty feet (150') from an existing well.
(g) A gas well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within
ninety (90) days from the date of the issuance of the permit. A well permit may be extended by the gas inspector
for an additional ninety (90) days upon written request by the operator and proof that the regulatory standards of
the requested permit for such location have not changed.
(h) Permits required by this article are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit which may be required
by any other provision of the city code or by any other governmental agency.
(i) No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within the floodway identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on the most current Federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Gas wells
proposed in the floodplain outside of the floodway shall comply with the requirements for development in the
city's design criteria and construction standards manual.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/562
(j) No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled that is not in compliance with any standard,
provision, procedure, and/or recommendation as described in the city's design criteria and construction standards
manual.
(k) By acceptance of any permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to
be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be
incorporated in any permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was set
forth verbatim in such permit.
Sec. 4.507 Gas Well Permit Application and Filing Fees
(a) Every application for a gas well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the
operator, or some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the planning and zoning
department.
(b) Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), provided,
however, that in the event the city incurs additional costs to administer a permit application, the applicant shall
pay for all such additional cost as part of the permit fee. The application shall include the following information:
(1) The date of the application and type of permit requested.
(2) An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the operation site, the parcel
and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property
recorded by plat shall reference subdivision, block and lot numbers.
(3) Map showing proposed transportation route and road(s) for equipment, chemicals or waste
products used or produced by the gas operation.
(4) Proposed well name and well depth.
(5) Surface owner names(s), telephone number(s), fax number(s), physical address(es), and, if
possible, e-mail addresses, of the lease property.
(6) Mineral lessee name, telephone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, e-mail
address.
(7) Operator/applicant name, telephone number, fax number, physical address, and if possible, email
address and if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a
partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners.
(8) Name, telephone number, fax number physical address of individual designated to receive
notice, and, if possible, e-mail address.
(9) Names and address of representatives or operator's agent with supervisory authority over all
gas operation site activities and an emergency twenty-four (24) hour telephone number.
(10) Location and description of all improvements and structures within eight hundred feet (800')
of the well. Such locations and descriptions shall be prepared by a registered professional land
surveyor.
(11) A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and
equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities including, but not
limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage tanks or storage sheds. All site plans
must include the following criteria:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/562
(A) Property boundaries with dimensions and setback lines.
(B) Location of proposed buildings and structures indicating sizes in square feet.
(C) The location and intensity of exterior lighting fixtures.
(D) The location of mechanical equipment.
(E) Outside storage areas.
(F) Curb cut locations.
(G) Parking, loading, and maneuvering areas.
(H) The location, materials and dimensions of screening improvements as required by
Section 4.514, Screening (a)(1).
(I) A separate plan sheet showing the location, materials and dimensions of all screening
improvements as required by Section 4.514, Screening (a)(2).
(J) Waste disposal locations with screening.
(K) Adjacent property lines, streets, easements immediately adjacent to the operation site.
(L) Names of owners of property immediately adjacent to the operation site.
(M) Names of subdivisions immediately adjacent to the operation.
(N) Site plans shall be submitted on a sheet size of 24" x 36" minimum.
(O) City boundaries where applicable.
(P) Date the drawing was prepared with name, address, and phone number of preparer.
(Q) Location, width, purpose of all existing easements.
(R) North arrow, at a maximum scale of 1:50 immediately adjacent to the operation site.
(S) All existing street names immediately adjacent to the operation site.
(T) Dimensions of all existing rights-of-way as specified on the city's thoroughfare plan.
(U) Title block identifying gas well site location.
(V) Vicinity location map at 1"= 2000'.
(W) Zoning classifications of all properties shown on the site plan.
(X) Location of 100-year flood limits where applicable.
(Y) Texas NAD83 state plane coordinates for at least two corners.
(Z) As a minimum, a preliminary drainage study as identified in the design criteria and
construction standards manual.
(12) Copies of all reports required by the commission, specifically including a copy of the
approved railroad commission form W-1 and/or P-4.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/562
(13) A signed right-of-way maintenance agreement supplied by the city that provides that the
operator shall repair, at his own expense, any damage caused by any activity associated with the
preparation, drilling, production, and operation of wells.
(14) A description of public utilities required during drilling and site operations.
(15) A description of the water source to be used during drilling.
(16) A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as required by the commission,
the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ), the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA) and/or the city. A copy of the notice of intent (NOI) shall be submitted to the
public works department at least three (3) days prior to the commencement of any on-site activity.
(17) A copy of the determination by the TCEQ of the depth of useable quality groundwater.
(18) Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article.
(19) A statement, under oath, signed by the operator or designated representative, that the
information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or
designated representative, true and correct.
(20) All required application and permit fees.
(21) A copy of a hazardous materials management plan and additionally, all material safety data
sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported and/or
temporarily used on the drilling site shall be provided to the gas inspector and the fire department.
(c) Building Permit Required.
(1) No building or structure regulated by the current technical codes adopted by the city shall be
erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or
demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the
planning and zoning department. No subdivision plat will be required.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm, or corporation, upon submittal of an
application for a building permit for work regulated by the current technical codes adopted by the
city, to register as a general contractor with the city. Work regulated includes, but is not limited to,
construction of gates, fencing, plumbing, irrigation, electricity, roadways, entrances, compressors,
flow lines, pipelines, gathering lines, tank batteries, and buildings. Such registration shall be upon
forms supplied by the planning and zoning department and shall become null and void on December
31st of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the city fee
schedule.
(3) Appropriate temporary or permanent restroom facilities shall be provided during the course of
any work subject to regulation by the current technical codes adopted by the city.
Sec. 4.508 Permitting Procedure
(a) All gas well permits will be filed through the planning and zoning department. The planning and zoning
department will then convene a meeting of the development assistance committee (DAC).
(b) It is the responsibility of the DAC to review and approve or disapprove all applications for gas well
drilling permits based on the criteria established by this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/562
(c) The DAC, within forty-five (45) days after the filing of a completed application and remittance of all fees,
insurance, and security per the requirements of this article for a gas well permit, shall determine whether the
permit application shall be approved or denied.
(d) The provisions of this article shall apply to any dwellings or buildings for which an application for a
building permit has been submitted on the date the application for a gas well permit is filed with the planning
and zoning department.
(1) All new and/or proposed construction of any buildings, structures, streets, roads, and/or
applicable improvements to the property upon which any gas well is located must be in compliance
with all applicable setback requirements enumerated in this article.
(2) If all the requirements of this article are met, the DAC shall issue a permit for the drilling of the
well or the installation of the facilities for which the permit application was made.
(3) If the DAC denies a permit application for cause as set out in this article for the requested gas
well permit, the DAC shall notify the operator in writing of such denial stating the reasons for the
denial. Within forty-five (45) days of the date of the written decision of the DAC to deny the permit,
the operator may cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the
planning and zoning department for approval and issuance of the permit. Additionally, the operator
may file an appeal to the city council pursuant to Section 4.518 of this article.
(4) The failure of the DAC to review and issue a permit within the time limits specified above shall
not cause the application to be deemed approved. The failure of the DAC to act within the time limit
shall be deemed a disapproval. The operator may file an appeal to the city council pursuant to Section
4.518 of this article.
(e) If an application for a permit is denied by the city, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new permit
application from being submitted to the planning and zoning department for the same well.
Sec. 4.509 Amended Gas Well Permits
(a) An amended permit may be issued for, but not limited to, the following changes in drill and/or operational
site activities:
(1) Redrilling;
(2) Deepening beyond one hundred fifty feet (150') of the permitted depth;
(3) Site access;
(4) Locations and/or quantities of equipment as determined by the gas inspector;
(5) Locations and/or number of drilling fluid or other types of pits; and
(6) Locations and/or number of buildings and structures.
(b) Applications for amended permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include the
following:
(1) An application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00);
(2) A description of the proposed amendments;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/562
(3) Any changes to the information submitted with the application for existing permit (if such
information has not previously been provided to the city);
(4) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the gas inspector to demonstrate
compliance with the applicable permit;
(5) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the gas inspector to prevent imminent
destruction of property or injury to persons; and
(6) An amended site plan will be required.
(c) All applications for amended permits shall be filed with the planning and zoning department for review by
the DAC. Incomplete applications may be returned to the applicant, in which case the city shall provide a written
explanation of the deficiencies; however, the city shall retain the application fee. The city may return any
application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the commission regarding the determination of the
operator.
(d) If the activities proposed by the amendment are not materially different from the activities covered by the
existing permit then the DAC shall approve or disapprove the amendment within fifteen (15) days after the
application is filed.
(e) If the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different from the activities covered by the
existing permit, and do not create a risk of destruction of property or injury to persons, then the DAC shall
approve or disapprove the amendment within forty-five (45) days after the application is filed. If, however, the
activities proposed by the amendment are materially different and, in the judgment of the gas inspector or the
DAC, might create a risk of destruction of property or injury to persons that were not associated with the
activities covered by the existing permit or that were not otherwise taken into consideration by the existing
permit, the DAC may require the amendment to be processed as a new permit application.
(f) The failure of the DAC to review and issue an amended permit within the time limits specified above shall
not cause the application for the amended permit to be deemed approved. Further, the decision of the DAC to
deny an amendment to a permit shall be provided to the operator in writing within the time period indicated in
subsections (d) and (e) above, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. The operator may appeal
any such denial to the city council pursuant to Section 4.518 of this article.
Sec. 4.510 Suspension or Revocation of Gas Well Permits
(a) If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any
requirement of a permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the permit), the city
shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable
time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to
cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. In no event, however, shall
the cure period be less than ten (10) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent danger of property or
injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by
this article.
(b) If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance, the city may suspend or revoke the permit pursuant to
the provisions of this article.
(c) No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the permit issued under this article
during any period of any permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of the city
in suspending or revoking the permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary,
diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation
of the permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/562
(d) If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the city, upon
written notice to the operator, may notify the commission and request that the commission take any appropriate
action.
(e) An operator may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision of the city in writing to suspend or
revoke a permit, file an appeal to the city council pursuant to Section 4.518 of this article.
Sec. 4.511 Periodic Reports
(a) The operator shall notify the gas inspector of any changes to the following information within ten (10)
days after the change occurs:
(1) The name, physical address, telephone number, and fax number of the operator;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the person designated to receive notices from the
city (which person must be a resident of the state that can be served in person or by registered or
certified mail); and
(3) The operator's emergency action response plan (including “drive-to-maps” from public rightsof-
way to each drill site).
(b) The operator shall notify in writing the gas inspector and the planning and zoning department of any
change to the name, address, and twenty-four (24) hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory
authority over drilling or operations activities within one (1) business day.
(c) The operator shall provide a copy of any “incident reports” or written complaints submitted to the
commission and a copy to the city within thirty (30) days after the operator has notice of the existence of such
reports or complaints.
(d) Beginning on December 31st after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31st
thereafter until the operator notifies the gas inspector and the planning and zoning department that the well has
been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the gas inspector identifying
any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable permit that have not been
previously reported to the city.
Sec. 4.512 Bond; Letters of Credit; Indemnity; Insurance
(a) General Requirements. The operator shall be required to:
(1) Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the permit issued hereunder.
(2) Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used,
allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore
such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations as
determined by the gas inspector.
(3) Indemnification and Express Negligence Provisions. Operators shall sign each permit and the
city shall retain a signed original. Each such permit issued by the city shall include the following
language:
“Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments,
and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have,
against the City of Lake Worth, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/562
sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or
unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection with
the performance of the work performed by the operator under a permit. The operator shall fully
defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Lake Worth, Texas, its departments, agents,
officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against each and
every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations, judgments,
losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in defense of the City of Lake Worth,
Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, including, without limitation,
personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by operator, its
agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in
connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a permit. The operator
agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Lake Worth, Texas, its departments, its officers,
agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from any liabilities or
damages suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs, or judgments against the City, its
departments, its officers, agents, servants, or employees, created by, or arising out of the acts or
omissions of the City of Lake Worth occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and
scope of inspecting and permitting the wells including, but not limited to, claims and damages arising
in whole or in part from the negligence of the City of Lake Worth occurring on the drill site or
operation site in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting gas wells.
IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS
SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND
PROTECT THE CITY OF LAKE WORTH, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS,
OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE
NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF LAKE WORTH, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS,
AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS THE
SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH, AND/OR
DAMAGE.”
(4) Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any terms of
the permit.
(5) Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the gas operation.
(b) Bond, Irrevocable Letter of Credit. Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit the operator shall provide the
public works department with a security instrument in the form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit as
follows:
(1) Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do
business in the state, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the
gas well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months
after the expiration of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is
restored, whichever occurs last. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run
to the city, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and
regulations of this article and the city. The original bond shall be submitted to the gas inspector with a
copy of the same provided to the city secretary.
(2) Letter of Credit. A letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in
the state and shall become effective on or before the date the permit is issued. The letter of credit
shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the
permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs last.
The city shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines or penalties or
costs to remedy assessed under this article. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be
submitted to the city by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking institution,
with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/562
(3) The principal amount of any security instrument shall be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for
any single well. If, after completion of a well, the applicant/operator, who initially posted a fifty
thousand dollar ($50,000.00) bond, has complied with all of the provisions of this article and whose
well in the producing stage and all drilling operations have ceased, may submit a request to the gas
inspector to reduce the existing bond to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the remainder of the
time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond or
letter of credit shall be maintained at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). If at any time after no less
than a fifteen-day written notice to the operator and a public hearing, the city council shall deem any
operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, it may require the operator to increase the amount
of the bond or letter of credit up to a maximum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00)
per well.
(4) Whenever the gas inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any
requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such
notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the gas
inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice,
the operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed,
or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated
cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less
than thirty (30) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to
persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by
this article. The city shall be authorized to draw against any irrevocable letter of credit or bond to
recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by
such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no
liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well
has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, such additional money
may be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and
restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(5) In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay
over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the
security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter of
credit or bond the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action
against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both such methods.
(6) When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been properly
abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of
the commission and notice to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a
satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in compliance with these
regulations shall be terminated and cancelled.
(c) Insurance. In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall
carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business
in the state. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the permit shall be suspended on such
date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such permit shall immediately cease until the
operator files additional insurance as provided herein.
(1) General Requirements Applicable to All Policies.
(A) The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an “additional
insured” to all policies except employer's liability coverage under the operator's workers
compensation policy.
(B) All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution
liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/562
claims-made basis.
(C) All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-VIII or better rating by the most
current version of the A.M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound
insurance carriers acceptable to the city.
(D) Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a “per
occurrence” basis unless otherwise stipulated herein.
(E) Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City Secretary, City of Lake Worth,
3805 Adam Grubb Road, Lake Worth, Texas 76135, evidencing all the required coverages,
including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a permit.
(F) All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery
in favor of the city.
(G) Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not
constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein.
(H) Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum thirty-day notice of
cancellation, nonrenewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten-days'
notice shall be acceptable in the event of nonpayment of premium.
(I) During the term of the permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the public
works department any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or
lawsuit or which could result in a property loss.
(J) Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city.
(2) Standard Commercial General Liability Policy. This coverage must include premises,
operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operation, sudden and accidental pollution,
blanket contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage,
independent contractors protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence location for bodily
injury and property damage.
(3) Excess or Umbrella Liability. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) excess, if the operator has a
stand-alone environmental pollution liability (EPL) policy. Ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00)
excess, if the operator does not have a stand-alone EPL policy. Coverage must include an
endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If seepage and pollution coverage is written on a
“claims made” basis, the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended
coverage period insurance when necessary.
(4) Environmental Pollution Liability Coverage. Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for
the duration of the permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury,
property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been
physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in
the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the
insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per loss, with an annual aggregate of at least ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00.)
(A) Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the
escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases,
waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/562
(B) The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage
period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that
any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the
issuance of the permit by the city.
(5) Control of Well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control,
redrilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the
operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and
evacuation of residents. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence/no aggregate, if
available, otherwise an aggregate of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00). Five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the
operator has care, custody and control.
(6) Workers Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance. Workers compensation benefits
shall be state statutory limits. Employers' liability shall be a minimum of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per accident. Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of
the city and provide coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal laws.
(7) Automobile Liability Insurance. Combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. Coverage must include all owned, hired and
not-owned automobiles.
(8) Certificates of Insurance. The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the
state, unless the coverage is written by a surplus lines insurer. The insurance set forth by the
insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved by the state department
of insurance or ISO (insurance services office), or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city,
with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage. Sets [sic] forth
all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained
herein. Shall [sic] specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage
provisions to the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read:
“THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NONRENEWED WITHOUT THIRTYDAYS'
ADVANCED WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN
THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE
TEN-DAYS' ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED.”
Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the
certificates of insurance.
(9) Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of the state upon whom
all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified
mail. Every operator shall within ten (10) days notify the gas inspector in writing of any change in
such agent or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued and abandonment is
complete.
Sec. 4.513 On-site and Technical Regulations
(a) Abandoned Wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission;
however, all well casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten feet (10') below the surface unless
the surface owner submits a written agreement otherwise. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well.
(b) Blowout Prevention. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled,
worked-over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas
operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/562
recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute (API). The operator must equip all drilling wells with
adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as
required by the commission. The operator must conduct daily testing of the operation and pressure providing a
copy to the city weekly.
(c) Chemical and Materials Storage. All chemicals and/or hazardous materials shall be stored in such a
manner as to prevent, contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and cleanup of any accidental spill, leak, or
discharge of a hazardous material. Operator shall have all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous
materials on site. All applicable federal and state regulatory requirements for the proper labeling of containers
shall be followed. Appropriate pollution prevention actions shall be required and include, but are not limited to,
chemical and materials raised from the ground (e.g., wooden pallets), bulk storage, installation and maintenance
of secondary containment systems, and protection from stormwater and weather elements.
(d) The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation (fracturing) operations performed on a
well:
(1) At least forty-eight (48) hours before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign,
which complies with subsection (y) Signs (1) below, at the entrance of the well site advising the
public of the date the operations will commence and an anticipated completion date;
(2) “Flowback” operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be performed
during daylight hours only unless the gas inspector approves in writing such operations during
nondaylight hours;
(3) A watchperson shall be required at all times during such operations;
(4) At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first
directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank; and
(5) Written notice of operations shall be provided to each owner of record of each parcel of
property located within two hundred feet (200') of the well at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to
commencement advising the adjacent property owners of the date the operations will commence and
the anticipated completion date.
(e) Compliance. Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements.
(f) Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or
discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater
or brine from any gas operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any gas operation in,
into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or any body
of water or any private or public property in the city.
(g) Drilling Fluids. Low toxicity glycols, synthetic hydrocarbons, polymers, and esters shall be substituted for
conventional oil-based drilling fluids.
(h) Drill Stem Testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill
stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas
separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to
the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe.
(i) Drip Pans and Other Containment Devices. Drip pans and other containment devices shall be placed or
installed underneath all tanks, containers, pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage
tanks, system valves, connections, and any other areas or structures that could potentially leak, discharge, or spill
hazardous liquids, semiliquids, or solid waste materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/562
(j) Dust, Vibration, Odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best
accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of gas and other hydrocarbon substances. All equipment
used shall be so constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances
or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything
incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures
thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements as
identified by the gas inspector in industry standards of drilling and production in this area may be adopted as
they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor.
(k) Electric Lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those
already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision.
(l) Electric Motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells.
No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the
city's ordinances and the appropriate national codes.
(m) Emergency Response Plan. Prior to the commencement of any gas or other hydrocarbons production
activities, operator shall submit to the gas inspector and fire chief an emergency response plan establishing
written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of gas wells. Said
plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission, TCEQ, state department of transportation
and/or the U.S. EPA. The emergency response plan shall be kept current with any additions, modifications,
and/or amendments concerning all construction-related activities, natural gas operations and/or natural gas
production. Updated plans shall be submitted to the gas inspector and fire chief within two (2) business days. A
copy of the emergency response plan shall be kept on site.
(n) Explosive Charges. Under no circumstances shall explosives of any type be used during any phase of
drilling, redrilling, deepening, reentering, activating, converting, fracturing, or completing a gas well without the
prior consent of the fire department. Where permitted, the operator shall provide notice to the gas inspector and
fire chief at least ten (10) days prior to such activities. The notice shall identify the date that the explosive
charges will be used, the date and means of transporting the explosive charges, and the transportation route to
and from the drill and/or operation site that will be used for the delivery of the explosive charges.
(o) Fire Prevention; Sources of Ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire
department and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the
operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations.
The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be
equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure.
All well heads shall contain an emergency shutoff valve to the well distribution line.
(p) Gas Emission or Burning Restricted. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the
atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the
venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or
as permitted by the commission, then such vent or open flame shall not be located closer than five hundred feet
(500') from any building not used in operations on the drilling site and such vent or open flame shall be screened
in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners.
(q) Grass, Weeds, Trash. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and trash,
combustible or otherwise.
(r) Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a
manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the
operation site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be
directed downward and shielded so as to both prevent direct illumination of and minimize glare on public roads
and adjacent dwellings and buildings within six hundred feet (600').
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/562
(s) Muffling Exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in
connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the
open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of
noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or
ignited carbon or soot. All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the
operator has notified the gas inspector that fracturing will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety
requirements.
(t) Organic Solvents. Organic solvents, such as trichloroethylene and carbon tetrachloride, shall not be used
for cleaning any element, structure, or component of the drilling rig, platform, and/or associated equipment,
tools, or pipes. To the maximum extent practicable, high flash point Varsol shall be used.
(u) Pipe Dope. Lead-free, biodegradable pipe dope shall be substituted for API specified pipe dope.
(v) Pits. All reserve pits, completion/workover pits, drilling fluid disposal pits, fresh makeup water pits, gas
plant evaporation/retention pits, mud circulation pits, or water condensate pits shall be lined with plastic or
stored above ground in tanks. The water surface elevation of the pit may not exceed twelve inches (12") above
the existing ground elevation prior to any on-site construction of the pit. One foot (1') of freeboard is required
between the surface elevation and on top of berm. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises
and the drilling site within forty (40) days after completion of the well, unless otherwise authorized by the gas
inspector. No washout pits shall be located within the city, unless all fluid, sludge, solid waste materials, drilling
fluids, waste oil, spent completion fluids, all other liquids, semiliquids, mud, including hazardous waste
inseparable by simple mechanical removal processes, and is made up primarily of natural material is
immediately captured within a fully enclosed, aboveground containment tank.
(w) Private Roads and Drill Sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used
for access to the drill site and the operation site itself shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide, have an overhead
clearance of fourteen feet (14') and shall be an all-weather hard surface and maintained to prevent dust, mud and
rutting. In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the
discretion of the public works department after consideration of all circumstances including, but not limited to,
the following: distances from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby property owners
whose surface rights are not leased by the operation; the purpose for which the property of such owners is or
may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind.
(x) Saltwater Wells. No saltwater disposal wells shall be located within the city.
(y) Signs.
(1) A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and
permanent site fencing erected pursuant to this article. Such sign shall be of durable material,
maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a surface
area of not less than sixteen (16) square feet with contrasting lettering not less than four inches (4")
tall and shall be lettered with the following:
(A) Well name and number;
(B) Name of operator;
(C) The emergency 911 number; and
(D) 24-hour telephone numbers of two (2) persons responsible for the well who may be
contacted in case of emergency.
(2) Permanent weatherproof signs reading “DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED” in both
English and Spanish shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/562
entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other location approved or designated by the fire
department of the city. Sign lettering shall be four inches (4") in height and shall be red on a white
background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification
numbers of the fire department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the
commission.
(z) Storage of Equipment. On-site storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on
the drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber,
pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations
are being conducted on the site. No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, rightof-
way or in any driveway, alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to
or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment which is necessary for drilling or
production operations on the site. The fire department shall be the entity that determines whether equipment on
the site shall constitute a fire hazard. No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any
kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. This shall not be deemed to exclude a
conventional gas separator or dehydrator.
(aa) Storage Tanks. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the API specifications unless other or
additional specifications are approved by the fire department. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a
secondary containment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system
shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height and one-and-one-half (1-1/2) times the contents of the largest tank
in accordance with the fire code, and buried at least one foot (1') below the surface. Drip pots shall be provided
at the pump out connection to contain the liquids from the storage tank. All tanks shall be set back pursuant to
the standards of the commission and the National Fire Protection Association. Each storage tank shall be
equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of
excess liquid accumulation in the tank. No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground
facilities, other than the well head and flow lines, shall be placed in a floodway identified by FEMA on the most
current FIRM. Meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground facilities proposed in the
floodplain shall be outside of the floodway and shall comply with the requirements for development in the city
design criteria and construction standards manual.
(bb) Tank Battery Facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning
arrestor system.
(cc) Surface Casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and
regulations of the commission.
(dd) Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall
have access to the well site to enable it to close the shutoff valve in an emergency.
(ee) Waste Disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to
the following: operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must
meet the API standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must
be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit classification. Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons
and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling, reworking or deepening of any
well shall be discharged into an aboveground self-contained tank, or, if authorized by the city council, a lined
pit. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate local, state
or federal agency. Unless otherwise directed by the commission and approved by the gas inspector waste
materials shall be removed from the site and transported to an off-site disposal facility not less often than every
thirty (30) days. Water stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary. All waste shall be disposed of in
such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this article and any
other applicable ordinance of the city.
(ff) Watchperson. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on site during the drilling or
reworking of a well when other workmen are not on the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/562
(gg) Installation of Pipelines On, Under or Across Public Property. The operator shall apply to the city for a
right-of-way use agreement on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city
property for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing
pipelines. Operator shall:
(1) Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public
utilities located on, under or across the course of such rights-of way.
(2) Furnish to the public works department a site plan showing the location of such pipelines.
(3) Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations, including,
but not limited to, the design criteria and construction standards manual.
(4) Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable,
as existed prior to the laying of the pipeline.
(hh) Public Streets. No permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of
the city and/or projected streets or alleys shown by the current comprehensive plan of the city, and no street or
alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless
prior consent is obtained from the public works department. Any consent from the public works department shall
be temporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or days that any street or alley may be blocked,
encumbered or closed. The site must not conflict with the city's thoroughfare plan.
(ii) Vehicle Routes for Gas Well Permits. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three
(3) tons shall be restricted to state arterials, and where local access is required, to those arterials, collectors or
commercial routes designated on the city's thoroughfare plan.
(jj) Work Hours for Gas Well Permits. Site development, other than drilling and fracturing, shall be conducted
only between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials
associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on
the well site shall be limited to between the above same work hour restrictions except in cases of fires, blowouts,
explosions, and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation
of drilling or production. The operator may request an exception from the city council pursuant to Section 4.518
of this article.
(kk) Noise Restrictions for Gas Well Permits.
(1) During drilling, redrilling or reworking, no on-site activity shall produce a sound level greater
than seventy-eight (78) dB(a) when measured at a distance of three hundred feet (300') from the
drilling equipment in question.
(2) During fracturing, no on-site activity shall produce a sound level greater than eighty-five (85)
dB(a) when measured at a distance of three hundred feet (300') from the drilling equipment in
question.
(3) During production, no on-site activity shall produce a sound level greater than sixty-five (65)
dB(a) when measured at a distance of three hundred feet (300') from any on-site equipment in
question.
(4) Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming as a minimum,
to the requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
(5) If sound levels exceed the dB(a) levels referenced in this subsection, the gas inspector may
require additional sound-reducing techniques and devices including, but not limited to, soundreducing
mufflers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/562
(ll) Tank Specifications for Gas Well Permit. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the API
specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire department. The top of the tanks shall be no
higher than twelve feet (12') above the terrain surrounding the tanks.
Sec. 4.514 Screening
(a) Throughout the entire exploration, drilling, and production process there shall be screening improvements
(fences, walls, berms and landscaping) required during each phase of the process.
(1) Exploration Through Completion (Drilling Phase). A temporary chainlink fence with allweather
screening fabric at least six feet (6') in height shall be established around the entire operation
site to obscure view of the gas drilling activities. A secured entrance gate shall be required. All gates
are to be kept locked when the operator or his or her employees are not within the enclosure. A knox
padlock or knox box with a key shall be provided to access the well site to be used only in case of an
emergency.
(2) Completion Through Abandonment (Production Phase). A masonry wall with landscaping shall
be required to enclose and visually screen the well and all associated equipment. An earthen berm
may also be required. The masonry walls, berms, and landscaping shall be in compliance with
standard engineering and design practices and shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(A) The masonry wall material and design shall be generally compatible with the design of
similar facilities, buildings and structures on and/or adjacent to the site.
(B) Masonry walls shall be at least eight feet (8') in height.
(C) Masonry walls shall be placed upon earthen berms in order to prevent viewing of the well
and associated equipment from a public street, existing residences and residentially zoned
undeveloped property contiguous to the well site where practicable as determined by the DAC.
However, the above-mentioned berms shall not be required unless needed to augment the height
of an eight-foot (8') masonry wall in order to prevent the viewing of the well or any associated
equipment from the above items.
(D) All landscape improvements shall be maintained in an attractive and healthy state by the
applicant and/or operator as to ensure the effective visual screening of the site throughout its
use for gas production and associated activities.
(E) Screening shrubs and trees shall be evergreen species and shall be installed in
conjunction with the required masonry walls and or berms in order to supplement both the
visual screening and noise mitigation of the well site and associated equipment. Screening
shrubs shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in height at planting, having the potential to grow to
a mature height of at least eight feet (8'), be planted on four-foot (4') centers and must have an
irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials. Screening trees shall
be planted on twenty-foot (20') centers. Trees must be a minimum of three inch (3") caliper at
time of planting and be irrigated as above. Plans for landscape and irrigation shall be submitted
to the planning and zoning department for approval.
(b) Gate Specifications. All temporary fences and masonry walls shall be equipped with at least one (1) gate.
The gate shall meet the following specifications:
(1) Each gate shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide and be composed of two (2) gates, each
of which is not less than six feet (6') wide, or one (1) sliding gate not less than twelve feet (12') wide.
If two (2) gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/562
(2) The gates shall be of chainlink construction, with all-weather screening fabric, that meets the
applicable specifications, or of other approved material that, for safety reasons, shall be at least as
secure as a chainlink fence;
(3) The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a
padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site; and
(4) Operator must provide the fire department with a knox padlock or knox box with a key to
access the well site to be used only in case of an emergency.
Sec. 4.515 Cleanup and Maintenance
(a) Cleanup After Well Servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator
shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property
caused by such operations within sixty (60) days.
(b) Cleanup After Spills, Leaks and Malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall
remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the fire department and the gas inspector all waste materials
from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin
immediately. If the owner fails to begin site cleanup within twenty-four (24) hours, the city shall have the right
to contact the commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by
such spill, leak or malfunction.
(c) Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads,
pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the gas inspector
shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed,
the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses.
Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors
approved by the planning and zoning department.
(d) Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all reasonable
steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the gas inspector and fire
department as soon as practicable. The gas inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the
city manager. If the city manager, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because of
such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary steps
to regain control of such well, the city may then employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors
or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the city deems
necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all
working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the
gas inspector in gaining control of said well.
Sec. 4.516 Plugged and Abandoned Wells.
(a) Surface Requirements for Plugged and Abandoned Well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the
requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well
site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(b) Abandonment shall be approved by the gas inspector after restoration of the drill and/or operation site has
been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the public works
department:
(1) The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the site;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/562
(2) All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the site;
(3) All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of
depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the
commission;
(4) If any soil was contaminated, it shall be removed from the site in accordance with city, state
and federal regulations;
(5) All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil;
(6) All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the site; and
(7) During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article.
(c) Abandoned Well Requirement. The operator shall furnish the following to the gas inspector:
(1) A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment
proceedings under the state law; and
(2) A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such
work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the dates so
stated.
(d) Abandonment Requirements Prior to New Construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites
shall meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building
permit for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
(e) The operator can only abandon a well if the gas inspector has reviewed and approved the abandonment.
Sec. 4.517 Technical Advisor
The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the
gas industry or the law as it pertains to gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or
represent the city on such matters relating to gas operations within the city as the city may want or require and
the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the city. In
the event such technical advisor(s) is/are employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the
city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article,
then the cost for such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed against and paid for by such
operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article. Prior to the employment of a
technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and
expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by the city council.
Sec. 4.518 Appeals
(a) In accordance with Sections 4.508, 4.509 and 4.510 of this article, the city council shall have and exercise
the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the
issuance of a gas well permit or the revocation or suspension of any gas well permit issued hereunder. Any
person or entity whose application is denied, suspended or revoked may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the
written decision of the gas inspector or DAC, file an appeal to the city council in accordance with the following
procedure:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/562
(1) An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with the city secretary. The grounds
for appeal must be set forth specifically and the error described by the appellant.
(2) Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the records the city secretary shall transmit all papers
involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city council agenda for hearing and give notice by
mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and any other party who has requested in
writing to be so notified. No other notice need be given.
(b) In accordance with Sections 4.506, 4.513 and 4.518 of this article, the city council shall have and exercise
the power to hear and determine appeals for deviations from well setback, hours of operation, waste disposal,
landscaping and screening requirements. An appeal under this subsection may be filed by the applicant at any
time.
(c) In order to grant the relief requested under subsection (a) or (b) above a simple majority vote of the city
council is required; provided, however, that a finding of error or abuse of discretion is additionally required to
grant relief under subsection (a) of this section.
(d) Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Sec. 4.519 Penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following:
(1) Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a gas well permit issued under this article;
(2) Fail to comply with any condition set forth in a gas well permit issued under this article; or
(3) Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article.
(b) Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
violation per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(c) Any violation of this article that governs fire safety, public health, and/or sanitation, including dumping,
refuse, or discharge, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation per
day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(d) The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law, including but not
limited to, the recovery of civil penalties under Subchapter B, Chapter 54, of the Texas Local Government Code.
The city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the
violation of this article. The power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there
has been a criminal complaint filed.
(Ordinance 846 adopted 11/14/06)
ARTICLE 4.600 RESERVED†
ARTICLE 4.700 KENNELS*
Sec. 4.701 Kennel Defined
A kennel is defined as an establishment designed or used for the boarding, selling or breeding of animals where
more than three (3) dogs and two (2) cats, or three (3) cats and two (2) dogs are to be boarded, sold or bred.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 7A)
Sec. 4.702 Permit Required
A kennel shall not be allowed until a kennel permit is issued by the city. The chief of police shall determine,
after inspection, whether or not such permit shall be issued. No permit shall be issued for a kennel to operate
within 1,000 feet of any residence. Grooming parlors where no animals are to be kept overnight and veterinary
clinics shall not be considered kennels, nor subject to this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section
7B)
Sec. 4.703 Term of Permit; Fee
Such permits shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. The permit fee shall be $25.00. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 7C)
Sec. 4.704 Revocation or Suspension of Permit
Any kennel permitted under this article found to be in violation of any zoning law, health law, or any other
applicable law of the city or the State of Texas, or that is maintained in such a manner as to be detrimental to the
health, safety or peace of mind of persons residing in the immediate vicinity, may have its kennel permit
suspended or revoked without prior notice by the chief of police. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section
7D)
ARTICLE 4.800 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.801 Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses for purpose to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by
the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 8A)
Sec. 4.802 Definitions
Adult Arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment which as one of its principal business
purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
or video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/562
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
“specified sexual activities.”
Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity, or
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or
by “specified sexual activities;” or
(3) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
Adult Cabaret shall also include an adult dancing establishment as defined, known and connoted by the term in
common usage in the area.
Adult Motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than twelve (12) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the city or his designated agent.
Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical
areas” is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or a State of Nudity. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or
female breast.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Sexually Oriented Business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or nude model studio.
Specified Anatomical Areas. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/562
Specified Sexual Activities. Includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or
female breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsection
(1) through subsection (3) above.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 8B)
Sec. 4.803 Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated sexually oriented business within
1000 feet of:
(1) A church;
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(3) Residentially zoned property;
(4) A public park; or
(5) A lot devoted to residential use.
(b) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business within
1000 feet of another sexually oriented business.
(c) A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more
than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor
area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business.
(d) For the purposes of subsection (a) above, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public
park, residential district, or residential lot.
(e) For purpose of subsection (b) above, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall
of the structure in which each business is located.
(f) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the passage of this article, that is in violation of
subsections (a), (b), or (c) hereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed five (5) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or
more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/562
the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming.
(g) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use
by the location, subsequent to the operation of the sexually oriented business, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the
sexually oriented business.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 8C)
Sec. 4.804 Additional Regulations for Adult Motels
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than twelve (12) hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article.
(b) A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room on a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within twelve (12) hours from
the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) above, the terms “rent” or “subrent” mean the act of permitting a room to
be occupied for any form of consideration.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 8D)
Sec. 4.805 Enforcement
(a) Except as provided by subsection (c) below, any person violating Section 4.803 hereof upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this
code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Except as provided by subsection (c) below, any person violating any provision of this article other than
Section 4.803 hereof shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in
Section 1.109 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(c) If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio, then a violation of Section 4.803 hereof
shall be punishable as a Class B Misdemeanor.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4.803 hereof that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so
in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary, school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college, or university,
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicated a nude person is available for viewing;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/562
(B) where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class; and
(C) where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time.
(e) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4.803 hereof that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or
video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 8E)
ARTICLE 4.900 PARADES, CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND TENT SHOWS
Sec. 4.901 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, group, or organization to conduct a parade upon the city streets or hold a
circus, carnival or tent show without first obtaining a permit from the city. However, this section shall not apply
to funeral processions; school functions such as pep rallys, fund raisers, marching bands, etc., providing such
conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or a government
agency. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 9A)
Sec. 4.902 Application for Permits
(a) Any person desiring to conduct a parade or to hold a circus, carnival or tent show within the city shall
make an application in writing to the city manager or his/her designee at least ten (10) days prior to the date such
parade, circus, carnival, or tent show is to be conducted.
(b) The application for a permit shall be on forms furnished by the city which shall set forth the following
information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person, sponsor, group, or organization
desiring such permit;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for the
conduct of the parade, circus, carnival or tent show;
(3) The proposed date(s) the parade, circus, carnival or tent show is to be held;
(4) The proposed route of parade or location of the circus, carnival or tent show;
(5) A description of the proposed parade (number of vehicles, animals, etc.), circus, carnival, or
tent show which is to be held; and
(6) Any additional information which the city may deem pertinent as to whether a permit should
or should not be issued.
(c) Each application for a permit shall be accompanied with a permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) before its
consideration. This fee shall be a non-refundable fee regardless of whether the permit is granted or denied.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 9B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.903 Consideration of the Application
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/562
Upon the filing of an application for a permit for a parade, circus, carnival, or tent show, the city manager or
his/her designee shall cause or make an investigation to determine whether or not the proposed event is in
conflict with any laws or ordinances and not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. When
reviewing the permit application the following concerns, and any other information as may otherwise be
obtained, shall be considered before approving any permit:
(1) The proposed event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic,
both vehicular and pedestrian.
(2) The proposed event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the
city to properly police the event preventing normal protection to the entire city.
(3) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles will not unduly interfere with proper fire
and ambulance service to all portions of the city.
(4) The conduct of the event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property or to
provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance.
(5) The event if for a meaningful purpose and is of sufficient interest to the general public to
justify any inconvenience it may cause.
(6) The event has been planned to ensure that the general safety, health and welfare of all persons
is provided as is reasonably possible.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 9C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.904 Compliance With Permit Conditions and Applicable Laws and Ordinances
It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any parade, for which a permit hereunder has been issued, to
fail to comply with all directions and conditions of such permit and all applicable laws and ordinances. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 9D)
ARTICLE 4.1000 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 4.1001 Use of Public Ways
No person, firm, or corporation shall, without prior permission from the city council in the form of franchise,
construct, reconstruct, maintain, use or operate any television signal, receiving, amplifying, or distributing
system for service known as cable television system in, over, under, along, or across present or future streets,
highways, alleys, bridges, or public ways within the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10A)
Sec. 4.1002 Removal or Relocation of Facilities
The city shall have the power at any time to order and require any cable television system operator to remove
and abate any pole, tower, wire, cable, electronic conductor, or any other structure or facility that is dangerous to
life or property and, in the event the operator after written notice fails or refuses to act, the city shall have the
power to remove or abate the same at the expense of the operator, all without compensation or liability for
damages to the operator. When required by the city for reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation
or widening or relocation, installation of sewer mains, water pipes, power lines, signal lights, tracts and
sanitation equipment, or any other type of structures or improvement by public agencies, any cable television
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/562
operator within the city shall, at its own expense, partake, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove
from the street or other public place any property of the operator when ordered in writing by the governing body
of the city, and operator shall have no claim for reimbursement of costs or damages against the city. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10B)
Sec. 4.1003 Use
All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment, and facilities erected or maintained by operator
within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper and intended use of streets,
highways, alleys, utility easements, bridges, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets,
highways, alleys, utility easements, bridges, or other public ways or places. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
4, Section 10C)
Sec. 4.1004 Underground Installation
In areas of the city having electric utility lines underground, whether required by ordinance or not, all of
operator's lines, cables, and wires shall be underground except in areas of underground electric service, service
from a public way to individual homes shall be above ground unless the homeowner agrees to pay the cost of
underground installation as may be determined by operator. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10D)
Sec. 4.1005 Restoration
In the event of any disturbance of any pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, including cultivated
grass turf, any easement adjacent to residential premises, the operator shall at its cost and expense and at the
time and in the manner prescribed by the governing body of the city or its duly designated representatives,
replace and restore all such pavement, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface to as good a condition before the
commencement of the work or activity by operator disturbing same. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
Section 10E)
Sec. 4.1006 Temporary Removal of Wire for Building Moving
An operator, upon the written request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, shall
remove, raise, or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses, buildings, or other bulky
structures. The reasonable expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering shall be paid by the person
requesting the same and operator may require such payment in advance. Operator shall be given not less than
forty-eight (48) hours advance notice in writing to arrange for such temporary wire changes. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10F)
Sec. 4.1007 Tree Trimming
An operator shall have the authority to the same extent that the city has such authority to trim trees upon or
overhanging streets, highways, alleys, bridges, or other public ways or places of the city in order to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables, electronic conductors, or other facilities or
equipment of the operator. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10G)
Sec. 4.1008 Construction, Maintenance, and Installation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/562
The construction, maintenance, and installation of equipment and facilities of any cable television operator,
including connections to subscribers of operator's service, shall be in accordance with all applicable ordinances
and regulations of the city, and in accordance with Subpart K of technical standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission rules. The cable television system shall be installed and maintained to conform
with the highest current state of the art in the field of closed circuit television transmission to the effect that the
subscribers shall receive the best possible service. Any such operator shall maintain and staff an office in or near
the city to provide maintenance and repair service at all times. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section
10H)
Sec. 4.1009 Placement of Fixtures
A cable television operator shall not place poles, towers, or similar fixtures where the same will interfere with
any gas, electric, or telephone fixtures, water hydrant or main, drainage facility or sanitary sewer, and all such
poles, towers, or similar fixtures shall be placed as directed by the city and in such manner as not to interfere
with the usual travel or use of streets, highways, alleys, or other public ways or places. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10I)
Sec. 4.1010 Insurance
(a) Every cable television operator shall procure, furnish, and file with the city manager or his/her designee a
policy of insurance approved by the attorney for the city covering liability and property damage with the
minimum amounts of liability thereunder as follows:
(1) $100,000.00 for any one single personal injury on any one person;
(2) $300,000.00 for a personal injury in any one single accident;
(3) $50,000.00 for property damage arising out of any single accident;
(b) The policy shall contain provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said
policy shall be delivered to the city attorney thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. Any and all
investigation of claims filed by any person, firm, or corporation against the city arising out of any use or misuse
of privileges granted to any cable television operator shall be made or at the expense of the cable television
operator or its insurer.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10J; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.1011 Operator's Rules
Every cable television operator's franchise within the city shall have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the
operator to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this article and its franchise, and to assure
uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers to its service. Provided, however, that such rules,
regulations, terms, and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of any such franchise or of this
article, or with the laws of the State of Texas. A current copy of such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions
adopted by operator shall be on file with the city manager or his/her designee, as well as in the local office of
operator. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10K; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.1012 Records and Reports
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/562
city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of the operator's plans, contracts, engineering, accounting,
financial, statistical, customer, and service records relating to the property and operations of the operator and to
all other records required to be kept thereunder. The following records and reports shall be filed with the city
manager or his/her designee in the local office of the operator:
(1) Company rules and regulations;
(2) Gross Revenue. A quarterly statement report during the preceding quarter and such other
information as the city shall request with respect to properties and expenses related to the operator's
service;
(3) Map of Installations. The operator shall provide the city with a continuously current file and
plan indicating the location of all CATV installations.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10L; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.1013 Political Advertising and Religious Programming
An operator shall, unless required to do otherwise by the Federal Communications Commission, charge at
regular commercial rates for political advertising. Operator may charge for carrying religious programming at
lower rates. Churches and other religious program originators shall be entitled to leased time on one dedicated
channel on a first come, first served based with time of broadcast to be determined by operator. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10O)
Sec. 4.1014 Equipment and Operation
In order to provide adequate civil defense and disaster service information and to prevent the distribution of
obscene or libelous programs, every operator of a cable television servicing the city shall install a system with
the capability, equipment, facilities, and personnel necessary to immediately interrupt signals being distributed
on one channel or on all channels at once, and to transfer other programs or signals in the place of the signal or
program interrupted. Every such operator shall provide at system activation a minimum of twenty-five (25)
active channels, full bank FM radio service, any such cable television operator shall distribute all UHF and VHF
telecasts originating in Dallas or Tarrant Counties, programming from the three (3) major television networks in
the United States, and distribute weather information satisfactory to the city. Lock-out devices shall be provided
upon request by the customer, without charge. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10P)
Sec. 4.1015 Access
Each cable television operator shall provide at least one educational access channel to Lake Worth Independent
School District and one channel to the Northwest Campus of the Tarrant County Junior college. A governmental
access channel shall be provided to the city upon request and a public access channel together with cameras,
studio, lights, and sound equipment shall be provided on a first come-first served basis. Should there be no need
for any such service as determined by operator and the city council, operator may, with permission of the city
council, use such channels for other functions. One channel shall carry announcements of events and activities.
There shall be no charge for local civic events, senior citizen activities, local school or college events, local
athletic league events, and local club meetings and events. Others may be charged as determined by operator. Xrated
movies, as defined by the motion picture producer association, shall not be permitted. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10Q)
Sec. 4.1016 Interconnection
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/562
Any cable television operator may be required to interconnect its system with any other broadband
communications facility operating in an adjacent territory. Operator may be required to interconnect its
educational, governmental, and/or local access system with such other cable system if permitted by appropriate
federal regulations and subject to payment of reasonable charges. Such interconnection shall be made within
sixty (60) days of a request of the city. For good cause, operator may request and city may grant reasonable
extension of time to comply with these requirements. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10R)
Sec. 4.1017 Extension Policy
Once construction has been completed in the initial service area, the cable television operator shall extend
service in overhead service areas within six (6) months of a request to all areas where the average density is
seven (7) subscribers per quarter mile of aerial cable or greater. In an area where the average density is less than
seven (7) subscribers per quarter mile of cable, or is served by underground utilities, the system shall bear its pro
rata share of the current aerial construction costs based on the actual number of potential subscribers per quarter
mile divided by seven (7). The remaining construction costs will be borne on a pro rata basis by each actual
cable television applicant committing to service within the pro rate extension area. In the case of new
subdivisions, developer may elect to bear the remaining costs, and service will be made available to residents at
normal rates. Mileage will be measured from the end of the nearest cable trunk. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 4, Section 10U)
Sec. 4.1018 Technical Performance Standards
(a) Cable television operators shall comply fully with the technical rules and standards for cable television
operation as adopted by the Federal Communications Commission, 47 CFR Part 76, Subpart K, as amended
from time to time.
(b) The following distortion specifications apply over a temperature range of minus twenty (20) degrees
Fahrenheit to plus one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit:
(1) The carrier to noise ratio shall be no less than 45.5 dB.
(2) Second order distortion shall be at least 60 dB below visual carrier.
(3) Total harmonic distortion shall be at least 52 dB below visual carrier.
(4) Cross modulation shall be at least 52 dB below visual carrier with synchronous video
modulation.
(5) Hum modulation factor shall not exceed plus or minus two percent (2%) (60 or 120 hz.)
tolerance.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10V)
Sec. 4.1019 Testing
Operator shall maintain test equipment capable of demonstrating that the standards established herein are being
met. Upon customer complaint, or where there exists other evidence, which, in the judgment of the city, casts
doubt on the reliability of the quality of any cable television service, the city shall have the right and authority to
test, analyze, and report on the performance of the system. Such test or tests shall be made consistent with the
provisions of 47 CFR 76.609 et. seq. as amended. The cost of such testing shall be borne by the city; but if such
testing determines that standards are not being met, operator may be required to reimburse the city for the costs
of such testing. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10W)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/562
Sec. 4.1020 Service to Public Buildings
(a) Public buildings shall be connected to the cable system at no charge. Such requests for service are to be
initiated by authorized local government officials. One service drop per facility shall be made at city Hall, the
police station, the county subcourthouse, city service center, the public library, city auditoriums and all public
schools. No monthly charges shall be made for service at these public buildings.
(b) Upon request of an authorized official, Tarrant County Junior college, Northwest Campus, shall be
connected to the cable system at no charge. If more than one service drop is required, the charge shall be based
on the operator's cost of time and materials. No monthly charges shall be made for providing basic service at the
junior college.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10X)
Sec. 4.1021 Compliance With Application
Cable television operator shall provide all services specifically set forth in its application to provide cable
television service to the city. Failure to provide the services promised in any application shall be deemed a
violation of this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10Y)
Sec. 4.1022 Cause for Termination
In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by virtue of any franchise or otherwise, the city
shall have the power and right to terminate and cancel all rights and privileges of any cable television operator to
operate within the city in the event that the operator:
(1) violates any material provision of its franchise or of this article;
(2) attempts to evade any material provision of its franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon
the city;
(3) fails to begin or complete construction as provided under its franchise;
(4) fails to operate a first call system in accordance with the highest standards of the industry.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10Z)
Sec. 4.1023 Forfeiture
(a) The city manager or his/her designee may make a written demand that the operator do or comply with any
provision of its franchise or of this article. If the violation by the operator continues for a period of thirty (30)
days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being
actively and expeditiously pursued, the city manager or his/her designee may place his request for termination of
franchise upon the next regular city council meeting agenda. The city manager or his/her designee shall cause to
be served upon the operator, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of intent to
request such termination and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least ten
(10) days before such meeting in the official newspaper of the city.
(b) The city council shall consider the request of the city manager or his/her designee and shall hear any
person interested therein and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any violation by the operator was
with just cause.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/562
(c) If such violation by the operator is found to have been with just cause, the city council shall direct the
operator to comply therewith such time and upon such terms and conditions as are just and reasonable.
(d) If the city council shall determine such violation by the operator was without just cause, then the city
council may, by ordinance, declare that the franchise of the operator shall be terminated and forfeited unless
there is compliance by the operator with such period as the council may fix.
(e) In the event of such revocation, the city shall have the right to purchase the cable system at a price not to
exceed its then fair market value, considering the original cost of all tangible and intangible property, as well as
the salvage value, the book value, the replacement costs, cash flow, and other facts, exclusive of good will, or
any right or privilege granted by operator's franchise. Should the city decline to purchase the system, the
operator shall have two (2) years from the date on which it ceases operation to remove, at its own expense, all
portions of its cable television system from all streets within the city; and then restore said streets and ways to a
condition reasonable satisfactory to the city within that period of time.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10AA; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.1024 Other Business Activities
Operator shall not engage in the business of selling, repairing, or installing television receivers or radio receivers
within the city during the term of the franchise. Local shareholders of operators owning more than ten percent
(10%) of the operator's stock shall likewise not engage in such business. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
Section 10BB)
Sec. 4.1025 Theft of Services and Tampering
No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system, shall willfully, maliciously, or otherwise damage or
cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus, or equipment of any cable television operator, or
commit any act with intent to cause such damage or to tap, tamper with, or otherwise connect any wire or device
to a wire, cable, conduit, apparatus, appurtenance, or equipment of any cable television operator with the intent
to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable system without authorization from or compensation to such operator,
or to obtain cable television or other communications service with intent to cheat or defraud such operator of any
lawful charge to which it is entitled. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10CC).
Sec. 4.1026 Company to Provide Lockout Device at Customer's Request
The company will make available to all customers, upon request, a lockout device that will prevent the pay
television channel from entering the TV set. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10DD)
Sec. 4.1027 City to Approve Majority Stock Changes
City shall have the right to approve the change of stock of company if fifty-one percent (51%) of the stock
changes hands, or if other companies and/or people are in control of the company. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 4, Section 10EE)
Sec. 4.1028 Penalty for Violations
Whoever shall violate any provision of Sections 4.1001 or 4.1025 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
liable to a penalty in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/562
each offense. The penalties provided in this article shall be enforced by appropriate proceedings instituted by the
city or by a cable television operator. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10FF)
Secs. 4.1029-4.1035 Reserved
Division 2. Rate Regulations*
Sec. 4.1036 Definitions
In this article:
Basic Cable Rates. The monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment.
Basic Service Tier. A separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other
tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must carry signals, all PEG channels, and all
domestic television signals other than superstations.
Benchmark. A per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has
determined is reasonable.
Cable Act of 1992. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
Cable Operator. Any person or group of persons:
(1) who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates
owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or
(2) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and
operation of such a cable system.
Channel. A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
Cost of Service Showing. A filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the
price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier
and to continue to attract capital.
Equipment Basket. A cost center to which the cable operator assigns the direct costs of service installation,
leasing, maintaining and servicing customer equipment. It includes an allocation of all system joint and common
costs that installation, leasing, and repairing equipment share with other system activities and a reasonable
profit, but excludes general system overhead.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
HSC. The hourly service charge that allows the cable operator to recover all equipment basket costs, except for
the cable operator's costs of purchasing and financing the lease of customer equipment.
Initial Basic Cable Rate. The rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges
for associated equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to
regulate basic cable rates.
Must-Carry Signal. The signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations which is required to be
carried on the basic service tier).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/562
Peg Channel. The channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and facilities and
equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
Price Cap. The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a
formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and
changes in overall inflation.
Reasonable Rate Standard. A per channel rate that is at, or below the benchmark or price cap level.
Superstation. Any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 13A)
Sec. 4.1037 Initial Review of Basic Cable Rates
(a) Notice. Upon the adoption of this article and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall
immediately notify all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends
to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the
Cable Act of 1992.
(b) Cable Operator Response. Within thirty (30) days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall
file with the city, its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material
concerning the reasonableness of its rates.
(c) Expedited Determination and Public Hearing.
(1) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rates for the basic
service tier and associated equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by
the applicable benchmark, the city council shall:
(A) hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
(B) act to approve the rates within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its
basic cable rates with the city.
(2) If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed
its basic cable rates with the city, the proposed rates will continue in effect.
(d) Extended Review Period.
(1) If the city council is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-ofservice
showing, the city council shall, within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed
its basic cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
(A) Ninety (90) days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the
FCC's reasonable rate standard;
(B) One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark.
(2) If the city council has not made a decision within the ninety (90) or one hundred fifty (150)
day period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/562
cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on
whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(e) Public Hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city
council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
(f) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed initial basic rate may
request the city manager or his/her designee to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the
objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part
of the record, the objector must provide the city manager or his/her designee with the objector's name and
address.
(g) Benchmark Analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic cable rate schedule as being in
compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark
analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the
initial basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
(1) If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates shall become the initial
basic cable rates and the cable operator's rates will be capped at that level.
(2) If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be the greater of the cable
operator's per channel rate on September 30, 1992, reduced by ten percent (10%), or the applicable
benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring between
September 30, 1992 and the initial date of regulation.
(3) If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable operator's per channel rate
was below the benchmark on September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark,
adjusted for inflation.
(h) Cost-of-Service Showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the
cable operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a initial
basic cable rates above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city council will review a cost-of-service
submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve initial basic
cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service
determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30, 1992 rates
minus ten percent (10%), will prescribe the cable operator's new rates.
(i) Decision.
(1) By Formal Resolution. After completion of its review of the cable operator's proposed rates,
the city council shall adopt its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the
following:
(A) If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or is justified by a cost-ofservice
analysis, the city council shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable
operator; or
(B) If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service
analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates, the city council shall establish initial basic
cable rates that are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-ofservice
analysis.
(2) Rollbacks and Refunds. If the city council determines that the initial basic cable rates as
submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/562
justifies lower rates, the city council may order the rates reduced in accordance with subsections (g)
or (h) above, as applicable. In addition, the city council may order the cable operator to pay to
subscribers, refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates
published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to
September 1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with
FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution.
(3) Statement of Reasons for Decision and Public Notice. If rates proposed by a cable operator are
disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were objections made by other parties to the proposed
rates, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city council must give public
notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official newspaper of
the city.
(j) Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment,
may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 13B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.1038 Review of Request for Increase in Basic Cable Rates
(a) Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated
equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least thirty (30) days before the cable
operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than annually and not until
at least one (1) year after the determination of the initial basic cable rates.
(b) Expedited Determination and Public Hearing.
(1) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase
request for basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the
applicable price cap, the city council shall:
(A) hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
(B) act to approve the rate increase within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator
filed its request with the city.
(2) If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed
its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into effect.
(c) Extended Review Period.
(1) If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-ofservice
showing, the city council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
(A) Ninety (90) days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase
is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
(B) One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap.
(2) The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/562
(3) If the city council has not made a decision within the ninety (90) or one hundred fifty (150)
day period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the
cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate
increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(d) Public Hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate
increase, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their
views and record objections.
(e) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may
request the city manager or his/her designee to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the
objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part
of the record, the objector must provide the city manager or his/her designee with the objector's name and
address.
(f) Delayed Determination. If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested
rate increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to
subsequent refund if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase.
(g) Price Cap Analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with
the FCC's price cap, the city council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the
standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be
established as follows:
(1) If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the
proposed rates shall become the new basic cable rates.
(2) If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city
council shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with
the price cap.
(h) Cost-of-Service Showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a
rate increase above the price cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant the FCC standards for
cost-of-service review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator
makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or
below the cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate.
(i) Decision. The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal
resolution. If a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections
were made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision.
Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting the city manager or his/her designee to
record the objection or may be submitted in writing at anytime before the decision resolution is adopted.
(j) Refunds.
(1) The city council may order refunds of subscribers rate payments with interest if:
(A) the city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as
described in subsection (c) above; and
(B) the cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review
period; and
(C) the city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable
price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/562
showing, and the city council disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
(2) The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC
regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution.
(k) Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment,
may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 13C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.1039 Cable Operator Information
(a) City May Require.
(1) In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that
exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce
information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate
determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in
accordance with this article.
(2) In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city
council may request additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates
are in accord with the standard.
(b) Request for Confidentiality.
(1) A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the
information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be
attached to and cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it applies.
(2) If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any
information to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information
to which the request applies shall be identified.
(3) Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a
statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based.
(4) Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be
considered.
(c) City Council Action. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (b), will be acted upon
by the city council. The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents by a preponderance of
the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the
ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the request
does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city council denies the request, the city council shall take one
of the following actions:
(1) If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable
operator may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city
will comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires will the
information be made available for public inspection.
(2) If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be
made available for public inspection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/562
(d) Appeal. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of
that decision from the FCC within five (5) working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the
information will be stayed pending review.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 13D)
Sec. 4.1040 Automatic Rate Adjustments
(a) Annual Inflation Adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its
capped base per channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNPPI index.
(b) Other External Costs.
(1) The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier
automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those
factors exceeds the GNPPI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs,
state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise
requirements. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base
per channel rate, without regard to its relation to the GNPPI.
(2) For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the
starting date for measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per channel rate may
be adjusted will be the date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February
28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of
retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before October 6, 1994.
(c) Notification and Review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least thirty (30) days in advance of a
rate increase based on automatic adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the
item or items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within thirty (30) days of
receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 13E)
Sec. 4.1041 Enforcement
(a) Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates
under the following circumstances:
(1) A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted
tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or
(2) The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city.
(b) Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be
subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day the cable operator fails to comply.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 13F)
Secs. 4.1042-4.1045 Reserved
Division 3. Cable Television Operator Service Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/562
Sec. 4.1046 Definitions
In this article:
Cable Operator. Any person or group of persons:
(1) who provides cable service over a cable system directly or through one or more affiliates that
own a significant interest in the cable system; or
(2) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and
operation of such a cable system.
Normal Business Hours. Those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve
customers. “Normal business hours” must include some evening hours at least one night per week and some
weekend hours.
Normal Operating Conditions. Those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator.
Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural
disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to,
special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
Service Interruption. The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable television channels.
Standard Installation. The installation of cable service at a location that is no more than one hundred twenty-five
feet (125') from the existing distribution system.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 14A)
Sec. 4.1047 Regulation of Customer Service Standards
Pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and its implementing
regulations, the city has given written notice to cable operators, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that
the city intends to enforce customer service standards. Ninety days following the cable operator's receipt of this
notice, the cable operator is subject to the provisions of this article and its enforcement. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 14B)
Sec. 4.1048 Office Hours and Telephone Availability
(a) Access Line. A cable operator shall maintain a local, toll-free, or collect call telephone access line which
is available to its subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
(1) Trained representatives of the cable operator shall be available to respond to customer
telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
(2) After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by an answering service or an
automated response system, including an answering machine.
(3) Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained representative
of the cable operator on the next business day.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/562
(b) Telephone Response Time. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer
representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds after the connection is made.
(1) If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds.
(2) Under normal operating conditions, a cable operator shall meet these answering and transfer
standards no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time, measured quarterly.
(3) The cable operator shall maintain sufficient telephone capability so that under normal
operating conditions, callers receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
(4) A cable operator is not required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure
compliance with these telephone answering standards unless the record of complaints indicates a
clear failure to comply.
(c) Office Availability. Customer service and bill payment locations shall be open at least during normal
business hours and must be conveniently located.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 14C)
Sec. 4.1049 Installations, Outages and Service Calls
Under normal operating conditions, a cable operator shall meet each of the following standards ninety-five
percent (95%) of the time, measured quarterly:
(1) Installations. The cable operator shall complete standard installations within seven (7) business
days after an order has been placed.
(2) Service Problems. A cable operator shall:
(A) except for conditions beyond the control of the cable operator, begin working on service
interruptions promptly, but no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes
known to the cable operator;
(B) begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of
the service problem.
(3) Appointments.
(A) When a cable operator makes an appointment with a customer for installation, service
calls, or other installation activities, the appointment must be for a specific time or, at
maximum, within a four hour time block during normal business hours. (Appointments may be
scheduled outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
(B) A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of
business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
(C) If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and
will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the cable operator shall notify the
customer and reschedule the appointment to a time that is convenient for the customer.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 14D)
Sec. 4.1050 Communications With Subscribers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/562
(a) Notifications to Subscribers.
(1) A cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of
installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
(A) products and services offered;
(B) prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to
programming and other services;
(C) installation and service maintenance policies;
(D) instructions on how to use the cable service;
(E) channel positions of programming carried on the system; and
(F) billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the
city's cable office.
(2) A cable operator shall notify subscribers of a change in rates, programming services, or
channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing.
(A) Notice of these changes shall be given to subscribers not less than thirty (30) days before
the changes take effect unless the change is not within the control of the cable operator. In this
case the cable operator shall give the notice as soon as the information is received.
(B) A cable operator shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days before any significant change is
made in the information required in subsection (a)(1).
(b) Billing.
(1) A cable operator shall prepare subscriber bills:
(A) so that they are clear, concise, and understandable; and
(B) with charges fully itemized, including, but not limited to, basic and premium service
charges and equipment charges.
(2) In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a
subscriber within thirty (30) days.
(c) Refunds. A cable operator shall issue refund checks promptly, but no later than either:
(1) the subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days,
whichever is earlier, or
(2) the return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated.
(d) Credits. A cable operator shall issue credits for service no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle
following the determination that a credit is warranted.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 14E)
Sec. 4.1051 Enforcement
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/562
(a) Notice of Violation; Failure to Respond; Civil Penalty. If a cable operator violates this article, the city
manager shall send written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the cable operator, specifying the
facts supporting the city's claim of violation. If the cable operator fails to respond to the notice in writing within
fifteen (15) days of receiving the notice, the city council may, upon proper posting on the city council's agenda,
impose a civil penalty against the cable operator of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day after the
15th day that the cable operator fails to provide its written response to the city's notice.
(b) Response. If, in its response, the cable operator acknowledges the violation alleged by the city, the cable
operator shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice to correct the violation. If, in its response, the cable
operator disputes the city's allegation of violation, the city council shall set a time for a public hearing on the
matter and send the cable operator written notice of the hearing, by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(c) Public Hearing; Decision; Appeal. The hearing must occur at least ten (10) days after receipt of the notice
by the cable operator. At the public hearing, the city and the cable operator may present relevant evidence
concerning the alleged violation. If the city council determines that a violation has occurred, the city council
shall issue an order prescribing how the violation is to be corrected and imposing civil penalties, if warranted.
The cable operator has thirty (30) days from receipt of the order to comply or begin compliance with the order or
appeal the order to the Federal Communications Commission.
(d) City Council Order. The city council may, by its order, impose civil penalties up to five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day, require refunds to subscribers if determined appropriate, require the cable operator to install
monitoring equipment or conduct surveys to measure compliance with telephone response and service standards,
and order specific actions by the cable operator to correct violations of this article.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 14F)
ARTICLE 4.1100 TEMPORARY BUSINESS PERMITS REQUIRED
(a) No person shall begin or set up a business on a temporary basis in the city without first having secured
from the office of the city manager or his/her designee of said city a permit to do business on a temporary basis
in said city, whether said business be in a building or other structure or on a lot or lots in said city. The charge for
said temporary permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each and all such temporary permits. The permit
will expire on the thirtieth (30th) day following the issuance of said permit.
(b) No temporary business permit shall be issued unless and until the premises or place where said business is
to be carried on shall be in conformity with all other ordinances of the city, and meet all fire, health and
electrical standards prescribed by the ordinances of the city. A business now in existence desiring to operate a
temporary business in conjunction or adjacent to existing business are subject to the requirements of this article.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 11; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 4.1200 BINGO GAMES*
Sec. 4.1201 Lawful
The conducting of bingo games for charitable purposes is, by this article, legalized and declared to be a legal
practice. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 12A)
Sec. 4.1202 Permit
No bingo games shall be operated within the city without first having received a special use permit issued by the
city council. The fee for application for such permit is set at fifty dollars ($50.00). The city manager or his/her
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/562
designee shall be authorized to renew the permit annually, after its first issuance by the city council, upon
payment of an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) special use permit fee. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
Section 12B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 4.1203 Tax
A two percent (2%) gross receipts tax is hereby imposed upon the conduct of bingo games within the city. The
tax shall be paid to the city manager or his/her designee by the person or organization conducting the bingo
game, pursuant to the terms of the state statute governing bingo. The reporting procedures shall be governed by
such statute. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 12C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 4.1300 SALE OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
(a) Except as provided in this article, no person shall offer for sale or lease any vehicle on any public or
private property within the city limits of Lake Worth. As used in this article, vehicle shall mean any automobile,
truck, trailer, motor home, camper, semitrailer, truck-tractor, boat or any other similar device in, upon or by
which any person or property may be transported.
(b) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the offer for sale or lease of any vehicle on private property which is
properly zoned under the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance for the sale of new and used vehicles.
(c) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the offer for sale or lease of three (3) or fewer vehicles in any twelve
(12) month period on private property owned or leased by the owner of the vehicle which is offered for sale or
lease. No vehicle or any part thereof which is offered for sale or lease in accordance with this article shall be
located or parked within any portion of the right-of-way or on any public property.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 15)
ARTICLE 4.1400 AMUSEMENT MACHINES*
Sec. 4.1401 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this article unless specifically indicated otherwise.
Amusement Machine. Any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin, metal slug, token, or check that
dispenses, or is used or is capable of being used to dispense or afford, amusement, skill, or pleasure or is
operated for any purpose, other than for dispensing only merchandise, music, or service. The term includes a
marble machine, marble table machine, marble shooting machine, miniature racetrack machine, miniature
football machine, miniature golf machine, miniature bowling machine, billiard or pool game, or machine or
device that dispenses merchandise or commodities or plays music in connection with or in addition to dispensing
skill or pleasure; the term does not include any amusement machine designed exclusively for a child or
otherwise prohibited by this article. (An “amusement machine” pursuant to this definition is the same as a “skill
or pleasure coin-operated machine” pursuant to Texas Occupations Code Section 2153.002(9), as amended.)
Amusement Machine Establishment. Any structure where one or more amusement machines are operated for
profit.
Conviction, Convicted. For the purposes of this article, a person is considered convicted if a sentence is imposed
on the person, the person is placed on community supervision (including deferred adjudication community
supervision), or the court defers final disposition of the person's case.
Permittee. Any person to whom a permit has been issued under this article, including without limitation the
permittee individually and any agent, employee or other person acting under the authority of the permit issued
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/562
by the city.
Person. Unless specifically indicated otherwise, “person” shall mean any individual, firm, corporation,
company, partnership, joint venture, organization, or any other or entity.
Sec. 4.1402 Levy of Occupation Tax
There is hereby levied upon every person owning an amusement machine establishment within the corporate
limits of the city an annual occupation tax on each amusement machine in an amount of one-fourth (1/4) the
amount of occupation tax charged by the state.
Sec. 4.1403 Permit Required
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), below, it shall be unlawful for any person, individually or in
association with others, to operate an amusement machine establishment without having a valid, current annual
permit issued by the city and without having a valid, current decal issued by the city for each amusement
machine being displayed or operated in the establishment.
(b) The permitting and regulating provisions of this article do not apply to:
(1) Amusement machines kept in private residences or apartments and used without charge by
members of the family or bona fide guests;
(2) Amusement machines provided on the premises of religious, charitable, educational, or
fraternal organizations for the use of members or their guests, and not for private profit, although a
charge is made for playing;
(3) Amusement machines provided on the premises of bona fide clubs or social organizations, not
operated for private profit although a charge is made for playing, which provide other membership
privileges and activities usual in bona fide private clubs organized for the promotion of some
common object and whose members must be individually passed upon and elected as members by a
committee or board made up of members of the club and its affairs and management shall be
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at
their annual meetings; or
(4) Amusement machines provided on the premises of publicly owned facilities.
Sec. 4.1404 Permit Fees
(a) The annual permit fee for each amusement machine establishment that displays four or fewer amusement
machines shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(b) The annual permit fee for each amusement machine establishment that displays five or more amusement
machines shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
(c) No permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid the required permit fee.
Sec. 4.1405 Applications
(a) A person desiring a permit to operate an amusement machine establishment shall file a written application
with the city manager or his/her designee. The application must be on a form provided by the city manager or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/562
his/her designee and include the following information:
(1) The full name, home address, and home telephone number of the applicant.
(2) All of the following business information that applies:
(A) the business trade name and a general description of the business and the address and
phone number of the business;
(B) if the applicant is a limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited
partnership;
(C) if the applicant is a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation and, for
an out of state corporation, the certificate of authority to do business in the State of Texas;
(D) the name and address of all partners or shareholders with 20 percent or greater interest in
the business; and
(E) the federal tax identification number of the organization for which the person works or
with which the person is affiliated.
(3) The physical location (including the street address) and the mailing address where the
establishment will be operated.
(4) The total number of amusement machines that will be located and available for use in the
establishment.
(5) A complete description of all amusement machines that will be located in the establishment,
including without limitation the name or type of the machine, the serial number of the machine, and
every owner of the machine (if different from the applicant).
(6) The total floor area of the establishment, and the total floor area of that portion of the
establishment that is to be open to customers or patrons for the use or operation of amusement
machines.
(7) If the applicant has been convicted of any crime directly related to an amusement machine
establishment, the date, location, and nature of the offense and the penalty received.
(8) Such other and additional information as the city manager or his/her designee may deem
necessary to assure that the applicant meets the requirements of this article.
(b) Applications for all permits shall contain the statements that:
(1) “I understand that the permit applied for shall be subject to all the provisions and regulations of
the city Code and all other ordinances of the city and laws of the state, and I certify that I and all of
my employees, agents, and operators will comply with said ordinances and laws;” and
(2) “I certify that none of the machines will be operated in a way that constitutes an illegal lottery,
including an “eight-liner” or other such machine for which payments, prizes, tickets, coupons,
certificates, or other returns of any sort are awarded, and that none of the machines is an illegal
gambling device as defined by Section 47.01(4) of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.”
(c) The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant before a notary public.
Sec. 4.1406 Issuance of Permit and Decal; Nonassignability
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/562
(a) The city manager or his/her designee shall issue a permit after the city manager or his/her designee has
completed the necessary investigation and determined that the applicant meets the requirements of and has fully
complied with this article and with all other ordinances and laws of the city and state and has paid the
occupation tax pursuant to Section 4.1402 above. Permits shall be deemed personal to the permittee and shall not
be assignable or transferable from one person to another or one location or place of business to another.
(b) Upon issuance of a permit under subsection (a) above, the city manager or his/her designee shall issue a
decal for every amusement machine located in a permitted amusement machine establishment that is listed on
the permit.
(1) The decal for each amusement machine is deemed personal to the machine and location for
which it is issued. No decal attached to an amusement machine shall be placed on another amusement
machine. No amusement machine may be moved to another business location or business
establishment in the city without first amending the permittee's application and obtaining a new decal
for the machine.
(2) Before replacing an amusement machine(s) or adding an amusement machine(s) to an
establishment, the permittee shall pay an occupation tax pursuant to Section 4.1402 above, for each
replacement or additional amusement machine, and amend the application with the city manager or
his/her designee to update and reflect accurately the information required pursuant to Section 4.1405
above. Upon such payment of the occupation tax and amendment of the application, the city manager
or his/her designee shall issue a decal(s) for the replacement or additional amusement machine(s). If
the total number of permitted amusement machines has changed, the city manager or his/her designee
shall also issue an amendment to the permit specifying the revised number of amusement machines
allowed in the establishment and the date of such amendment.
Sec. 4.1407 Duration of Permit; Decal
The permit shall be valid from the date of issuance until December 31 of the year the permit was issued. The
decal shall be valid until the amusement machine is moved from the location for which it is issued.
Sec. 4.1408 Posting of Permit
(a) The permit shall state on its face to whom it is issued, the date it will expire, the address and location of
the establishment, and the type of establishment authorized to be operated. The permit shall be signed and sealed
by the city manager or his/her designee. A permittee, while engaged in the operation of business, shall have the
permit posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance and in such a place, and position that it is easy to
read at any time of day or night.
(b) The permit must state on its face the total number of amusement machines allowed in the establishment
and the serial number and decal number of each amusement machine. Every amusement machine in an
amusement machine establishment shall contain a decal.
Sec. 4.1409 Permit Denial
(a) The city manager or his/her designee shall deny an application for a permit if the city manager or his/her
designee finds any of the following:
(1) the applicant failed to furnish the city with all information required by Section 4.1405 above;
(2) the applicant has ever been convicted:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/562
(A) of any felony or Class A or B misdemeanor directly related to gambling, theft from a
customer of a business owned or operated by the applicant, or any other crime directly related
to the applicant's operation of an amusement machine establishment; or
(B) within the five years before applying for the permit, of any Class C misdemeanor directly
related to gambling, theft from a customer of a business owned or operated by the applicant, or
any other crime directly related to the applicant's operation of an amusement machine
establishment; or
(3) evidence that the applicant does not meet the requirements of this article or any other
ordinances or laws of the city or state.
(b) The city manager or his/her designee shall note the reasons for denial on the application and shall notify
the applicant of the denial by mailing notice to the applicant at the address shown on the application.
(c) A denial is final and effective on the day the city manager or his/her designee denies the permit.
Sec. 4.1410 Permit Revocation
(a) The city manager or his/her designee shall revoke a permit if it is determined that:
(1) the establishment is not being operated in accordance with this article or with any ordinances or
laws of the city or state;
(2) any statement made in the application is untrue;
(3) the applicant has ever been convicted:
(A) of any felony or Class A or B misdemeanor directly related to gambling, theft from a
customer of a business owned or operated by the applicant, or any other crime directly related
to the applicant's operation of an amusement machine establishment;
(B) within the five years before applying for the permit of any Class C misdemeanor directly
related to gambling, theft from a customer of a business owned or operated by the applicant, or
any other crime directly related to the applicant's operation of an amusement machine
establishment; or
(C) the applicant falsely certified to the statements required by Section 4.1405 above; or
(D) the applicant displayed or operated an amusement machine that did not have a decal or
was not listed on the permit for the amusement machine establishment.
(b) The city manager or his/her designee shall give written notice of the reason for denial or revocation of a
permit by mailing notice to the applicant at the address shown on the application for the permit.
(c) A revocation is final and effective eleven days after the city manager or his/her designee mails the notice
of the revocation, unless the person listed on the application appeals the revocation as prescribed by this Section
4.1411 in which case the revocation is stayed until the city council makes a final determination.
Sec. 4.1411 Appeal From Denial or Revocation of Permit
(a) To contest the denial or revocation, the person listed on the application for the permit may file with the city
manager or his/her designee, within ten days after the city manager or his/her designee mails notice of denial or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/562
revocation, a written appeal for a hearing before the city council.
(b) After an appeal is filed, the city manager or his/her designee shall provide the city council with a record of
all proceedings conducted with regard to the application for a permit, including the written application, the
action of the city manager or his/her designee, and the reasons for such action. The city manager or his/her
designee shall provide to the person listed on the application a copy of this information at least 24 hours before
the hearing, if the person requests such information in writing.
(c) The city council must hold a hearing on the appeal of the denial or revocation of a permit within 30 days
after the date of filing of the appeal, unless the appellant waives in writing the right to a hearing within 30 days.
The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive as to all parties.
Sec. 4.1412 Prohibited Machines
Any amusement machine or other machine or device of any kind or character that awards, dispenses, or
otherwise produces any payments, prizes, tickets, coupons, certificates, or other returns of any sort shall be
prohibited within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 4.1413 Age Restriction
Any establishments where amusement machines are present and maintained as the primary use (as defined in the
zoning ordinance) must prohibit persons under 18 years of age from entering any portion of the building that
contains such amusement machines. A clearly posted sign must state in legible letters at least 3 inches high that
“PERSONS 18 UNDER YEARS OF AGE MAY NOT ENTER THESE PREMISES.”
Sec. 4.1414 Violation
It shall be a violation of this article to display any amusement machine or operate any amusement machine
establishment that does not meet the requirements of this article and any other ordinances or laws of the city or
state.
Sec. 4.1415 Penalties
(a) In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this article, the city may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding in any court of appropriate jurisdiction to restrain, correct, or abate such
violation. For violations of this article, the city may also invoke civil remedies provided by the laws of the state,
which shall be cumulative and subject to prosecutions prescribed for such violations.
(b) A fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code shall be
levied against any person upon conviction of any violation of any provision of this article. Each day shall
constitute a separate offense.
(c) In addition, the city is authorized to seal any coin-operated machine (as that term is defined in Texas
Occupations Code, Section 2153.002, as amended) for which the city's occupation tax has not been paid, and
shall charge a fee of $5 for the release of any machine so sealed for nonpayment of tax (as authorized by Texas
Occupations Code, Section 2153.352).
(Ordinance 693 adopted 5/14/02; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/562
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.100 FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 5.101 Department Created
There is hereby created and established a fire department in the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5,
Section 1A)
Sec. 5.102 Composition of Department; Officers
The members of the fire department shall be a chief, assistant chief, three (3) captains, three (3) lieutenants and
not in excess of thirty (30) other members. The department shall consist of three (3) regular fire companies and
subordinate to the chief and assistant chief. Each of them shall be manned by a captain and lieutenant and such
other men as the chief may direct. The chief, assistant chief, captains and lieutenants shall be elected annually on
the first Tuesday in March by the members of the fire department. Each officer shall take an oath of office and
be commissioned by the mayor. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1B)
Sec. 5.103 Personnel; Hours; Compensation
Included in the personnel of the said fire department as hereinabove provided, said department shall contain such
full-time paid employees or part-time paid employees as the city council may direct from time to time. The
hours of employment of the said members of the fire department and the compensation to be paid said members
shall be fixed by the council and subject to further orders of the council. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5,
Section 1C)
Sec. 5.104 Chief and Assistant Chief
There is hereby created the positions of chief and assistant chief of the fire department.
(1) The chief of the fire department shall, before entering upon his duties, take the constitutional
oath of office, and the mayor and city council may require the chief of the fire department to execute
a bond to the city, conditioned to the faithful performance of his duties, if it deemed advisable, said
bond to be in such amount as the mayor or city council may determine. It shall be his duty to see that
the laws, ordinances, orders, rules and regulations concerning the said department and the operation
thereof are carried into full force and effect. It shall be the duty of the chief to enforce such rules and
regulations made from time to time to secure discipline in said department. He shall have power to
suspend any subordinate officers, members or employees for a violation of such rules and regulations
and upon executing any such suspension, forthwith in writing, advise the city council of his reasons
therefor. He shall diligently observe the condition of fire apparatus and workings of said department
at all times, and shall report in writing at any time to the city council and make in connection with
said equipment such recommendations as he may desire for the efficiency of said equipment and the
proper conduct of the department. He shall cause to be made and submit an annual budget for the
operation of the department when called upon to do so by the mayor or city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/562
(2) In the absence of the chief for any reason whatsoever, the assistant chief of the fire department
shall perform all the duties of the chief of the fire department and shall have vested in him all of the
power and authority of the chief of the fire department.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1D)
Sec. 5.105 When a Fire Occurs
It shall be the duty of the chief of the department and his assistant whenever a fire shall occur in the city to
immediately report to the place of such fire and take proper measures for placing apparatus in the most
advantageous position. The assistant chief, captains and lieutenants of the respective companies on arrival at a
fire shall immediately report to the chief, provided that in the absence of the chief or assistant chief, the first
captain to arrive at the fire shall be the person in command. When the chief shall arrive at a fire, he shall have
sole command over all other officers, all members of the department and all other persons who may be present at
the fire. He shall take all proper measures for extinguishing the fires and protection of property and for
preservation of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city and regulations respecting fires. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1E)
Sec. 5.106 Destroying Structures to Contain Fires
Whenever any building in the city is on fire, it shall be lawful for the chief, or his assistant or acting chief, to
direct such buildings, or other building, or buildings, fence or fences which they may deem hazardous or likely
to catch fire and communicate to other buildings, to be torn down or blown up or otherwise destroyed for the
purpose of checking or otherwise extinguishing such fire; and neither the city council or any individual member
thereof, nor the chief of the department, assistant chief, or any member of the department, shall in any wise be
held responsible for the damaging of the property or the destruction thereof, that may occur by reason of the
attempt of the department to extinguish any fire. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1F)
Sec. 5.107 Fire Vehicles to Have Right-of-Way
All moving apparatus under the fire department shall have the paramount right-of-way through all street,
thoroughfares, lanes, alleys, places and all other vehicles contiguous thereto shall take and keep to the right-hand
side of the street unless the same be obstructed, in order to give the apparatus of the fire department the
unobstructed use of the streets for the time being. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1G)
Sec. 5.108 Fire Department May Close Streets Near Fires
The fire department shall have the right, in time of fire, to place ropes or guards across all streets, thoroughfares,
lanes, or alleys on which shall be situated any building on fire and at such other points as it may deem expedient
and necessary, and the members of said department who have been assigned by the chief for policing purposes
shall prevent any and all persons, except officers and members of the fire department and owners and occupants
of such buildings, endangered by the existing fires, from entering the lines designated by ropes or guards. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1H)
Sec. 5.109 Equipment to be Kept in State of Readiness
The fire apparatus belonging to the city shall be kept in such place or places as the city council shall from time
to time provide, and the company to which same may be assigned shall keep the said equipment in constant
readiness for use. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1I)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/562
Sec. 5.110 Enforcement/Arrest Authority of Fire and Police Personnel
(a) During the progress of a fire within the city limits of the city and for twenty-four (24) hours after its
extinguishment, it shall be lawful for the chief of police or any police officer to arrest and keep in custody all
persons who hinder, or interfere with the extinguishment or investigation of the fire, or who refuse to obey a
lawful order of any such person or any firefighter, fire inspector, fire investigator, or other officer of the fire
department in connection with the extinguishment or investigation of a fire.
(b) The fire marshal and all certified inspectors in the employment of the city shall be authorized to enforce
the provisions of this article, the city fire code and any other provisions of the city code or city ordinances
relating to fire safety or fire prevention. This enforcement authority shall include, but not be limited to, the
issuance of citations and initiation and participation in any legal action pursuant to said codes and ordinances
when required to be processed through the municipal court or the Tarrant County court system, and participation
in nuisance abatement actions performed by the city. This enforcement authority shall be in addition to the
lawful authority of police officers or any other properly designated officer or employee designated under city
ordinance or state law to enforce the provisions of these codes.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1J)
Sec. 5.111 May Command Persons Present to Assist
The officers mentioned in the preceding section shall be vested with full power and authority to command all
persons present at any fire in the city to assist the discharge of any duty under the supervision of such fire in the
extinguishment of same, or the removal and preservation of property, provided that the persons shall not be
bound to obey such officers unless the officers shall wear their badge of office, or unless his official title be
known, or be made known to such persons. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1K)
Sec. 5.112 Designation of New Member of Department
The chief and assistant chief of the fire department acting as a committee will recommend for membership in the
department such applicants as are qualified and who are and will be available for either day or night duty
according to the needs of the department. Upon recommendation of the chief and assistant chief applicants will
be accepted for membership by majority vote of the members of the department. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 5, Section 1L)
Sec. 5.113 Unlawful to Interfere With Firemen
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons not a member of said fire department to interfere with, or in any
manner hinder any member or employee of said fire department in the discharge of his duties as such. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1M)
Sec. 5.114 Unlawful to Interfere With Equipment
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons not a member of said fire department to handle, or in any way
interfere, with any of the apparatus belonging to or used by said fire department, either at a fire or while
traveling to or returning from a fire, or while standing in the fire department quarters, or at any time, unless such
person or persons is requested to do so by an officer of said department. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5,
Section 1N)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/562
Sec. 5.115 Penalty for Violations
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction of same shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of
this code. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1O)
Sec. 5.116 Badge to be Provided to Members
The city council shall provide each member of said fire department a badge descriptive of the office in which
said fireman is serving. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 1P)
Sec. 5.117 Firemen's Relief; Pensions
The city council may, at its discretion, provide for the relief of members of the fire department temporarily or
permanently disabled in the discharge of their duties; and shall have the right to provide for the organization and
administration of a pension fund to provide for the old, disabled and infirm members of said department under
such system, rules and regulations as may be deemed advisable whenever the finances of the city will justify the
undertaking of this service and subject to the laws of the State of Texas. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5,
Section 1Q)
ARTICLE 5.200 FIRE DEPARTMENT IDENTIFICATION CARDS, BADGES, DECALS, ETC.
Sec. 5.201 Definitions
Automobile Decals and Signs. All decals, signs, banners or designs pertaining to city fire department, whether
issued or purchased by individuals.
Badges and Patches. All badges and patches purporting to city fire department, whether issued or purchased by
individuals.
Firemen. All persons, members of the city fire department in good standing.
Honorary Firemen. Such persons designated by the fire chief to receive an honorary identification card.
Identification Card. The card issued by the fire chief or his designated officers.
Ladies Auxiliary. Such female persons as shall be designated and shall be in good standing in the auxiliary.
Lights. All types of lights whether blue or other type designated for city fire department.
Officers. All duly elected of appointed persons in the city fire department.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 2A)
Sec. 5.202 Use of Fire Department Equipment
(a) All officers, firemen, honorary firemen and ladies auxiliary of the city fire department shall, upon
notification of resignation, suspension or termination with the city fire department immediately cease to use or
display any identification card, badges, patches, automobile decal or signs and lights of the fire department.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/562
(b) All officers, firemen, honorary firemen and ladies auxiliary shall, upon notification of resignation or
suspension or termination surrender to the chief of the city fire department all equipment belonging to the fire
department within twenty-four (24) hours.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 2B)
Sec. 5.203 Unlawful to Impersonate Officer, Fireman, or Other Member of Fire Department
It shall be a violation for any person not a member of the city fire department to use or display any identification
card, badge, patch, automobile decal or sign, and lights of the fire department or to impersonate by word or sign,
a member of the fire department; provided nothing in this article shall prevent any person from assisting the city
fire department in the suppression of fires and the use of necessary equipment while so engaged. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 2C)
ARTICLE 5.300 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.301 Office Created
The office of the fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be appointed by the city council with the fire
marshal reporting directly to the fire chief. The said fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his
office, and shall be removed only for cause. He shall receive an annual salary to be determined by the council as
compensation for his services. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 3A)
Sec. 5.302 Duty to Investigate Fires and Keep Records
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires,
together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss,
which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5,
Section 3B)
Sec. 5.303 Fire Marshal May Take Testimony and Furnish Evidence for Prosecution
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of
the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to
commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall
cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to
the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the
information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 3C)
Sec. 5.304 Fire Marshal May Summon Witnesses and Administer Oaths
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/562
book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The said fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 5, Section 3D)
Sec. 5.305 Witnesses Who Refuse to Testify, Etc., Guilty of Misdemeanor
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
said fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire
marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. Provided,
however, that any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5,
Section 3E)
Sec. 5.306 Investigations by Fire Marshal May be Private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 3F)
Sec. 5.307 Fire Marshal May Enter and Examine Buildings Where Fire has Occurred
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 3G)
Sec. 5.308 Fire Marshal to Inspect Certain Buildings; Orders to Remedy
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon
and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public
buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure
which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger
persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges,
furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which
the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or
unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable
products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in
character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall
order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or
occupant of said building or premises. Provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself
aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the
complaint and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith
complied with by said owner or occupant. At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/562
marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report of each fire in the city during the
month. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 3H)
Sec. 5.309 Unlawful to Maintain Fire Hazards
(a) Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same
when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and
which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished by a fine
in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code.
(b) Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the
same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever,
including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter
of fire, or health, or safety or persons of property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other
structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of
explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable
materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or
property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or
which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such building, structure or premises other
than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth
in Section 1.109 of this code.
(c) No prosecution shall be brought under subsections (a) and (b) above until the order provided for in Section
5.308 be given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same.
(d) The penalties provided for herein shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by law for
the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, and punishments for offenses against the city.
(e) Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in any of the foregoing sections or subsections
shall be a distinct and separate offense.
(f) All misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures herein provided for
shall be recovered and enforced, in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures,
penalties and punishments for offenses generally against the city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 3I)
ARTICLE 5.400 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.401 Adopted
The 2012 International Fire Code and all 2012 International Fire Code appendices published by the International
Code Council, Inc., are hereby adopted as the official fire code of the city. This code is fully incorporated by
reference as though copied into the article in its entirety.
Sec. 5.402 Amended
The International Fire Code, 2012 edition, as adopted herein is amended to meet the unique fire safety needs of
the city, as shown on exhibit A to Ordinance 1003, on file in the office of the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/562
Sec. 5.403 Public Record
The material contained in the 2012 International Fire Code, although fully adopted and incorporated by
reference in this article, shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material
contained in the 2012 International Fire Code shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the fire
chief. The 2012 International Fire Code will be available for public inspection and copying during regular
business hours.
(Ordinance 1003 adopted 6/11/13)
ARTICLE 5.500 FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
Sec. 5.501 Definitions
That the following terms used in this article are defined as follows:
Fireworks or Explosives. Includes any contrivance made of paper, pasteboard or other material and containing
explosives or materials combined in various proportions for the purpose, when ignited, or lighted by hand or
otherwise, of making a noise, creating an explosion or producing a pyrotechnic display.
Person. Any natural person or association of natural persons, trustees, receiver, partnership, corporation,
organization or the manager, agent, servant or employee of any of them.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 5A)
Sec. 5.502 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, transport,
manufacture, discharge, ignite or in any manner aid, assist or abet in the discharging or igniting of any fireworks
or explosives of any size within the corporate limits of the city, without first securing a permit. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 5B)
Sec. 5.503 Possession of Fireworks or Explosives Without Permit Deemed an Offense
The possession of fireworks or explosives within the corporate limits of the city, shall constitute prima facie
evidence of an intention to violate the provisions of this article and shall be deemed an offense, without first
securing a permit. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 5C)
Sec. 5.504 Penalty for Violations; City May Also Institute Other Actions
(a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(b) In case of any willful violations of any of the terms and provisions of this article, the city, in addition to
imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court having
proper jurisdiction to restrain, correct or abate such violation; and the definition of any violation of the terms of
this article as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the city from invoking all civil remedies given to it by the laws
of the State of Texas, but same shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such
violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 5D)
Sec. 5.505 Application for Permit Submitted to Fire Marshal
(a) Any person or group desiring to secure a permit shall first make written application for a permit to the fire
marshal of the city.
(b) It shall be the duty of the officer to whom the application for a permit is made to make an investigation
and submit a report of his findings and his recommendation for or against the issuance of a permit, together with
his reasons for or against the issuance of the permit with his reasons therefor to the city council.
(c) The city council shall have the power in its discretion to grant or deny the application subject to such
reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall prescribe.
(d) It shall be the duty of the officer to whom the application for a permit is made to make an investigation as
to whether such, as proposed, will be of such a character and will be so located that it may be hazardous to
property or dangerous to any person, and he shall in the exercise of reasonable discretion grant or deny the
application subject to appeal to the city council.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 5E)
ARTICLE 5.600 OUTDOOR BURNING AND FIRES*
Sec. 5.601 Permit Required for Outdoor Burning
No person, firm or corporation shall be entitled to start any open fire for the purpose of burning grass, rubbish,
garbage, wood, lumber, or any other combustible material in the city without first obtaining a permit from the
city fire marshal. Such permit may be issued by the fire marshal after written application showing the place and
time of proposed burning and by exhibiting the material proposed to be burned. The fire marshal may issue such
burning permit if in his opinion such burning will not constitute a fire hazard or health hazard to the adjacent
property or its inhabitants. In making such determination, the fire marshal shall take into consideration the type
of material to be burned, its proximity to other persons and the quantity of property which is susceptible of being
burned on the premises in question. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 6A)
Sec. 5.602 Fires Out of Doors for Cooking
When fire is used out of doors for cooking, washing, barbeque pits, or any other purely domestic purpose, it
shall be built in and confined to a fireproof structure or container in such a manner as to prevent such fire from
escaping. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 6B)
Sec. 5.603 No Open Fires Permitted From One Hour Before Sunset to One Hour After Sunrise
No open fires of any nature whatsoever shall be permitted out of doors from one (1) hour before sunset to one
(1) hour after sunrise. The uses referred to in Section 5.602 above are not considered open fires. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 6C)
Sec. 5.604 Unlawful to Have Open Fire on Public Property
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/562
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to light, have lighted, or maintain any open fire on
public property including any street, alley or thoroughfare. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 6D)
Sec. 5.605 When Effective; Applicable to City Property Outside Corporate Limits
This section shall become effective immediately upon its passage and publication as provided by the city charter
and by the laws of the State of Texas and its provisions, regulations and requirements shall be applicable to all of
that area within the corporate limits of said city and in addition thereto to any property owned by or under the
jurisdiction of said city outside of its corporate limits. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 6E)
ARTICLE 5.700 SELF-SERVICE SERVICE STATIONS
Sec. 5.701 Permit Required
No “self-service” service station where gasoline is sold shall operate within the city limits of the city without a
permit issued by the city manager or his/her designee upon recommendation of the fire marshal. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 7A; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 5.702 Issuance of Permit; Requirements
A permit shall be issued after:
(1) The applicant files an application in writing showing the location of the proposed station, the
number of “self-service” pumps and a plat showing the location of each gasoline pump on the
premises; the names, ages and addresses of all employees or other persons who shall be in charge of
the station or working in the station. Such application shall be accompanied by a twenty-five dollar
($25.00) fee which shall be good for one (1) year. A new application shall be filed each year showing
any changes in the next preceding application.
(2) Each employee working in such station must pass an examination given by the fire marshal
which shall cover the subjects of fire prevention and fire extinguishing as it relates to gasoline fires,
and first aid to gasoline fire victims. An application to take such examination shall be accompanied
by a ten dollar ($10.00) examination fee. Upon passing the examination the fire marshal shall issue
him a “self-service” employee's permit.
(3) The fire marshal has inspected the premises and certified that the plat accompanying the
application truly represents the actual location of gasoline pumps on the premises.
(4) The fire marshal has inspected the premises and certified that there are no hose leaks in
gasoline hoses and that supplemental means are provided outside of the pump or dispensing device
whereby the source of power may be readily disconnected in the event of fire or other accident.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 7B)
Sec. 5.703 Unlawful to Operate Station Without Permit; Unlawful to Work Without Passing
Examination
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a “self-service” gasoline service station within
the city limits of the city without a permit issued under the terms of this article. It shall be unlawful for any
employee or agent to work in a “self-service” gasoline service station without first passing the examination
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/562
called for in Section 5.702(2) hereof and receiving a permit issued by the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 5, Section 7C)
ARTICLE 5.800 MOBILE SERVICE UNITS
Sec. 5.801 Mobile Service Units Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or dispense fuel from a mobile service unit in the
city, or to operate the same as a service station, including self-service. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5,
Section 8A)
Sec. 5.802 Mobile Service Unit Defined
A “mobile service unit” as used in this article, shall mean and include any vehicle, tank, tank truck, or other
movable device from which flammable liquids used as fuel, may, as an act of retail sale, be dispensed into the
fuel tank of a motor vehicle. It is the intent of this article to prohibit mobile gasoline filling stations which either
park or roam around on off-street parking lots and from which the driver or attendant makes sales of gasoline to
persons whose vehicles are parked on such lots. This section shall not apply to the delivery of liquefied
petroleum gas to lawful recipients having proper containers other than motor vehicles, or to the emergency
delivery of motor fuel to a stalled vehicle. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 8B)
ARTICLE 5.900 POLICE CHIEF TO DESIGNATE FIRE LANES
The chief of police is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes in any parking area within the city, whether such
parking area is upon private property or public property. Such fire lanes designated by the chief of police shall
control the parking of vehicles and any person in an area designated as a fire lane shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor in violation of this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Section 9)
ARTICLE 5.1000 PERMIT FEES FOR FIRE PROTECTION RELATED EQUIPMENT
The permit fees for the following permits are hereby increased to the following amounts:
(1) Sprinkler System Permits:
Less than 50 heads $100.00
50 to 100 heads $150.00
More than 100 heads $200.00
Underground $100.00
(2) Alarm System Permits:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/562
Less than 30 devices $100.00
More than 30 devices $200.00
Vent Hood System $100.00
(3) Fuel Station Permits:
Tank Installation $200.00
Tank Removal $100.00
Tank Repair $100.00
Miscellaneous Permits $50.00–$200.00
(Ordinance 705 adopted 1/14/03)
ARTICLE 5.1100 FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICE FEES
Sec. 5.1101 Definitions
The following term used in this article shall be defined as follows:
Person. Any:
(1) Nonresident of the city;
(2) Legal entity operating a commercial business inside the city limits or outside the city limits in
areas which the city is authorized to provide fire and rescue services; or
(3) Agent, employer, or employee of a nonresident of the city or legal entity operating a
commercial business inside the city limits or outside the city limits in areas which the city is
authorized to provide fire and rescue services.
Sec. 5.1102 General Regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/562
(a) Fire and rescue service fees as specified in section 5.1103, which may be amended from time to time, will
be charged to any person who is deemed to be at fault for the causation of, or whose negligence contributed to,
an incident requiring city fire and rescue services.
(b) The city or its authorized agent shall send an invoice to the person or the person's insurance provider and
such person or insurance provider shall remit full payment of such fees to the city or its authorized agent
immediately upon receipt of an invoice.
(c) Fees will be charged and collected for those fire and rescue services provided inside the city limits as well
as those services provided outside the city limits in areas where the city is authorized to provide such services.
Sec. 5.1103 Schedule of Fees
The schedule of fees for fire and rescue services rendered is as follows:
(1) Motor Vehicle Incidents.
(A) Level 1 - $435.00. Provide hazardous materials assessment and scene stabilization. This
will be the most common “billing level.” This occurs almost every time the fire department
responds to an accident/incident.
(B) Level 2 - $495.00. Includes level 1 services as well as clean up and material used
(sorbents) for hazardous fluid clean up and disposal. We will bill at this level if the fire
department has to clean up any gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of
the accident/incident.
(C) Level 3 - Car Fire - $605.00. Provide scene safety, fire suppression, breathing air, rescue
tools, hand tools, hose, tip use, foam, structure protection, and clean up gasoline or other
automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident.
(D) Level 4 - $1,800.00. Includes level 1 and 2 services as well as extrication (heavy rescue
tools, ropes, airbags, cribbing etc.). We will bill at this level if the fire department has to
free/remove anyone from the vehicle(s) using any equipment. We will not bill at this level if the
patient is simply unconscious and fire department is able to open the door to access the patient.
This level is to be billed only if equipment is deployed.
(E) Level 5 - $2,200.00. Includes levels 1, 2, and 4 services as well as air care (multi-engine
company response, mutual aid, helicopter). We will bill at this level any time a helicopter is
utilized to transport the patient(s).
(F) Additional Time On-Scene (for all levels of service).
(i) Engine: $400.00 per hour.
(ii) Truck: $500.00 per hour.
(iii) Miscellaneous equipment: $300.00.
(2) Hazmat.
(A) Level 1 - $700.00 - Basic Response. Claim will include engine response, first responder
assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, setup and command.
(B) Level 2 - $2,500.00 - Intermediate Response. Claim will include engine response, first
responder assignment, hazmat certified team and appropriate equipment, perimeter
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/562
establishment, evacuations, setup and command, level A or B suit donning, breathing air and
detection equipment. Setup and removal of decon center.
(C) Level 3 - $5,900.00 - Advanced Response. Claim will include engine response, first
responder assignment, hazmat certified team and appropriate equipment, perimeter
establishment, evacuations, first responder set up and command, level A or B suit donning,
breathing air and detection equipment and robot deployment. Setup and removal of decon
center, detection equipment, recovery and identification of material. Disposal and environment
clean up. Includes above in addition to any disposal rates of material and contaminated
equipment and material used at scene. Includes 3 hours of on-scene time - each additional hour
at $300.00 per hazmat team.
(D) Additional Time On-Scene (for all levels of service).
(i) Engine: $400.00 per hour.
(ii) Truck: $500.00 per hour.
(iii) Miscellaneous equipment: $300.00.
(3) Commercial Fires.
(A) $400.00 per hour, per engine/$500.00 per hour, per truck. Includes:
(i) Scene safety.
(ii) Investigation.
(iii) Fire/hazard control.
(B) Damaged Equipment. If city equipment is damaged in responding to a commercial fire,
the city may recover the actual cost of replacement for such equipment.
(C) Miscellaneous/Additional Time On-Scene.
(i) Engine: $400.00 per hour.
(ii) Truck: $500.00 per hour.
(iii) Investigator: $150.00 per hour.
(iv) Miscellaneous equipment: $300.00.
(Ordinance 1022 adopted 3/11/14)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.100 WEEDS, BRUSH, RUBBISH, ETC.*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/562
Sec. 6.101 Maximum Height of Grass and Weeds
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation owning or having supervision or control of any lot, tract,
parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to suffer or
permit grass, weeds or any plant that is not cultivated to grow to a height greater than twelve (12) inches on an
average or to grow in rank profusion upon such premises, including along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the
same between the property line and the curb, or if there is no curb, then within ten (10) feet outside the property
line. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 1A)
Sec. 6.102 Rubbish, Brush and Other Unsanitary Matter
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having supervision or control of any lot, tract,
parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to suffer or
permit any rubbish, brush, or any other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature
(including but not limited to junk, trash, refuse, old ice boxes, refrigerators, stoves, and other worn out, wrecked,
or dismantled machinery, tractors, automobiles, etc.) to accumulate or be present upon any such premises,
including along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb, or if there is
no curb, then within ten (10) feet outside the property line. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 1B)
Sec. 6.103 Responsibility for Cutting; Clearing
It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation owning or having supervision or control of any lot, tract,
parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to cut or cause
to be cut and to remove or cause to be removed all such grass, weeds, plants, rubbish, brush, and any other
objectionable, unsightly and unsanitary matter of whatever nature, as often as may be necessary to comply with
the provisions of Sections 6.101 and 6.102 above. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 1C)
Sec. 6.104 Abatement of Prohibited Conditions
(a) If the owner of any lot, tract, parcel of land or a portion thereof situated within the corporate limits of the
city shall fail to comply with the requirements of Sections 6.101 and 6.102, the city manager or his/her designee
or his designated representative may cause such property owner to be notified of the violation. The notice shall
be given:
(1) personally to the owner in writing;
(2) by letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or
(3) if personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown:
(A) by publication at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days;
(B) by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the violation relates; or
(C) by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(b) Following the expiration of not less than ten (10) days from the date of the notice, the city may enter upon
such premises and may do such work as necessary or cause the same to be done in order that the premises
comply with the requirements set forth in Sections 6.101 and 6.102. In the notice of a violation provided in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/562
subsection (a) above, the city may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner
commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety, on or
before the first anniversary date of the notice, the city, without further notice, may abate the violation at the
owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this article
occurs within the one (1) year period and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership
change, then the city, without notice, may take any action permitted by this article and assess the expenses as
provided in subsection (c) below.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 1D; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
(c) A bill for the actual cost incurred and a reasonable administrative charge incurred by the city resulting
from the abatement of the above described condition shall be mailed to the owner of such premises and must be
satisfied within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of such bill. The administrative charge shall be $100.00
and shall be assessed when the city abates or causes to be abated a nuisance. This administrative charge is in
addition to the actual costs incurred by the city in abating or causing to be abated a nuisance. Without amending
this article, the city may impose an administrative charge of more than $100.00 if the city's cost of implementing
this article is greater than $100.00.
In the event such bill has not been satisfied within the specified period, the mayor may file a statement with the
county clerk of the expenses incurred in the abatement of the above described condition on the premises and the
city shall have a privileged lien on any lot or lots upon which such expense is incurred, second only to tax liens
and liens for street improvements. The lien statement shall state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal
description of the property. Said privileged lien shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum
from the date such payment is due. For any such expenditure and interest as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and
recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city, and the statement made as aforesaid or a copy thereof shall
be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work performed by the city.
(Ordinance 921, sec. 1, adopted 7/14/09)
Sec. 6.105 Authority to Enter Abatement Agreements
(a) The code compliance officer for the city or his designee (the code officer) shall be authorized to enter into
agreements to abate certain public nuisances in accordance with this article. The code officer shall be authorized
to enter into the following abatement agreements with independent contractors (abatement contractors):
(1) To provide mowing services and/or light clean-up of properties of less than one acre that are in
violation of Sections 6.101 and/or 6.102;
(2) To provide mowing services and/or light cleanup of properties of more than one acre that are in
violation of Sections 6.101 and/or 6.102; and
(3) To provide services of major clean-up to pick up and remove rubbish, brush, and other
unsanitary matter from properties in violation of Section 6.102.
(b) The code officer shall ensure each abatement contractor provides the following documentation before
entering into an agreement for abatement services:
(1) Proof of insurance liability coverage in a minimum amount of $500,000;
(2) A completed IRS W-9 Form (Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification); and
(3) A completed conflict of interest questionnaire.
(Ordinance 921, sec. 2, adopted 7/14/09)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/562
(c) The code compliance officer shall select the abatement contractor and compensate the contractor for each
abatement in the following manner:
(1) Mowing, trimming, and light cleanup.
(A) For standard mowing, trimming, light cleanup jobs, and smaller tree limbs, a set payment
rate shall be used per acre of property. The payment rate shall be set by the city manager or his
designee, under advisement of the code compliance officer, at a rate that is reasonable for the
performance of such services.
(B) Contractors shall be placed on a rotational list. When a contractor is notified of a
potential job by the code compliance officer, they shall have 24 hours to respond. If a contractor
does not respond or refuses a job (for any reason), that contractor will be placed at the bottom
of the list as though he had taken the job. If at any time a contractor does not fulfill the
abatement agreement he may be removed from the list of eligible contractors.
(2) Major cleanup. Larger jobs requiring major clean up of trash, debris, rubbish, large tree
branches, etc., will be done by bid. The code compliance officer will use the rotational list of
abatement contractors created in accordance with this section. The code compliance officer will
contact the top three contractors for price quotes and will select the contractor who provides the
lowest quote for the job. If at any time a contractor does not fulfill the abatement agreement he may
be removed from the list of eligible contractors for future bidding.
(Ordinance 974 adopted 10/11/11)
ARTICLE 6.200 ACCUMULATIONS OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS*
Sec. 6.201 Conditions Constituting Fire Hazard Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having supervision or control of any lot, tract,
parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to suffer or
permit any downed timber, brush, logs, weeds, grass, decaying vegetable matter, rubbish, trash, or inoperable
vehicles on any such lot or premises so that such conditions or matter may by reason of fire endanger any
adjoining property or may be reasonably calculated to communicate fire to any adjacent premises. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 3A)
Sec. 6.202 When Hazards May Exist
A fire hazard is created if in the opinion of the fire marshal the materials kept or maintained on the premises
constitute a more than ordinary threat to fire and conflagration of adjacent property. In making this
determination, the fire marshal must take into consideration the size of the premises in question, the nature and
quantity of materials kept or stored, and the proximity of such materials to adjacent property which is
susceptible of being burned by a fire spreading from the property in question. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 6, Section 3B)
Sec. 6.203 Nuisance
The conditions described in Section 6.201 above shall constitute a nuisance. In addition to any criminal penalties
and the abatement procedures set out in Article 6.100 of this chapter, the city, state or any other interested person
or adjoining property owner may cause such condition to be abated by civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 3C)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/562
ARTICLE 6.300 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Sec. 6.301 Designation of Public Health Authority
The city designates the county health department and its public health authority for the purpose of ensuring
minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department's function.
Sec. 6.302 State Regulations and Guidelines Adopted
The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the executive
commissioner of the Health and Human Services Commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter
229, Sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this
jurisdiction.
Sec. 6.303 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in this article:
Authorized Agent or Employee. The employees of the regulatory authority.
City. Refers to the City of Lake Worth, Texas.
Food Establishment. A food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile
food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor.
Owner of Business. The owner or operator of the business. Each new owner or operator shall comply with the
current code of the city.
Regulatory Authority. The director and representatives of the county public health department.
Service of Notice. A notice provided for in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the
permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the holder of the permit.
State Rules. The state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and
173 through 175. These rules are also referred to as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec. 6.304 Permits and Fees
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the city unless he/she
possesses a current and valid permit issued by the regulatory authority.
(b) Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place in or on every food
establishment regulated by this article.
(c) Nontransferable (change of ownership). Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not
transferable, from one person or entity to another or from one location to another, except as otherwise permitted
by this article.
(d) Application for Permit. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written
application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/562
address, and phone number of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the
applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or
falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are
required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit.
(e) Inspection for Permits. Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the
regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and
rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal
of a permit.
(f) Fee Schedule. Fees for permits/inspections issued under this article shall be as listed below and are to be
paid to the Tarrant County Public Health Department at 1101 South Main, Fort Worth, Texas 76104.
(1) Food Store.
(A) Less than 5,000 sq. ft.: $200.00.
(B) Greater than 5,000 sq. ft.: $300.00.
(2) Food Service.
(A) Less than 500 sq. ft.: $100.00.
(B) 500–1,500 sq. ft.: $150.00.
(C) 1,500–3,000 sq. ft.: $200.00.
(D) 3,000–6,000 sq. ft.: $250.00.
(E) Greater than 6,000 sq. ft.: $300.00.
(3) Childcare Food Service. $150.00.
(4) Catering Operation. $250.00.
(5) Food Court. $200.00 per establishment.
(6) Adjunct Operation.
(A) Food service: $150.00 per independent operation.
(B) Food store less than 5,000 sq. ft.: $150.00 per independent operation.
(C) Food store greater than 5,000 sq. ft.: $200.00 per independent operation.
(7) Commissary.
(A) No food prep: $100.00.
(B) With food prep: $200.00.
(8) Mobile Units.
(A) Prepackaged food only: $100.00.
(B) Open and/or food prep: $200.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/562
(C) Push cart: $200.00.
(9) Plan Review Fees.
(A) Less than 500 sq. ft.: $0.00.
(B) 500–3,000 sq. ft.: $50.00.
(C) Greater than 5,000 sq. ft: $100.00.
(10) Late Fees.
(A) From 1–30 days: 10% of fee owed.
(B) From 31–60 days: 20% of fee owed.
The late fee increases 10% for each 30-day block until permit fee is paid. Permits that are more
than 90 days overdue will be void and required to reapply.
(11) Required Reinspection Fees. $75.00.
Sec. 6.305 Review of Plans/Specifications
(a) Submission of Plans. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversions shall be submitted to the regulatory authority
for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that twenty percent (20%) or greater for the area
of the food establishment is to be remodeled or when equipment required by the rules is to be relocated or
removed. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical
plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and
facilities.
(b) Approval. The plan specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the
requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in
construction, remodeling, or conversion. Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a
permit denial, suspension, or revocation.
(c) Fees. Fees for review of the plans shall be as listed above.
Sec. 6.306 Inspections
(a) Preoperational Inspections. Before a permit is issued, the regulatory authority shall inspect and approve the
food establishment.
(b) Annual Inspections. An inspection of a food establishment by the regulatory authority shall be performed
at least once per year and shall be prioritized based upon assessment of a food establishment's compliance and
potential of causing foodborne illness according to 25 TAC 229.171(h).
(c) Classification. The regulatory authority shall classify food establishments as special priority, high priority,
medium priority, or low priority, according to the type of operations; particular foods that are prepared, number
of people served; susceptibility of the population served; history of violations and any other risk factor deemed
relevant to the operation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/562
(d) Refusal of Inspection. Refusal of an owner, manager, or employee to allow the authorized representative
of the regulatory authority, upon presentation of credentials, to inspect any permitted business or operation
therein during normal business hours will result in an immediate suspension of the permit, requiring all
permitted activities to abate until after such time as a hearing may be held per section 6.308.
Sec. 6.307 Food Manager/Food Handler Education and Certification
Requirement. Each food service establishment shall have at least one (1) person employed in a managerial
capacity possessing a current food manager certificate approved by the regulatory authority. The following
requirements must be met regarding food manager/handler education and certification:
(1) Proof of such certification must be provided to the regulatory authority prior to the opening of
the food establishment;
(2) Each food service establishment with six (6) or more employees that is required to have
certified food managers must have at least one (1) certified manager on site during all operations;
(3) Every employee of a food service establishment other than a certified food manager must
maintain a valid food handler certification registered with the regulatory authority;
(4) Food handler certification shall be valid for a period of up to three (3) years as determined by
the regulatory authority;
(5) Food manager and food handler certification documentation must be maintained in the food
service establishment and presented upon request by the regulatory authority; and
(6) Existing food service establishments that are required to have certified food managers shall
have sixty (60) days to meet the certified food manager requirements upon the transfer or termination
of a certified food manager.
Sec. 6.308 Suspension and Revocation of Permit
(a) Notice of Suspension. The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any
permit to operate a food establishment if the operations of the food establishment constitute an imminent hazard
to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section.
When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the
holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of a request for
a hearing.
(b) Reinstatement of Permit After Suspension. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or
the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately
suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with
the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten (10) days. If no written request for hearing is filed
within the ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any
time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(c) Revocation of Permit. The regulatory authority may, after providing an opportunity for a hearing revoke a
permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the
regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the
holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to
revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice.
Unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit within such ten (10) day
period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/562
(d) Service of Notices. A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder
of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the last known address of the holder of the permit as shown on their permit application. A copy of the notice
shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
(e) Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time
and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority shall
make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 975 adopted 11/8/11)
ARTICLE 6.400 LITTERING PROHIBITED
Sec. 6.401 Definitions
City. Lake Worth, Texas.
Garbage. Is putrescrible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
Litter. Is “garbage,” “refuse” and “rubbish” as defined herein and all other waste materials which if thrown or
deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or tends to cause a
depreciation in the market value of adjacent property by virtue of its unsightliness or odor.
Refuse. Is all putrescrible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned or inoperative vehicles, broken furniture, abandoned or
inoperative appliances and solid market and industrial wastes.
Rubbish. Is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes such as
papers, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, discarded
clothing, toys, crockery and similar materials.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 5A)
Sec. 6.402 Littering on Public Property Unlawful
(a) No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city
except in public receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps.
(b) Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon private property.
(c) No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such
a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the
park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided herein.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 5B)
Sec. 6.403 Sweeping or Depositing Litter Into Streets Prohibited; Owner to Keep Sidewalks Litter Free
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/562
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation
of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 6, Section 5C)
Sec. 6.404 Littering From Vehicles Prohibited
(a) No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other
public place within the city, or upon private property.
(b) No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or
tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 5D)
Sec. 6.405 Littering on Private Property Unlawful
(a) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by
such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
(b) The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of
litter. Provided, however, that this article shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles
for collection. It shall be unlawful for any person to empty or dump trash or garbage into any private receptacle
belonging to any other person, firm or corporation.
(c) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether
owned by such person or not.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 5E)
Sec. 6.406 Clearing of Litter From Private Property by City
(a) The health officer is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any private property within
the city or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is
dangerous to public health, safety, or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner at
his last known address.
(b) Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice provided for
in subsection (a) above, or within fifteen (15) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned
to the city post office department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was
properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the health officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the city.
(c) When the city has effected the removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost
thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum from the date of the completion of the
work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/562
tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and said charge shall be due and payable by said owner at the time
of payment of such bill.
(d) Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within thirty (30) days after the disposal of
such litter, as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, then, and in that case, the health officer shall cause
to be recorded in the city tax records a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the
date the work was done and the location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation of such
sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for
the amount due in principal and interest plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been
made. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and
further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of six (6) percent in the event same is not paid in full on or
before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in
accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied
with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person
concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or
described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 5F)
ARTICLE 6.500 GARBAGE REGULATIONS
Division 1. Collection Service
Sec. 6.501 City Garbage Service Required
From and after the effective date of this article, each family unit and commercial unit within the city limits of the
city be and are hereby required to subscribe and use the service of the city garbage disposal system. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 6A)
Sec. 6.502 Necessary for Health and General Welfare
The city council finds that it is necessary that this article be passed in order to protect the health and general
welfare of the citizens of the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 6B)
Sec. 6.503 Subscribers to Conform to Regulations
Each subscriber to the city garbage system shall conform to the regulations set out by the city council with
respect to all aspects of the said garbage disposal system. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 6C)
Sec. 6.504 Fees to be Paid
Each subscriber shall pay the monthly fees as prescribed by the city council. The collection of such fees for
residential accounts shall be made a part of the water billing service and the city shall be entitled to discontinue
water service to any person, firm or corporation not paying the city garbage fees. The collection of such fees for
commercial accounts shall be handled by the solid waste service provider at fees as prescribed by the city
council. (Ordinance 857, sec. 1, adopted 3/13/07)
Sec. 6.505 Unlawful to Burn Garbage and Refuse Within City
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/562
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to burn garbage, trash or refuse within the city
limits of the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 6E)
Secs. 6.506-6.510 Reserved
Division 2. Garbage Collection and Disposal
Sec. 6.511 Definitions
City. The city or its authorized representative.
Family. One (1) or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single, housekeeping unit, whether or not
related to one another by birth, adoption, or marriage.
Garbage. Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill or carrion and every accumulation of animal, fruit
or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of meats, fish, fowl,
fruits or vegetables and any other matter of any nature, which is subject to decay and may serve as a breeding
material for flies or other germ carrying insects.
Person. Includes the singular and plural and shall also mean any individual, firm, corporation, association,
family, persons, group, governmental agency, municipal or quasi-municipal corporation, occupant, owner's
agent, lessee or tenant.
Premises. House, yard, building, apartment, tourist court, trailer court, dwelling place or lot within the corporate
limits of the city.
Waste. All of the following: domestic garbage, ashes, tin cans, bottles, and other household trash, including
discarded furniture, furnishings, fixtures, household appliances of all kinds, containers of all kinds, cartons,
books, newspapers, manure, dead animals or parts thereof, trees, tree branches, tree roots, tree trunks, brush,
shrubs, grass clippings, plant stalks, leaves, etc.
Waste Container. A can of galvanized iron, noncorrodible metal or plastic, rodent and fly-proof, durable and
leakproof, of the type commonly sold as garbage cans of a suitable gauge, weight and construction to insure
durability, with suitable handles on can and lid and of capacity of not less than ten (10) gallons and nor more
than thirty (30) gallons. A commercial type container is defined as any refuse container that has a capacity of
more than one (1) cubic yard.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 7A)
Sec. 6.512 Accumulation of Waste
Except as provided in other sections hereof, no person shall permit to accumulate on his premises any waste
except in covered containers or as otherwise hereafter provided. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section
7B)
Sec. 6.513 Containers Required; Placing and Maintenance
(a) Every person in the possession of any premises in the city where persons reside shall provide for each
family residing therein, and at all time maintain in good order and repair a sufficient number of waste containers
to hold all waste produced in or on, or brought into or on such premises, as soon as practicable after same is
produced or brought therein or thereon, except as otherwise herein provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/562
(b) All waste containers shall be as previously defined, and no other type of container shall be acceptable.
Filthy, leaking or defective receptacles shall be cleaned, repaired or replaced as directed by the city manager or
his/her designee. All containers shall be disinfected with an effective antiseptic solution as often as is necessary
to maintain them in a sanitary condition. Evidence of neglect of these requirements or unsafe containers shall be
determined by the city manager or his/her designee.
(c) All unattended commercial type refuse containers shall be kept closed at all times.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 7C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 6.514 Contents of Containers
(a) It shall be the duty of every person in the possession of any premises to cause all garbage brought on or
produced on the premises to be thoroughly drained of all surplus liquid, securely wrapped in paper or packed in
a covered box or carton of such dimensions as will permit of its free passage into and out of the waste container,
and deposited in a waste container as soon as practicable after the same is produced or brought therein or
thereon. Waste containers to which garbage or waste is frozen through failure to observe these regulations and
all containers which are other than as specified in this article shall not be serviced. Materials of every character
shall be securely wrapped or bound in such manner as may be necessary to prevent the scattering of same by the
wind and shall be deposited in a waste container or otherwise deposited as prescribed herein.
(b) All waste of a size or nature which renders it unsuitable for deposit in containers shall be placed on the
ground at the designated pickup point in neat and orderly bundles or stacks not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in
weight or one foot six inches by four feet (1'6" x 4') in size. Except as otherwise provided herein, wood, sticks,
brush and other nongarbage waste must be placed within five (5) feet of the curbline.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 7D)
Sec. 6.515 City May Inspect Containers
All waste containers shall be subject to inspection and approval or condemnation by the city manager or his/her
designee. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 7E; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 6.516 Transporting Waste
No person, firm or corporation shall transport waste, or cause waste to be transported, over the streets or other
public ways in the city unless such waste being transported is entirely and securely covered; garbage shall not be
transported over or along the streets of the city or other public property, except in a metal covered liquid-tight
compartment approved by the health officer, the city manager or his/her designee. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 6, Section 7F; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 6.517 Waste to be Disposed of
(a) Every person in possession of any premises in the city shall be required to have accumulations of waste
removed and disposed of before such waste becomes a health problem.
(b) All waste of a size or nature which renders it unsuitable for deposit in containers shall be picked up on a
monthly basis during the last week of each calendar month in which Monday through Friday all fall within that
calendar week. Except for waste caused by a natural disaster, such waste shall not be placed on the ground at the
designated pickup point earlier than 12:01 a.m. on the 20th day of each month.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/562
(Ordinance 711 adopted 7/8/03)
Sec. 6.518 License Required to Provide Waste Disposal Service
No person shall provide waste disposal services within the city without a license or franchise from the city
council. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 7H)
Sec. 6.519 Rates
The rates for residential sanitation service are hereby set as follows:
(1) A monthly service charge shall be charged to all customers in the amount as prescribed in the
current contract with the solid waste provider, plus a 2-1/2% administration fee, plus sales tax for
regular curbside service.
(2) A monthly service charge shall be charged to all customers in the amount as prescribed in the
current contract with the solid waste provider, plus a 2-1/2% administration fee, plus sales tax for
elective carry-out service.
(3) A monthly service charge shall be charged to all customers in the amount as prescribed in the
current contract with the solid waste provider, with no additional administration fee, plus sales tax for
disabled carry-out, back-door service.
(Ordinance 927 adopted 8/25/09)
Sec. 6.520 Penalties
Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this article shall be fined for each offense in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section
1.109 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 7J)
Secs. 6.521-6.525 Reserved
Division 3. Permits for Hauling Garbage and Other Refuse
Sec. 6.526 Permit Required
It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to haul or transport garbage, trash or refuse on
or upon the public streets, alleys and thoroughfares of the city without a permit issued pursuant to the terms of
this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 8A)
Sec. 6.527 Application for Permit
Any person, firm or corporation desirous of procuring such a permit shall submit an application, in writing,
setting forth the name, and address of the applicant, a description of the vehicle or vehicles to be used, years of
experience in the business of hauling garbage, a financial statement and shall state whether or not such applicant
has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. Such applicant shall accompany his application with a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/562
fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which fee shall be returned to applicant in the event that such permit is not
issued. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Section 8B)
Sec. 6.528 Council to Hear and Determine
The city council shall hear and determine the application and shall make a finding as to whether or not public
necessity and convenience requires the issuance of such permit and shall issue a permit if it so finds that public
necessity and convenience requires additional garbage service within the city. The provisions of this article shall
not apply to holders of specific franchises now in effect; the terms of such specific franchises shall govern the
type of service rendered, fees to be charged and money to be paid to the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
6, Section 8C)
ARTICLE 6.600 LIQUID WASTE REGULATIONS
Sec. 6.601 Definitions and Purpose
(a) Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
Administration. The director of the department of water and the director's authorized representative are
authorized to administer, implement, and enforce the provision of this article.
Approved. Accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the
approving authority.
Approving Authority. The director or any other official designated by the city manager or his/her designee.
Commission. The state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ).
Director. The director of the department of water or the director's authorized representative.
Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid or semisolid
grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and/or septage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any
constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
groundwater.
Disposal Site. A permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or septage is
processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land at which will remain after closure.
Disposer. A person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid waste.
Generator. A person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste.
Grease Trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum
based oil, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly
connected.
Grease Trap Waste. Greasy, fatty liquid, semiliquid and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by
a grease trap.
Grit Trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum
based oils, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or
indirectly connected.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/562
Grit Trap Waste. Petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery
repair and/or washing facilities.
Hazardous Waste. Any liquid, semiliquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes), which because of its quality,
concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
(1) Have any of the following characteristics: toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer,
flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or
illness; or
(2) Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, or disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as a
hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or by the Administrator, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal “Solid Waste Disposal Act,” as
amended by the “Resource Conversation and Recovery Act of 1976” and as may be amended in the
future.
Liquid Waste. Waterborne solids, liquids, and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap,
chemical/portable toilet and/or septic tank and described as a grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage.
Manager. The person conducting, supervising, managing, or representing the activities of a generator,
transporter or disposer.
Manifest System. The system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation,
and disposal of liquid.
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Permit. The formal written document issued to a person by the approving authority authorizing collection of
grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage.
Permittee. A person granted a permit under this article.
Person. An individual, corporation (including a government corporation), organization, government,
governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or
body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission, or
any other legal entity.
POTW. Publicly-owned treatment works.
Sanitary Sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not normally
admitted.
Septage. Wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical or septic tank.
Shall. The word “shall” wherever used in this article will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; “may” is
permissive.
Special Wastes. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of its quality, concentration,
physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, require special handling and disposal to protect the
human health or the environment.
Spill. The accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and
septage.
TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/562
TDH. Texas Department of State Health Services.
Tank. A device, designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and septage which is
constructed primarily of nonearthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the
containment.
Toxic Waste. Any liquid, semiliquid, or solid waste material which has the ability to chemically produce injury
once it reached a susceptible site in or on the body.
Transporter. A person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste.
Trip Ticket. The shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information
required by the approving authority.
Vehicle. A mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate the generation, transportation and disposal of grease trap
waste, grit trap waste, and septage, for the protection of the sanitary sewer system and the environment. The
wastes regulated by this article do not include hazardous wastes or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid wastes.
With an increase in recycling, the city feels the need to regulate every type of waste transported within the city,
including waste oil recyclers, Fry-O-Later grease recyclers and nonhazardous waste haulers such as waste
groundwater, i.e. companies that haul to a centralized waste treatment facility.
Sec. 6.602 Permits; Generally
(a) Permit Required.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person collects or transports liquid waste without a valid
permit issued by the director.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement action for a violation of subsection (1) above,
that:
(A) The person was disposing of the person's own waste from the person's own recreational
vehicle, boat, travel trailer; or
(B) The person was transporting liquid waste through the city that was collected outside of
the city and which was disposed of outside of the city.
(b) Permit Application Procedures. A person required by subsection (a) to have a permit shall do the
following:
(1) Complete and file a permit application on a form prescribed by the director;
(2) Submit with the application a photocopy of applicant's driver's license. If the applicant is a
person other than an individual, the driver's license shall be that of the applicant's chief operating
officer or manager;
(3) Submit with the application a copy of the applicant's current registration issued by the
commission, pursuant to 30 TAC Section 312.142, to collect and transport liquid wastes;
(4) Submit with the application a copy of the state registration license receipt issued to each
vehicle the applicant elects to register under the permit;
(5) Submit with the application a list of all disposers the applicant proposes to use;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/562
(6) Submit to the director proof that applicant's vehicles which will be registered under the permit
are insured in at least the minimum amounts as required by state law, or are self-insured as provided
by state law to secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operation of each
vehicle. A written statement from an authorized agent of the applicant's insurance carrier verifying
the issuance of such insurance shall be filed with the director before a permit is issued. All such
verifications of insurance shall provide for thirty-day cancellation notice to the director;
(7) Provide any additional information requested by the director;
(8) Demonstrate to the director that the applicant and applicant's drivers have sufficient knowledge
of the vehicles they will be operating and the liquid waste facilities they will be servicing, to collect
and transport liquid waste in a safe and competent manner; and
(9) Submit for inspection by the director each vehicle the applicant proposes to register under the
permit. Each vehicle shall meet the following requirements:
(A) The business name, telephone number, and address of the applicant shall be permanently
displayed on both sides of the vehicle in letters of a minimum height of three (3) inches, in a
color contrasting to their background. An address is sufficient if it includes the applicable city
and state. If the applicant's business is not within a municipality, the name of the county and
state will be sufficient.
(B) The vehicle shall display current state vehicle registration tags and inspection certificate.
(C) The vehicle shall display the commission-assigned registration number in accordance
with state regulations.
(D) The vehicle shall have a single waste tank which shall be of a minimum 1,000-gallon
capacity, unless otherwise approved by the director, permanently mounted on the vehicle, and
designed to transport wastes. Portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in a
vehicle are prohibited. This paragraph does not apply to vehicles used to transport chemical
toilet wastes.
(E) The vehicle's engine which powers its movement, drive train, and emissions system shall
not be modified for the purpose of creating a vacuum to empty liquid waste facilities.
(F) The vehicle shall have a power take off (PTO) unit to create vacuum sufficient to remove
the entire contents of the liquid waste facilities it services.
(G) The vehicle shall be clean and odor free.
(H) All piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to the tank or vehicle.
(I) The tank shall be liquid tight.
(J) The tank shall be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily
cleaned.
(K) All piping, valves, and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean.
(L) Any inlet, or opening of the tank, shall be constructed so that collected waste will not
spill during filling, transfer, or during transport.
(M) All outlet connections shall be constructed so that no waste will leak, run, or spill out of
the vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/562
(N) All outlets shall be of a design and type suitable for the waste handled and capable of
controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate
surroundings while in use.
(O) All pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances shall be of a design
and type suitable for the type of waste handled; be capable of being easily disassembled for
cleaning; and operate without spillage, spray, or leakage.
(P) All tank valves shall have a safety plug or cap.
(Q) All closed vehicles, tanks, or containers used to transport liquid wastes regulated by this
article shall have sight gauges installed and maintained in such a manner that they can be used
to determine whether a vehicle is loaded and the approximate capacity of the load. Gauges are
not required to read in gallons or liters, but shall show what percentage of the tank capacity is
filled. An alternate method to measure actual volumes may be utilized if the transporter has
received prior written approval from the Commission's executive director and has provided a
copy of that approval to the director.
(R) All discharge valves and ports shall be prominently marked. All discharge ports shall be
visible and readily accessible.
(c) Issuance and Display of Permit.
(1) The approving authority shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate
established fee is paid. An applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
vehicle and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional vehicle operated by the applicant.
(2) A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance, unless suspended or revoked.
(3) A permit shall not be transferable.
(4) The director shall issue a vehicle registration number to each vehicle registered under a permit,
and shall list this number on the permit. A vehicle registration number is not transferable.
(5) The approving authority shall number permits consecutively and each permit holder shall cause
to be displayed on each side of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background and in threeinch
letters or larger, the business name, TDH registration number and the following:
LWC (LAKE WORTH CITY)
The first three (3) letters (LWC) shall represent the city issuing the permit, followed by the
assigned permit number. The permit holder shall place business name, TCEQ registration number and
the vehicle permit number on each vehicle before the vehicle is operated.
(6) The permit holder shall cause a copy of the permit to be kept in each vehicle at all times and
presented to the director or any peace officer upon demand. A copy of the permit holder's transporter
registration issued by the commission shall be kept in each vehicle at all times and presented to the
director or any peace officer upon demand.
(7) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a liquid waste
transportation vehicle without the vehicle registration number assigned to that vehicle by the director
displayed as required by subsection (5) above.
(8) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a liquid waste
transportation vehicle which is not permitted by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/562
(9) A person commits an offense if the person operates a liquid waste transportation vehicle and
fails to display to the director or any peace officer upon demand, a copy of a valid city permit.
(10) A person commits an offense if the person operates a liquid waste transportation vehicle and
fails to display to the director or any peace officer upon demand, a copy of a valid liquid waste
transporter registration issued by the commission.
(d) Grounds for Permit Denial.
(1) The director may deny the issuance of a permit if:
(A) The applicant, a partner of the applicant, a principal in the applicant's business, or
applicant's manager or operator has:
(i) Within the five (5) years preceding the date of the application been convicted of a
misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine exceeding $500.00, and
which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste
transportation business; or
(ii) Been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in
operating a liquid waste transportation business;
(B) The applicant fails to provide evidence of liability insurance or self insurance as required
by this section;
(C) The applicant had a permit, that was issued under this article or its predecessor,
suspended or revoked within the twelve (12) months preceding the date of the application;
(D) The application contains a false statement of material fact;
(E) The application or any other required information is incomplete;
(F) The applicant's vehicle submitted for inspection does not meet the criteria of Section
6.602(b)(9) above. However, the director may issue a permit but exclude from registration those
vehicles not meeting said criteria;
(G) The applicant has not shown proof that the applicant and the applicant's drivers are
qualified under Section 6.602(b)(8) above;
(H) The applicant has violated a provision of this article within the preceding twelve (12)
months; or
(I) The applicant does not have a valid liquid waste transporter registration issued by the
commission.
(2) An applicant whose permit is denied will be notified by the director, in writing, of the denial
and the grounds therefor. Such notice will be sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
mailing address listed on the application.
(e) Permit Conditions. A person who has been issued a permit by the director shall comply with the following:
(1) A permit holder shall immediately notify the director of any management changes in the
business during the time the permit is in effect, and shall provide the director with a photocopy of the
new manager's or chief operating officer's driver's license;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/562
(2) The permit holder shall notify the director of all changes in disposal sites it wants to utilize
during the permit periods, and shall use only those disposal sites permitted or approved by the
commission and the director;
(3) The permit holder shall maintain insurance required by Section 6.602(b)(6) above and
immediately notify the director of any changes in its insurance carrier or policy, and insured status or
self-insured status;
(4) The permit holder shall maintain all vehicles registered under the permit in compliance with the
requirements of Section 6.602(b)(9);
(5) The permit holder shall immediately notify the director when it sells or otherwise disposes of
vehicle registered under the permit;
(6) The permit holder shall maintain vehicle registration numbering in compliance with Section
6.602(c)(5);
(7) The permit holder shall immediately notify the director when the permit holder's waste
transporter registration issued by the commission expires or is suspended or revoked;
(8) A permit holder shall ensure that all of the permit holder's employees collecting and
transporting liquid waste in vehicles registered under the permit remain sufficiently knowledgeable of
such vehicles and of liquid waste facilities they service, so that they are able to collect and transport
liquid waste in a safe and competent manner; and
(9) The permit holder shall ensure that none of the vehicles registered under a permit exceeds state
weight limits while transporting liquid waste.
(f) Permit Modification.
(1) The permit holder may request a modification to the permit during the permit year to register
additional liquid waste transportation vehicles.
(2) A request to register additional vehicles shall be submitted to the director for consideration in a
manner determined by the director.
(3) Additional vehicles shall be submitted to the director for inspection and shall meet the
requirements of Section 6.602(b)(9).
(4) The permit holder shall provide to the director proof of liability insurance or self insurance for
such additional vehicles in accordance with Section 6.602(b)(6).
(5) Before the director modifies the permit, the applicant shall remit a permit fee for each
additional vehicle in accordance with Section 6.602(c)(1).
(6) All additional vehicles are subject to the requirements of this article.
(7) A permit modification shall not extend the term of the permit.
Sec. 6.603 Transporter Responsibilities
(a) Before accepting a load of liquid waste, a transporter shall determine the nature of the liquid waste and
whether the transporter's equipment is sufficient to properly handle the transportation without spillage, leaks, or
release of toxic, odorous or harmful gasses. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall
inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/562
(b) A transporter pumping waste from a liquid waste facility shall remove one hundred percent (100%) of the
contents of such facility. However, in the case of septic tanks, a small residual of sludge may be left for seeding
purposes.
(c) A transporter operating under a city permit shall not transport hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous
industrial solid waste in a vehicle registered under the permit.
(d) A transporter operating under a city permit shall not commingle hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous
industrial solid waste with liquid waste.
(e) A transporter shall not mix incompatible wastes within the same container. A transporter shall not use the
same container or pumping equipment to collect or transport liquid waste which is incompatible with previously
handled waste, without first emptying and cleaning the container and equipment. A transporter may mix wastes
with different characteristics if the disposer to which the waste is being transported is authorized to store,
process, or dispose of such mixed wastes.
(f) A transporter shall handle and dispose of grease trap wastes or grit trap wastes commingled with septage at
an authorized, licensed, disposal site. This waste shall not be disposed of in a publicly-owned treatment works.
(g) A transporter shall not operate a vehicle that fails to meet the requirements of Section 6.602(b)(9).
(h) A transporter shall allow the director or any peace officer to inspect vehicles registered under a permit,
upon their request.
(i) A transporter shall allow the director or any peace officer to obtain samples of liquid waste from the
transporter's vehicle, upon their request.
(j) A transporter shall not empty liquid waste into a generator's solid waste receptacles.
(k) A transporter operating under a city permit shall use a manifest system book consisting of five-part tickets,
purchased from the director in packs of one hundred (100) for forty dollars ($40.00), in the following manner:
(1) Each manifest system book shall be used exclusively for a single vehicle.
(2) A transporter will complete one (1) trip ticket for each individual collection, with the exception
of chemical toilet companies servicing their own units. Such companies shall be exempt from trip
ticket requirements, but shall be required to submit to the director a monthly total of volumes
disposed of and the locations of such disposal, no later than the (10th) day of the month following the
month in which the disposal occurred.
(3) The transporter shall sign the original part of a trip ticket and request the generator to do the
same at the time of the liquid waste collection. The transporter shall not remove liquid waste from the
generator's premises until the generator signs the trip ticket. The transporter shall leave the first copy
(yellow) of the trip ticket with the generator.
(4) The transporter shall have the disposer sign the original part of the trip ticket at the time the
waste is disposed of, and shall leave the second (pink) copy of the trip ticket with the disposer.
(5) The transporter shall retain the third copy (green) of the trip ticket for the transporter's own
records.
(6) The transporter shall return the fourth copy of the trip ticket to the generator within fifteen (15)
days after the waste is received at the disposal facility.
(7) The transporter shall deliver to the director all completed original trip tickets no later than the
tenth (10th) day of the month following the month in which they were completed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/562
(8) The transporter shall retain its copies of all trip tickets for a period of five years and shall make
such copies available to the director, upon request, for inspection at all reasonable times.
(9) A person commits an offense if the person engages in the transportation of liquid waste and
fails to comply with any provision of this section.
Sec. 6.604 Suspension or Revocation of Permit
After notice and hearing the director may suspend for up to six (6) months or may revoke a permit if the director
determines that:
(1) The permit holder, a partner of the permit holder, a principal in the permit holder's business, a
permit holder's manager or operator, or an officer of the permit holder:
(A) Has within the five (5) years preceding the date of the hearing been convicted of a
misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine exceeding $500.00, and which
relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business;
or
(B) Has been convicted of a felony which relates to the duty or responsibility in operating a
liquid waste transportation business;
(2) The permit holder failed to comply with any of the permit conditions stated in Section 6.602(e);
(3) The permit holder or an employee failed to use the manifest system book in compliance with
this article, or to maintain manifests for five years, or to allow the director to inspect the manifest;
(4) The permit holder or an employee improperly disposed of liquid waste;
(5) The permit holder or an employee commingled liquid waste with hazardous waste or class 1
nonhazardous industrial solid waste in a city-permitted vehicle;
(6) The permit holder or an employee refused to allow the director or a peace officer to inspect a
liquid waste transportation vehicle or obtain liquid waste samples from such vehicle;
(7) The permit holder or any employee thereof, within the twelve months preceding the hearing,
was convicted of violating this article; or
(8) The permit holder's liquid waste transporter registration issued by the commission expired, or
was suspended or revoked.
Sec. 6.605 Generator Responsibilities
(a) A generator shall have liquid waste removed from its liquid facilities only by a transporter holding a valid
permit issued by the director to do so.
(b) Prior to liquid wastes being removed from its premises a generator shall determine whether the disposer
who will be disposing of the waste is permitted or approved for such by the commission.
(c) A generator shall determine whether its liquid waste contains hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous
industrial solid waste and shall not have hazardous wastes, class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste, or
hazardous wastes or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid wastes combined with liquid wastes removed from its
premises by a transporter operating under a city permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/562
(d) Prior to a transporter leaving a generator's premises with a load of liquid waste, a generator shall sign the
original of a city trip ticket prepared by the transporter.
(e) A generator shall keep a copy of all city trip tickets for liquid waste collected from its premises, for a
period of five years, and shall make such trip ticket copies available to the director for inspection at all
reasonable times.
(f) A generator shall install or provide liquid waste facilities on its premises of such type and size as specified
by the director.
(g) A generator shall maintain its liquid waste facilities as follows:
(1) Liquid waste facilities shall be maintained in continuous, proper working condition.
(2) Pumping Out of Wastes.
(A) Grease traps located upon the premises of food establishments shall be one hundred
percent (100%) pumped out a minimum of once every ninety (90) days, and at all other times as
necessary to maintain their effectiveness. The director may order a generator to have its grease
traps pumped out more frequently than every ninety (90) days if the director determines such is
necessary for the protection of the sanitary sewer.
(B) Grit traps shall be one hundred percent (100%) pumped out a minimum of once per year;
and at all other times as necessary to maintain their effectiveness. The director may order a
generator to have its grit traps pumped out more frequently than once per year if the director
determines such is necessary for the protection of the sanitary sewer.
(C) Septic tanks shall be pumped out as often as necessary to maintain their effectiveness,
and shall be inspected a minimum of once per year. The tanks shall be one hundred percent
(100%) pumped out except for a small residual of sludge left for seeding purposes.
(3) Liquid waste facilities shall be inspected for seepage into the surrounding media whenever the
trap has been pumped. The generator shall repair, replace, or install apparatus and equipment as
necessary to ensure the proper operation and function of the liquid waste facilities.
(h) A generator shall supervise the servicing of the generator's liquid waste facilities and shall insure that they
are completely emptied by the transporter during such servicing.
(i) A generator shall maintain records of liquid waste facility inspections for three (3) years and shall make
such records available to the director for inspection at all reasonable times.
(j) A generator shall report all spills occurring during collection to the director within 24 hours.
(k) A generator shall immediately clean up or cause to be cleaned up all spills of liquid waste and shall have
the waste properly disposed of by a transporter.
(l) A person commits an offense if the person is a generator of liquid waste and fails to comply with any
provision of this article or any order of the director authorized by this article.
(m) A person commits an offense if the person is a generator of liquid waste and allows liquid waste that emits
noxious odors or offensive odors, or that creates an unsanitary condition or which is injurious to the public
health, to accumulate upon premises under the person's control.
Sec. 6.606 Disposer Responsibilities
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/562
(a) A disposer shall sign the original of a city trip ticket prepared by a transporter operating under a city
permit for all liquid waste received on the disposer's premises from such transporter.
(b) The disposer shall note any significant discrepancies on each copy of the trip ticket.
(1) Trip ticket discrepancies are differences between the quantity or type of waste designated on
the trip ticket and the quantity or type of waste a disposer actually receives.
(2) Significant discrepancies in type are obvious differences which can be discovered by inspection
or waste analysis. Significant discrepancies in quantity are:
(A) For bulk weight, variations greater than ten percent (10%) in weight; and
(B) For liquid waste, any variation greater than fifteen percent (15%) in gallons.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person disposes of liquid waste in violation of subsections (a) or (b) of
this section.
(d) In order to retain city approval of its disposal site, a disposer shall comply with subsections (a) and (b) of
this section, and shall:
(1) Maintain all valid federal, state, and local permits required to operate a disposal site;
(2) Comply with all federal, state, and local laws pertaining to the operations of the disposal site;
(3) Accept only those classes of liquid waste authorized under federal, state, and local laws; and
(4) Dispose of liquid waste in accordance with federal, state, and local laws.
Sec. 6.607 Additional Permit Holder Responsibilities
(a) A permit holder shall immediately notify the director in writing when the liquid waste transportation
business is sold or ceases to operate.
(b) In addition to the written notification required in subsection (a) above, the permit holder shall immediately
deliver to the director:
(1) All completed original trip tickets in the permit holder's possession;
(2) All unused trip tickets in the permit holder's possession; and
(3) The permit holder's permit.
(c) The permit holder shall remove the city registration number from all liquid waste transportation vehicles
upon the sale or cessation of operation of the liquid waste transportation business.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person has a permit to transport liquid waste and violates any provision
of this section.
(e) A permit shall be invalid upon the sale or cessation of operation of a liquid waste transportation business.
Sec. 6.608 Previously Issued Permits
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/562
All permits issued by the director to liquid waste transporters pursuant to the previous version of this article shall
remain valid until their expiration or until their revocation pursuant to the ordinance under which they were
issued.
Sec. 6.609 Interference with Grease Trap, Grit Trap or Sanitary Sewer
A person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes
with or permits the interference with a grease trap, grit trap, or the sanitary sewer.
Sec. 6.610 Bioremediation of Grease Traps
(a) A person commits an offense if the person introduces, causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any
bioremediation media into a grease trap.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection (a) above that the use of the bioremediation
media had been approved by the director, and the media and the use of the media met all criteria of subsection
(c).
(c) Bioremediation media may be used with the director's approval if the person has proved, to the satisfaction
of the director, that:
(1) Laboratory testing which is valid for the type of grease trap to be used has verified that:
(A) The media is a pure live bacterial product and does not contain any surfactants,
emulsifiers, or substances which act as solvents for fat.
(B) The total mass of oil and grease discharge to the sanitary sewer after the use of the media
will not exceed the discharge limits for oil and grease established in the industrial waste
regulations contained in Article 13.600 of Chapter 13 of this Code.
(C) The pH of the discharge is not less than 5 nor greater than 12.
(D) The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap
and does not increase the potential of oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer.
(E) The media is not destroyed by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and
detergents, or by hot water.
(F) Any waste pumped from the grease trap after use of the media is acceptable at disposal
sites for grease trap waste.
(G) The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming or obstruction in the
sanitary sewer.
Sec. 6.611 Nuisances
(a) A vehicle transporting liquid waste which is leaking or spilling from such vehicle is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
(b) Any premises upon which liquid waste has accumulated and which is emitting noxious or offensive odors,
or which is creating an unsanitary condition, or which is injurious to the public health is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/562
(Ordinance 825 adopted 4/11/06)
ARTICLE 6.700 OPERATION OF PUBLIC POOLS, SPAS AND INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURES*
Sec. 6.701 Designation of Public Health Authority
The city designates the county health department and its public health authority for the purpose of ensuring
minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department's function.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to delegate authority or preempt inspection by the city of swimming
pools for compliance with the city's building regulations, this code or other applicable law.
Sec. 6.702 State Regulations and Guidelines Adopted
There is hereby adopted by reference of the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Section 341.064; Tex. Admin.
Code, Sections 265.181–265.208, “Standards for Public Pools and Spas”; and Tex. Admin. Code, Sections
265.301–265.308, “Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains.” A copy of each shall be kept on file in the
official records of the city.
Sec. 6.703 Definitions
All definitions in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Ch. 341 and Title 25, Chapter 265, Subchapter L of the
Texas Department of State Health Services regulations, “Standards for Public Pools and Spas,” are hereby
adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall apply in this article:
Certified Pool Operator. A person who possesses a valid pool operator's certificate from a course approved by
the city.
City. Authorized representatives of the City of Lake Worth, Texas, which shall include the director and
representatives of the Tarrant County Public Health Department.
Director. Director of the Tarrant County Public Health Department, who shall be an authorized representative of
the city with respect to public pool and spa inspections and permitting.
Health Department. Tarrant County Public Health Department.
Pool. Any manmade permanently installed or nonportable structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an
artificial body of water that is used for swimming, diving, aquatic sports, or other aquatic activity other than a
residential pool and that is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of
whether a fee is charged for use. The pool may be either publicly or privately owned. The term does not include
a spa or a decorative fountain that is not used as a pool.
Private Residential Pool. A pool that is located on private property that is intended for use by one single-family
and their invited guests, located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence.
Private Residential Spa. A spa that is located on private property that is intended for use by one single-family
and their invited guests, located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence.
Public Interactive Water Feature and Fountain (PIWF). Any indoor or outdoor installation maintained for public
recreation that includes water sprays, dancing water jets, waterfalls, dumping buckets, or shooting water cannons
in various arrays for the purpose of wetting the persons playing in the spray streams.
Public Pool. Any pool, other than a private residential pool.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/562
Regulatory Authority. The director and representatives of the Tarrant County Public Health Department.
Spa. A constructed permanent or portable structure that is two (2) feet of more in depth and that has a surface
area of two hundred and fifty (250) square feet or less or a volume of three thousand two hundred fifty (3,250)
gallons or less and that is intended to be used for bathing or other recreational uses and is not drained and
refilled after each use. It may include, but is not limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water, mineral
baths, air induction bubbles, or any combination thereof. A spa does not refer to a business establishment, such
as a day spa or a health spa. Industry terminology for a spa includes, but is not limited to, “hydrotherapy pool,”
“whirlpool,” “hot tub,” etc. A spa does not include a private residential spa.
Sec. 6.704 Permits
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public pool, spa, or interactive water feature in
the city without a current and valid pool, spa, or interactive water feature permit issued by the regulatory
authority.
(b) Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the public pool for which
it is issued or on file in a secure area of the permitted facility's premises.
(c) Nontransferable (change of ownership). Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not
transferable. Upon change of ownership of a business, the new business owner will be required to meet current
standards as defined in the city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. The new owner shall
notify the city within ten (10) days after assuming ownership of the public pool, spa, or interactive water feature.
(d) Multiple Permits. A separate permit shall be required for every public pool, spa, or interactive water
feature, except that public pools, spas, or interactive water features on a single water filtration system require
one (1) permit.
(e) Denial of Permit. A permit may be denied if the city, upon inspection, determines that the requestor has
failed to comply with approved plans and specifications adopted in accordance with these rules.
(f) Inspection for Permits. An inspection shall be required annually to qualify for a permit. A permit is valid
for one (1) year from the date of issuance. The regulatory authority shall perform the annual inspections for
compliance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 6.705 Review of Plans/Specifications
(a) Submission of Plans. Before construction or extensive remodeling on a public pool, spa, and/or interactive
water feature begins, the person proposing to construct or remodel shall submit an application to the regulatory
authority for review and approval. The application shall include:
(1) The construction or remodeling plans, under an engineer's seal, and specifications stating that
the proposed construction or remodeling complies with these rules and indicating that the proposed
layout, mechanical plans, construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed
fixed equipment and facilities;
(2) The date on or after which proposed construction is to begin;
(3) The name, address, and phone number of the entity primarily responsible for constructing the
public pool, spa, or interactive water feature and the name, address, and phone number of the entity
responsible for operating the public pool, spa, or interactive water feature;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/562
(4) A check or money order in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the plan
review and opening inspection fee, payable to the county; and
(5) Any additional information necessary to verify compliance.
(b) Approval. The city and the regulatory authority shall approve plans and specifications that meet the
requirements of this article and all other provisions of this code. No public pool, spa, or interactive water feature
shall be constructed or extensively remodeled except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by
the city.
Sec. 6.706 Inspections
(a) Preoperational Inspections. The city and/or the regulatory authority shall inspect a newly constructed or
remodeled public pool, spa, or interactive water feature prior to operation to determine compliance with
approved plans and specifications, and with the requirements of these regulations. Requested inspections must
be made a minimum of three (3) working days prior to the desired public pool, spa, or interactive water feature
opening date.
(b) Inspections. The city and/or the regulatory authority shall inspect all public pools, spas, and interactive
water features at least once per year. The owner or operator shall request an inspection by permit application
providing the public pool, spa, or interactive water feature owner's name, address, and telephone number and, if
different, the public pool, spa, or interactive water feature operator's name, address, and telephone number.
(c) Inspection Fees. A fee, as set forth in this article, shall be required to be paid for preoperational
inspections, and thereafter, on an annual basis. Fees shall be paid to Tarrant County Public Health Department at
1101 South Main, Fort Worth, Texas 76104. Only one permit will be required for a public pool, spa, or
interactive water feature connected to a single filtration system. Inspection fees shall be based on the number of
filtration systems located at a single address. This fee shall be separate from the fee the city shall collect
pursuant to section 3.1781 of this code.
(1) Plan Review and Opening Inspection Fee: $150.00.
(2) Annual Permit/Inspection (per filtration system): $250.00.
(3) Required Reinspection: $75.00.
Sec. 6.707 Closures
(a) Closures. A public pool, spa, or interactive water feature shall be closed if any of the following conditions
occur:
(1) Disinfectant level below the minimums set by the Texas Department of State Health Services;
(2) pH below 7.0;
(3) Inability to see bottom drain (poor visibility);
(4) Chlorine levels above eight (8) ppm; or
(5) Any other imminent health hazards.
(b) Notice. A closed sign shall immediately be posted and the public pool, spa, or interactive water feature
access gate shall be locked until all violations have been corrected.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/562
Sec. 6.708 Records
Daily records for each permitted public pool, spa, or interactive water feature shall be kept on premises and shall
include information pertaining to:
(1) Disinfectant–three (3) times per day;
(2) pH–three (3) times per day;
(3) Alkalinity–one (1) time per week;
(4) Chemicals added–noted by name, amount, and date; and
(5) Other information needed to ensure the facility's proper operation.
Sec. 6.709 Suspension and Revocation of Permit
(a) Notice of Suspension. The city may temporarily suspend the permit of a public pool, spa, or interactive
water feature for noncompliance with state public pool, spa, or interactive water feature standards, by issuing a
written notice for suspension. When a permit is suspended public pool, spa, or interactive water feature
operations shall immediately cease. A closed sign shall be immediately posted and the public pool, spa, or
interactive water feature access gate shall be locked until any and all violations have been corrected.
(b) Reinstatement of Permit After Suspension. Whenever a notice of suspension is issued by the city, the
holder of the permit or the person in charge will be given an opportunity to correct the violation(s) prior to final
revocation of the permit. The city may end the suspension any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(c) Revocation of Permit. The city may, after providing notice of pending revocation and an opportunity for a
hearing revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for
interference with the city in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the city shall notify the holder of
the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that
the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice. Unless a written
request for a hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit within such ten (10) day period, the
revocation of the permit becomes final.
(d) Service of Notices. A notice provided for in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the
holder of the permit or the person in charge of the public pool, spa, or interactive water feature operations, or
when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address listed on the permit
application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
(e) Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time
and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority shall
make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(f) Right of Appeal. Any permit holder who wishes to dispute the decision of a hearing may appeal the
decision to the director of the county public health department.
(g) Application After Revocation. Final revocation of a public pool, spa, or interactive water feature permit
shall not prevent the holder of a revoked permit from making written application for a new permit to the
regulatory authority.
(h) Closed Public Pool, Spa, or Interactive Water Feature. Prior to reopening, the owner or operator shall
provide the application and fee required by section 6.705(a) if a public pool, spa, or interactive water feature:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/562
(1) Closes voluntarily at the request of the regulatory authority on more than two occasions in one
(1) calendar year; or
(2) Closes on court order on more than two (2) occasions in one (1) calendar year.
Sec. 6.710 Operator Certification
(a) Requirement. The person in charge of public pool, spa, or interactive water feature operations at a class C
pool as defined by the adopted regulations, shall have at least one (1) certified public pool, spa, or interactive
water feature operator employed to maintain the public pool, spa, or interactive water feature for each apartment
complex or municipal location. The certificate must be kept on premises to facilitate inspections.
(b) Termination of Certified Public Pool, Spa, or Interactive Water Feature Operator. In the event that a
certified public pool, spa, or interactive water feature operator is terminated or transferred, the business shall
have sixty (60) days from the operator's termination or transfer date to designate a new certificate holder. This
requirement is applicable even if public pool, spa, or interactive water feature maintenance operations are
contracted to an outside company.
Sec. 6.711 Violations and Penalties
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses, or fails to comply with or who
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.109 of this code for
each offense, and each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 976 adopted 11/8/11)
ARTICLE 6.800 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC WATER WELLS
Sec. 6.801 Purpose
(a) This article sets forth uniform requirements for the uses and the construction of facilities in or on land
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the wells in order to promote sanitary conditions in and around such
wells, to secure all such land from pollution hazards, and to enable the city to comply with all applicable state
and local regulations.
(b) The objective of this article is to prevent certain uses and the construction of facilities in or on land
surrounding the wells, which might create a danger of pollution to the water produced from such wells.
Sec. 6.802 Definitions
Unless the context required otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
City. The City of Lake Worth, Texas.
City Council. The city council of the city.
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, government entity, or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents,
successors, or assigns.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/562
Wells. The water wells owned and operated by the city.
Sec. 6.803 Prohibited Activities
The following activities are prohibited within the designated areas of land surrounding the wells:
(1) Construction and/or operation of underground petroleum and/or chemical storage tanks and
liquid transmission pipelines, stock pens, feedlots, dump grounds, privies, cesspools, septic tanks,
sewage treatment drain fields, absorption beds, evapotranspiration beds, improperly constructed
water wells of any depth, and all other construction or operation that could create an unsanitary
condition is prohibited within, upon, or across all areas of land within a 150-foot radius of the wells.
For the purposes of this article, “improperly constructed water wells” are those wells that do not meet
the surface and subsurface construction standards for a public water supply well.
(2) Construction of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, storm sewers, and
cemeteries is specifically prohibited within, upon, or across any area of land within a 50-foot radius
of the wells.
(3) Construction of homes or buildings upon any area of land within a 150-foot radius of the wells
is permitted, provided the restrictions described in subsections (1) and (2) above are met.
(4) Normal farming and ranching operations are not prohibited by this article; provided, however,
livestock shall not be allowed within a 50-foot radius of the wells.
Sec. 6.804 Right of Entry
City employees, or authorized representatives of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to immediately enter upon any premises located within a 150-foot radius of any well to conduct an
inspection or observation necessary to enforce this section.
(Ordinance 726 adopted 10/14/03)
ARTICLE 6.900 MOSQUITO CONTROL
Sec. 6.901 Purpose
It is the intent of this article to control and reduce the mosquito population by removing, draining, treating,
altering, or otherwise eliminating breeding sources for mosquitoes. The goal is to establish an effective program
of mosquito control through such things as the elimination or treatment of breeding sources for mosquitoes,
elimination of identified mosquito populations, and alleviation of all other such conditions found to be
conducive to the reproduction or continued existence of mosquitoes.
Sec. 6.902 Definitions
Artificial Container. Any bucket, barrel, tire, bottle, tub, tank, gutter, birdbath, swimming pool, ornamental
pond, flower pot, jar or any other such manmade items capable of collecting water.
Breeding Source. Any condition capable of sustaining the reproduction of mosquitoes. This shall include both
artificial container and natural conditions or containers.
Enforcement Officer. Any code enforcement officer of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/562
EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Evidence of Mosquito Breeding. The natural presence of mosquito larva, pupa, or their remains.
Insecticide. A chemical agent which kills or prevents the reproduction of insects.
Larva. The immature, fully aquatic stage of mosquito development in which the insect appears as a small,
wingless, worm-like form.
Larvicide. A chemical agent which kills or prevents the reproduction of mosquito larvae.
Mosquito. A small long legged, two-winged insect of the family Culicidae, in which the female of the species is
distinguished by a long proboscis for sucking blood.
Occupant. The person who has the use of or occupies any building or any part thereof or who has the use or
possession, actual or constructive, of the premises whether the owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or
vacant portions of a building, or in case of occupancy in whole or in part by the owner, the owner of the building
shall be deemed to be, and shall have the responsibility of an occupant of such building.
Owner. The person owning the building or premises.
Natural Body of Water. Any spring, stream, pond, lake, or wetland that was historically present in a natural state
but may have been physically altered over time. A pond built in an area where there was no surface water or
wetland present is not a natural body of water.
Person. Any individual, proprietorship, corporation, firm, association, or other legal entity.
Premises. A parcel of real property, including all buildings and structures located thereon.
Pupa. The immature, fully aquatic stage of mosquito development immediately following the larval stage and
preceding the adult form in which the insect appears as a small, wingless, worm-like shape with a greatly
enlarged head.
Stock Tank. A manmade pond or artificial container used to provide drinking water for livestock such as cattle or
horses.
Sec. 6.903 General Provisions
(a) All premises within the city shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes
on the premises. Artificial containers, ditches, streams, and all other such sources of standing water or other
liquid that serve as breeding sources must be removed, drained, treated, altered, maintained, or otherwise
eliminated by the person occupying the premises or, in the absence of an occupant, by the owner, in such a
manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes.
(b) Where there is evidence of mosquito breeding, effective methods of eliminating and treating mosquito
breeding sources shall be instigated by the person occupying the premises, or in the absence of an occupant, by
the owner, after discovering or being informed of the evidence of mosquito breeding on the premises.
(c) The owner or occupant of a premises with a natural body of water shall not be responsible for maintaining
such natural body of water to eliminate mosquito breeding, but shall cooperate with the city in eliminating the
breeding source if the natural body of water is suspected of or has been determined to be a breeding source.
(d) The owner or occupant of premises a with a stock tank shall manage the stock tank to minimize breeding
of mosquitoes without using any substance that will impair the use of the water for livestock.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/562
Sec. 6.904 Methods of Eliminating and Treating Mosquito Breeding Sources
Breeding sources for mosquitoes shall be treated by one or more of the following methods to eliminate the
breeding source:
(1) Filling, draining, removing, or otherwise eliminating the breeding source.
(2) Completely emptying the breeding source of all water at least every five calendar days. Where
an artificial container is a water basin (such as a swimming pool, pond, birdbath, etc.) designed for
the purpose of holding water, such containers shall be maintained or altered to prevent mosquito
breeding or be removed.
(3) Treating the breeding source with an effective insecticide and/or Larvicide in accordance with
the label and/or directions established with the EPA.
(4) Completely emptying artificial containers of all liquid and storing in such a manner as to
prevent the permanent collection of liquid in said containers.
(5) Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of cans, boxes, broken or empty bottles, discarded
vehicle tires, and similar objects likely to hold water.
(6) Maintain all natural or manmade storm or surface water drain ways in a manner to prevent the
ponding of water sufficient to provide breeding for mosquitoes.
(7) Other methods proven to be effective in controlling mosquitoes as approved by the
enforcement officer.
State law references–Mosquito breeding places declared public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 341.011(7);
protection of impounded water from disease-bearing mosquitoes, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 341.038.
Sec. 6.905 Right of Entry–Inspection
(a) The enforcement officer shall have the right of entry upon any premises where entry is necessary to carry
out the provisions of this article. If consent for entry is not given or obtained, an administrative search and
inspection warrant shall be obtained.
(b) The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are
breeding therein, and failure to prevent such breeding within three calendar days after notice by the enforcement
officer shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(c) Should the occupant, owner, or other person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of
mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same within three days after due notice has
been given to him or her, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary cost incurred
by him for this purpose shall be charged against the occupant, owner, or other person offending, as the case may
be.
Sec. 6.906 Notice
Whenever this article provides for notice to be given to a person, that notice may be given by delivering a
written notice to the person or by mailing a written notice to the person.
Sec. 6.907 Penalties and Remedies
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/562
In addition to any other remedy provided by this article or other law, any person who violates any provision of
this article shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate violation.
(Ordinance 1008 adopted 8/13/13)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.100 MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD*
Sec. 7.101 Court Established
The city council hereby establishes the city municipal court as a municipal court of record in order to provide a
more efficient disposition of cases arising in the city, and to more effectively enforce the ordinances of the city.
The municipal court shall become a court of record from and after the 1st day of January 1998, and shall be
designated the “municipal court of record in the city.” (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12A)
Sec. 7.102 Municipal Court Jurisdiction
The municipal court of record has the jurisdiction provided by Section 30.00005 of the Government Code. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12B)
Sec. 7.103 Terms of Government Code Adopted
This municipal court of record is established pursuant to the authority granted in Chapter 30 of the Government
Code of the State of Texas, and the terms set forth therein are hereby adopted governing the operation of said
court. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12C)
Sec. 7.104 Municipal Court Judge
The municipal court of record shall be presided over by a municipal judge appointed by the city council who
shall serve for a two (2) year term concurrent with that of the mayor. The municipal judge must be a licensed
attorney in good standing in the State of Texas and must have two or more years of experience in the practice of
law in Texas. The judge must be a citizen of the United States and a resident of the State of Texas. A person may
not serve as a municipal judge if the person is employed by the city. A municipal judge who accepts
employment with the city vacates the judicial office. The city council shall set the salary of the municipal judge
of the municipal court of record. The amount of the judge's salary may not be diminished during the judge's term
of office. The salary may not be based directly or indirectly on fines, fees, or costs collected by the court. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12D)
Sec. 7.105 Vacancies Substitute Judge
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/562
If a vacancy occurs in the office of a municipal judge of a court of record, the city council shall by ordinance
appoint a qualified person to fill the office for the remainder of the unexpired term. The city council may appoint
one or more qualified persons to be available to serve for a municipal judge who is temporarily absent due to
illness, family death, continuing legal or judicial education programs, or any other reason. The municipal judge
shall select one of the qualified persons appointed by the city council to serve during the absence of the
municipal judge. The substitute judge, while serving as a municipal judge, has all the powers and shall discharge
all the duties of a municipal judge. A substitute judge must meet the qualifications prescribed for the municipal
judge. The city council shall set the compensation for the substitute judge. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1,
Section 12E)
Sec. 7.106 Supervision and Control of the Court
The municipal judge shall supervise and control the operation and clerical functions of the administrative
department of the municipal court of record, including the court's personnel, during the proceedings or docket of
the court. At all other times, the operation and clerical functions of the administrative department of the
municipal court shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager or his/her designee. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12F; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 7.107 Magistrates
The city council may appoint one or more magistrates who need not possess all the qualifications necessary to
be a municipal court judge of the court of record. The magistrate may conduct an arraignment, hold an indigence
hearing, accept a plea, sign a judgment, set the amount of bond and perform other functions under Article 15.17
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. A magistrate may not preside over the court or hear contested cases. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12G)
Sec. 7.108 Appointment of Court Clerk and Court Personnel
The city manager or his/her designee shall appoint a clerk of the municipal court of record, who shall be known
as the municipal court clerk. The municipal court clerk shall keep the records of the municipal court of record,
issue process, and generally perform the duties of a clerk of a county court at law exercising criminal
jurisdiction. In the annual budget, the city council may provide for deputy clerks, warrant officers, and other
personnel as needed for the proper operation of the municipal court of record. During proceedings of the court,
the clerk and court personnel shall serve at the direction of the municipal court judge. At all other times they
shall serve at the direction and supervision of the city manager or his/her designee who shall have the authority
to remove the court personnel according to rules set forth in the city's personnel policies. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12H; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 7.109 Court Reporter
The municipal court clerk shall appoint a court reporter who must meet the qualifications provided by law for
official court reporters. The court reporter or court staff may use written notes, transcribing equipment, video or
audio recording equipment, or a combination of those methods to record the proceedings of the court. The court
reporter or court staff are not required to record testimony in any case unless the judge or one of the parties
requests a record in writing, and files the request with the court before trial. If a record is made, it shall be kept
for the 20 day period beginning the day after the last day of the court proceeding, trial or denial of motion for
new trial, whichever occurs last. The court reporter is not required to be present during proceedings of the
municipal court of record, provided that proceedings that are required to be recorded are recorded by a good
quality electronic recording device. If a case is appealed, the proceedings shall be transcribed from the recording
by an official court reporter. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12I)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/562
Sec. 7.110 Seal
The court clerk is directed to acquire a seal in conformance with state law for the municipal court of record.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12J)
Sec. 7.111 Jury
The court clerk shall supervise the selection of persons for jury service in the municipal court of record. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12K)
Sec. 7.112 Transcript Preparation Fee
In the event of an appeal, the appellant shall pay a transcript preparation fee in the amount of $25.00. The
transcript preparation fee does not include the fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings. The clerk shall note
the payment of the fee on the docket of the court. If the case is reversed on appeal, the fee shall be refunded to
the appellant. In addition to the transcript preparation fee, the fee for the actual transcript of the proceedings and
statement of facts must be paid by the appellant. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12L)
ARTICLE 7.200 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND*
Sec. 7.201 Establishment
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, hereinafter referred to as the
“fund,” pursuant to Article 102.0172, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account or may be maintained in the general revenue
account.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12M)
Sec. 7.202 Establishment of Amount of the Fee and Assessment and Collection
(a) The amount of the fee shall be the maximum fee authorized by Article 102.0172 of the Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure. (Ordinance 748 adopted 7/20/04)
(b) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in
the city municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) a sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) the person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community
supervision; or
(3) the court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999.
(d) The court clerk shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director of the city, who shall deposit the
fee into the municipal court technology fund.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12M)
Sec. 7.203 Designated Use of the Fund and Administration
(a) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of or maintain technological enhancements for the
municipal court of the City of Lake Worth, Texas, including:
(1) computer systems;
(2) computer networks;
(3) computer hardware;
(4) computer software;
(5) imaging systems;
(6) electronic kiosks;
(7) electronic ticket writers;
(8) docket management systems; and
(9) any other item permitted by law.
(b) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Lake Worth.
(Ordinance 745 adopted 7/13/04)
ARTICLE 7.300 MUNICIPAL COURT CHILD SAFETY FUND
Sec. 7.301 Fund Created
There is hereby created a municipal child safety trust fund. This fund shall be administered under the direction
of the city council of the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12N)
Sec. 7.302 Fee Assessed
(a) A person convicted of an offense regarding the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as allowed by
Section 542.202, Texas Transportation Code or Chapter 682, Texas Transportation Code, shall pay as court costs
on each parking violation the maximum amount authorized by Article 102.014(b), Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure, in addition to other taxable court costs.
(b) A person convicted of an offense under Subtitle C, Title 7, Texas Transportation Code, when the offense
occurs within a school crossing zone as defined by Section 541.302 of that Code, shall pay as court costs the
maximum amount provided for in Texas Transportation Code, Section 102.014(c), in addition to other taxable
court costs.
(c) A person convicted of an offense under Section 25.093, Texas Education Code, or Section 25.094, Texas
Education Code, shall pay as court costs the maximum amount authorized by Article 102.014 (d), Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure, in addition to other taxable court costs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/562
(d) The additional court costs under this article shall be collected by the municipal court clerk and paid to the
official who discharges the duties of municipal treasurer for deposit in the child safety trust fund. The municipal
court clerk shall keep separate records of money collected under this article.
(Ordinance 748 adopted 7/20/04)
Sec. 7.303 Conviction
A person is considered convicted for purposes of this article if:
(1) A sentence is imposed;
(2) The person received probation or deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
Sec. 7.304 Fund Purposes
The municipal child safety trust fund must be used for a school crossing guard program if the city operates one.
If the city does not operate a school crossing guard program, or if the money received from court costs exceeds
the amount necessary to fund the school crossing guard program, the city may either deposit the money in an
interest bearing account or expend it for programs designed to enhance child safety, health, or nutrition,
including child abuse prevention and intervention, drug and alcohol abuse prevention, or any other purpose
permitted by law.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12N)
ARTICLE 7.400 MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND*
Sec. 7.401 Fund Created
There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund. This fund shall be administered under the
direction of the city council of the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12O)
Sec. 7.402 Fee Assessed
All defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be required to pay the maximum
security fee authorized by Article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure as a cost of court, in
addition to other taxable court costs. A person is considered convicted for purposes of this article if a sentence is
imposed on the person, the person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication, or the court
defers final disposition of the person's case. The security fee shall be collected by the municipal court clerk and
paid to the official who discharges the duties of municipal treasurer for deposit in the municipal court building
security fund. (Ordinance 748 adopted 7/20/04)
Sec. 7.403 Fund Purposes
The municipal court building security fund may be used only to finance the following items when used for the
purpose of providing security services for any buildings housing the municipal court of the city:
(1) The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/562
(2) Hand-held metal detectors;
(3) Walk-through metal detectors;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personal during times when
they are providing appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains or other security hardware;
(10) The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass;
(11) Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel; and
(12) Any other item or service permitted by law.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 12O)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.100 HANDBILLS, SIGNS, ETC.
Sec. 8.101 Unlawful to Post Without Consent; Removal
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post, fasten, erect or display, or so cause to be
posted, fastened, erected or displayed, any political, commercial or other type of handbill, sign, poster or
advertisement on any structure, tree, pole, curb or elsewhere within the right-of-way of any public street, or upon
any public property within the city, without the express permission of the city, or upon any private property, real,
personal or mixed, within the city, without the express permission of the owner thereof.
(b) When any handbill, sign, poster or advertisement shall be found posted, fastened, erected or displayed in
violation of this article, same shall be prima facie evidence that such unlawful posting, fastening, erecting or
displaying was caused by the person, firm or corporation advertised thereby only if such person, firm or
corporation advertised thereby refuses or fails to remove same after having been notified that such handbill sign,
poster or advertisement is in violation of this article; and each day that such handbill, sign, poster or
advertisement shall remain so posted, fastened, erected or displayed shall constitute a separate violation of this
article.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 1A)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/562
Sec. 8.102 Penalty for Violations
That any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in accordance
with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code and each day's violation thereof shall
constitute a separate offense. The violation shall commence twelve (12) hours after notice has been given for
removal. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 1B)
ARTICLE 8.200 DAMAGING OR DETAINING LIBRARY MATERIALS
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who borrows library materials to fail to return any such overdue library
materials within thirty (30) days after a warning letter is sent to the person pursuant to the Mary Lou Reddick
Public Library Policies adopted by the library board and the city council.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person who borrows library materials to fail to pay any costs for repair or
replacement of any such library materials within thirty (30) days after a warning letter is sent to the person
pursuant to the Mary Lou Reddick Public Library Policies adopted by the Library Board and the city council.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 2)
ARTICLE 8.300 DISCHARGING FIREARMS
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind, or to discharge an air rifle
or air pistol of any description by whatever name known that by means of compressed air, compressed gas,
springs, or any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets, or any solid object at a velocity in excess of
three hundred (300) feet per second, or to discharge any cannon cracker or torpedo on or across any public
square, street or alley within three hundred (300) feet of any business establishment or residence in the city. A
“cannon cracker” is any combustible package more than two (2) inches long and more than one (1) inch through.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 3)
ARTICLE 8.400 NOISE
Sec. 8.401 Loud Noise Prohibited
(a) Any unreasonable loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury
to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited.
(b) Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration, which substantially interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities, is declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 4A)
Sec. 8.402 Loud Noises Enumerated
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this article; but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in such manner or with such
volume, during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort,
or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/562
(2) The use of any loudspeaker or amplifier of such intensity that annoys and disturbs persons of
ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof, except by permit issued by the city manager
or his/her designee for nonpolitical purposes.
(3) The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall
disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(4) The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle except as a danger or warning signal; the creation of noise
by means of any such signal device of any unreasonable loud or harsh device for any unnecessary
and unreasonable period of time.
(5) The running of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in
such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring, or rattling noise or vibrations.
(6) The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of danger.
(7) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(8) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is
effectively muffled and reduced.
(9) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work on any building other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in
the interest of public safety and convenience, and then only by permit from the city council, which
permit may be renewed by the council during the time the emergency exists.
(10) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution of
learning while the same is in session or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with
the workings of such institutions, providing conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner
indicating that the same is a school or hospital area.
(11) The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of
any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
(12) The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors, which disturbs the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood.
(13) The use of any bell, drum, loudspeaker, whistle, or other instrument or device for the purpose
of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale of merchandise.
(14) The parking or storage between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any motor vehicle,
with any motor or motors affixed thereto left in operation, for a period in excess of one (1) hour,
within a distance of two hundred (200) feet from any family dwelling.
(15) The commercial changing of automobile or truck tires by use of metal tire irons and tools
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within a distance of two hundred (200) feet from any
family dwelling.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 4B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 8.500 ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/562
Sec. 8.501 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings provided in this section:
Antique Vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old.
Junked Vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have a valid registration lawfully attached to it;
(2) Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(3) Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(A) Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours if the vehicle is on public property; or
(B) Thirty (30) consecutive days if the vehicle is on private property.
(4) For the purpose of this article, “junked vehicle” includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or
watercraft. This article applies only to:
(A) A motor vehicle that displays an expired registration or does not display a license plate;
(B) An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal
aircraft identification number registered under Federal Aviation Administration aircraft
registration regulations in 14 C.F.R part 47; or
(C) A watercraft that:
(i) Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number; and
(ii) Is not a watercraft described by section 31.055 Parks and Wildlife Code.
Motor Vehicle Collector. A person who:
(1) Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
(2) Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or
special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle
for historic interest.
Special Interest Vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's
specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
Sec. 8.502 Junked Vehicles Declared Public Nuisance
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place
or public right-of-way:
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/562
(4) Creates a fire hazard;
(5) Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
(6) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and
(7) Is a public nuisance.
Sec. 8.503 Notice
(a) The procedures for the abatement and removal of a public nuisance under this article must provide not less
than ten (10) days' notice of the nature of the nuisance. The notice must be personally delivered, sent by certified
mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature
confirmation service to:
(1) The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
(2) Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
(3) The owner or occupant of the property upon which the nuisance is located or the owner or
occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the nuisance is located.
(b) The notice must state that:
(1) The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth (10th) day after the date on
which the notice was personally delivered or mailed;
(2) Any request for a hearing must be made before that 10-day period expires; and
(3) Failure to abate the nuisance or failure to attend the hearing after notice constitutes a waiver by
the owner and lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to dispose of
the junked vehicle under the terms of chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code.
(c) If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be
placed on the nuisance, or, if the owner is located, personally delivered.
(d) If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance
shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh (11th) day after the date of the return of the notice.
Sec. 8.504 Hearing
(a) If the junked vehicle is not removed and abated within the prescribed time period, the municipal court
judge shall hold a public hearing on the abatement and removal of the junked vehicle. At the hearing, the
municipal court judge shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive
testimony from owners, witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to such alleged public nuisance.
The hearing may be continued from time to time.
(b) At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed to be inoperable, unless demonstrated otherwise by
the owner.
(c) Following the hearing, the municipal court judge shall consider all evidence and determine whether the
vehicle, or any part thereof, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the municipal court judge finds that a
public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, and that the notice
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/562
requirements provided in this article have been met, the municipal court judge shall make a written order setting
forth his findings and ordering that the nuisance be abated.
(d) If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the order requiring removal of the nuisance
must include:
(1) For a motor vehicle, the motor vehicle's:
(A) Description;
(B) Vehicle identification number; and
(C) License plate number;
(2) For an aircraft, the aircraft's:
(A) Description; and
(B) Federal aircraft identification number as described by Federal Aviation Administration
aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. part 47; and
(3) For a watercraft, the watercraft's:
(A) Description; and
(B) Identification number as set forth in the watercraft's certificate of number.
(4) A statement that the vehicle will be disposed of in accordance with the Texas Transportation
Code.
(e) The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the corporate city
limits of the city after a proceeding for the abatement or removal of the public nuisance has commenced, has no
effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
Sec. 8.505 Abatement of Nuisance
In the event the municipal court judge orders abatement of the nuisance, the city or any duly authorized person
may abate such public nuisance by removal and disposal of the junked vehicle.
Sec. 8.506 Junked Vehicles Not to be Reconstructed or Made Operable After Removal
After any junked vehicle has been removed under the authority of this article, it shall not be reconstructed or
made operable again.
Sec. 8.507 Notice to Department of Transportation
No later than the fifth (5th) day after the date of removal of a junked vehicle pursuant to this article, notice must
be given to the state department of transportation. Such notice must identify the vehicle or vehicle part.
Sec. 8.508 Disposal of Junked Vehicles
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/562
Any junked vehicles taken into custody by the city or any duly authorized person pursuant to a provision of this
article shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable provisions of chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation
Code.
Sec. 8.509 Application of This Article
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is:
(1) Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street
or other public or private property; or
(2) Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor
vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any,
are:
(A) Maintained in an orderly manner;
(B) Not a health hazard; and
(C) Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly
growing trees, or shrubbery.
Sec. 8.510 Offense
(a) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by Section 8.502.
(b) An offense under this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. Each day an offense occurs shall be a separate offense.
Sec. 8.511 Enforcement
(a) Any peace officer, code enforcement officer or other regularly salaried, full-time city employee is
authorized to enforce this article. Such employee may issue a warning or a citation before issuing a notice
pursuant to Section 8.503.
(b) Upon conviction of a violation of this article, the municipal court judge shall order that the vehicle be
abated and removed within a prescribed period of time. The judge's order shall provide that if the vehicle is not
removed within the prescribed period of time, the city may remove the vehicle in accordance with state law.
(c) The enforcement remedies authorized under this article shall not be deemed exclusive and the city reserves
the right to seek any enforcement remedy available at law or in equity. The failure of the city to seek
enforcement by any means shall not foreclose the enforcement of this article by any other means.
Sec. 8.512 Abandoned Vehicles
An abandoned vehicle left upon public property or public rights-of-way constitutes a nuisance and may he
abated in accordance with state law.
(Ordinance 1048 adopted 7/14/15)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/562
ARTICLE 8.600 NUISANCES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Sec. 8.601 Nuisance on Private Property Defined
For the purposes of this article, the term “nuisance” is defined to mean any condition or use of premises or of
building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others, causes or tends to cause substantial diminution
in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located, or any such condition or
use of premises that is dangerous to human health or welfare. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or
the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of the following:
(1) Lumber, building materials, junk, trash or debris;
(2) Storage of furniture, other than furniture designed for outside use, household items, products of
a commercial trade or business enterprise, whether such items are so used or not outside;
(3) Abandoned discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, cans, or containers;
(4) Items of salvage such as scrap metals, rags, papers, bottles, cans, and similar items;
(5) Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant
odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects;
(6) Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or permit
another to keep, upon any premises deleterious or septic material, unless such material is retained in
containers or vessels which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents and animals;
(7) Any inoperable, dismantled, wrecked or junked vehicles, motorized or otherwise;
(8) Any dead or damaged tree which poses a serious threat to life or property on the premises,
adjacent premises, or adjacent public right-of-way.
(Ordinance 1007 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 8.602 Duty to Maintain Private Property
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance
thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in
the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 6B)
Sec. 8.603 Notice to Remove or Abate Nuisance
(a) Upon becoming aware of nuisance conditions set forth herein, the police chief or his designated
representative shall make a determination whether or not the conditions and circumstances constitute a nuisance
as herein defined. If it is determined that the conditions constitute a nuisance, the police chief shall cause a
written notice to be given to the owner, tenant or person in control of said premises, or an agent thereof, to
remove or abate the nuisance. Such notice shall state the nature of the nuisance and that it must be removed or
abated within ten (10) days and that failure to do so may cause a complaint to be filed in municipal court for
violation of maintaining a nuisance. Such notice shall be given by delivering the written notice personally or by
leaving it at his or her dwelling or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion residing
therein or by mailing the written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the whereabouts of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/562
owner of the property is unknown, the notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address listed on the tax roll and by publication in the official newspaper on two (2) separate days at
least six (6) days apart. Where the notice is mailed it shall be prima facie evidence of service if an executed
return receipt is received.
(b) Where after diligence has been exercised to serve notice to the owner, tenant, or person in control of said
premises or agents thereof, and such notice cannot be delivered and/or where such notice has been served but the
nuisance has not been removed or abated within the ten (10) day period, the police chief shall then cause a
summons to be obtained and delivered to the owner, tenant or person in control of said premises, or an
authorized agent thereof, requiring such condition to be abated or to appear before the municipal court of the city
at a stated time and place. The summons shall be served to the defendant by a peace officer by delivering a copy
to him personally; or leaving it at his usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion
residing therein; or by mailing to the defendant's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The summons shall state the nature of the nuisance on the property and that it must be removed or abated within
ten (10) days or the complaint will be heard in municipal court for violation of maintaining a nuisance as defined
in this article, and furthermore, any person found guilty of maintaining such nuisance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109
of this code for each offense and that the municipal court shall order the removal and abatement of the nuisance.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 6C)
Sec. 8.604 City May Remove or Abate Nuisance
If the owner, tenant or person in control of said premises, or agent thereof, fails to comply with the order to
remove or abate any nuisance, then in addition to any fine which may be levied against such person, the court
may allow the city to remove or abate such nuisance. The city may then cause the said nuisance to be removed
or abated, and the expenses of such procedure shall be charged against the owner and shall thereupon become a
valid and enforceable personal obligation of the owner of such premises which may be recovered by the city in a
suit brought for that purpose, and the city may assess the expenses on the property on which the nuisance is
located or situated and make the same a lien thereon. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 6D)
Sec. 8.605 Filing Statement of Expenses; Lien
(a) Whenever the city shall have performed any work or paid any necessary expenses in connection with any
work done in the removal or abatement of any nuisance, it shall be the duty of the mayor to immediately prepare
and deliver or mail to the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was located an itemized statement in
the form of an affidavit, duly sworn to, of all such work performed and all costs and expenses incurred and paid
by the city in connection therewith. Said statement shall be sent to the owner of said property if his true address
is known; if not, then to the owner of record according to the last official tax roll of the city at the address carried
in connection therewith. Such affidavit, among other things and provisions shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of owner, and name and address of tenant or agent of property if known, and
if unknown, recite the fact;
(2) Description of the property sufficient to identify same, and where property has been
subdivided, a description by lot and block number of any particular subdivision shall be sufficient, or
the description as per the revised map of the city;
(3) Statement of the action of the city;
(4) Itemized statement of the work done and performed, together with the cost thereof opposite
each item; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/562
(5) Statement of payment made by the city to other parties, and to whom made, or reasonable
charges by any concerned city department.
(b) Upon delivery or mailing of the statement and affidavit provided for above, the city shall be entitled to the
payment of the aggregate amount so expended, or reasonable charges for city work or costs paid, as therein set
forth. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay the amount due within thirty (30) days thereafter, the affidavit
containing the information as set out hereinabove, signed by the mayor, shall be filed with the County Clerk of
Tarrant County, Texas. Such statement, when filed, shall constitute a lien upon the property on which the
expense was incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount remaining
unpaid on said statement shall accrue interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date of
expenditure by the city, or from the date that the city itself performed such work and incurred said expense, as
provided for in Article 4436, Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 6E)
ARTICLE 8.700 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS
Sec. 8.701 Spills Prohibited and Regulated
Any person or entity who accidentally, negligently, or intentionally causes or is responsible for a spill or escape
of hazardous materials on any public or private property within the city shall take immediate responsive action
to confine, contain and abate such spill or escape in accordance with federal, state and local regulations,
including but not limited to regulations adopted by or pursuant to the following agencies or acts: Superfund
Amendment and Reauthorization Act (SARA Title III); Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA);
Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA); Texas Hazardous
Substances Spill Prevention and Control Act; Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA); Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); State Emergency Response
Commission (SERC); Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC); Texas Department of Health (TDH);
Texas Water Commission (TWC); or the rules and regulations of any other such agency. The failure to take such
immediate responsive action as provided above shall be a violation of this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 7, Section 7A)
Sec. 8.702 City May Intervene in Cleanup
In the event that it is determined in the discretion of the fire marshal of the city that the abatement of any
hazardous materials spill or escape is not being promptly or properly conducted by the responsible person, the
fire marshal may utilize the city fire department and other department, agencies, or entities which are authorized
to assist in the abatement of hazardous material spills. The responsible person or entity shall be liable for the
payment of all costs and expenses incurred in connection with the abatement of such spill or escape. The failure
of the responsible person or entity to pay all such costs and expenses within ten (10) days of receipt of a
statement shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7,
Section 7B)
Sec. 8.703 Cost of Cleanup
For purposes of this article, costs incurred by the fire department or other departments or entities shall include,
but shall not be limited to, all actual out-of-pocket expenses attributable to the abatement or clean-up of any
hazardous materials, including costs of equipment operations, costs of materials utilized, costs of specialists,
experts, and other contract labor not in the full-time employment of the city, overtime costs, and other incidental
costs incurred by the city as a result of said incident. The authority to recover costs under this article shall not
include fire suppression, rescue, medical services, etc., which are normally or usually provided by the fire
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/562
department or other city departments and are unrelated to a particular hazardous materials incident. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 7C)
Sec. 8.704 Hazardous Materials Defined
For purposes of this article, hazardous materials shall be defined as any substance designated as such by the
administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to CERCLA, and any other substances or
materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief or his authorized representative,
poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, or safety of persons or property, or to the ecological
balance of the environment, and shall include but not be limited to such substances as explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products, gases, poisons, ebiologic (biologic) agents, flammables, and
corrosives. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 7D)
Sec. 8.705 Penalties for Violations
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 7E)
Sec. 8.706 Rights and Remedies Reserved
All rights and remedies of the city are expressly saved as to any and all violations of the provisions of any
ordinances affecting the clean-up of spills or escapes of hazardous materials which have accrued at the time of
the effective date of this article; and, as to such accrued violations and all pending litigation, both civil and
criminal, whether pending in court or not, under such ordinances, same shall not be affected by this article but
may be prosecuted until final disposition by the courts. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 7F)
ARTICLE 8.800 CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS*
Sec. 8.801 Definitions
In this article:
Curfew Hours.
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day; and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term includes, but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/562
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under 17 years of age.
Officer. A police officer of the city.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting
business at any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and
the officers of a corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a
minor.
Public Place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, parks and the common areas and parking lots of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, commercial shopping centers and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) linger or stay; or
(2) fail to leave premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or other
person in control of the premises.
Serious Bodily Injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 8A)
Sec. 8.802 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control
allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 8B)
Sec. 8.803 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 8.802 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/562
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning from home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, a school district or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, a school district or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 8.802(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 8C)
Sec. 8.804 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this article, an officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and
reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in Section 8.803 is present. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 8D)
Sec. 8.805 Penalties
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense upon conviction is punishable by
a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code.
(b) When required by Section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates Section 8.802(a) of this article and shall refer the minor to
juvenile court.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Section 8E)
ARTICLE 8.900 SOLICITATION IN RIGHT-OF-WAY*
Sec. 8.901 Solicitation in Roadways
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/562
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, sell or offer for sale or distribution any goods, wares,
merchandise or service, or solicit a ride, employment, donations, contributions or business within a roadway, or
on any median or traffic island within the right-of-way of any street or highway within the city.
(b) For purposes of subsection (a), “roadway” is defined as that portion of a street or highway designed,
improved or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, typically delineated by curbs, edgelines or the edge of
pavement.
Sec. 8.902 Solicitation to Occupants of Vehicles
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or sell or offer for sale or distribution any goods, wares or
merchandise, or solicit a ride, employment, donations or contributions by a direct transaction or exchange with
the occupant of any vehicle stopped or traveling on any street or highway within the city.
(b) An offense under subsection (a) above occurs when the offer, solicitation or distribution is made regardless
of whether a transaction is completed.
(Ordinance 727 adopted 10/14/03)
ARTICLE 8.1000 PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN DRUGS
Sec. 8.1001 Definitions
For purposes of this article:
Prohibited Smoking Material. Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for
smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes
any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical:
(1) Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia
divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
(2) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497)
and homologues;
(3) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-210 or HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(4) 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018, Spice or K2);
(5) 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073);
(6) 1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081);
(7) N-benzylpiperazine commonly known as BZP;
(8) 1-(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl]) piperazine commonly known as TFMPP;
(9) Any other synthetic cannabinoid; or
(10) Any similar substance which when inhaled or otherwise ingested produces intoxication,
stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner, changes, distorts or disturbs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/562
the auditory, visual, or mental process and the product or substance had no other apparent legitimate
purpose for consumers.
Sec. 8.1002 Possession, Purchase, Sale or Ingestion of Prohibited Smoking Material
It shall be unlawful to use, possess, purchase, sell, gift, barter, publically display for sale, or attempt to sell, gift
or barter a prohibited smoking material within the city limits.
Sec. 8.1003 Defenses to Prosecution
(a) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of Section 8.1002 if the use of the prohibited smoking
material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to
prescribe controlled substances within the state.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of Section 8.1002 if an individual charged with a
violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a
religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic
membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the state.
(Ordinance 950 adopted 9/14/10)
ARTICLE 8.1100 PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES
Sec. 8.1101 Definitions
In this article:
Aggressive or Intimidating Manner.
(1) To approach or speak to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to
believe that the person is being threatened with:
(A) Imminent bodily injury; or
(B) The commission of a criminal act upon the person or another person, or upon property in
the person's immediate possession;
(2) To persist in a solicitation after the person solicited has given a negative response; or
(3) To block, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a solicited person.
Automated Teller Machine. A machine, other than a telephone:
(1) That is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial institution;
(2) By which the customer may communicate to the financial institution a request to withdraw a
benefit for the customer or for another person directly from the customer's account or from the
customer's account under a line of credit previously authorized by the financial institution for the
customer; and
(3) The use of which may or may not involve personnel of a financial institution.
Exterior Public Pay Telephone. Any coin or credit card reader telephone that is:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/562
(1) Installed or located anywhere on a premises except exclusively in the interior of a building
located on the premises; and
(2) Accessible and available for use by member of the general public.
Public Transportation Stop. An area officially marked and designated as a place to wait for a bus, a light rail
vehicle, or any other public transportation vehicle that is operated on a scheduled route with passengers paying
fares on an individual basis.
Self-Service Carwash. A structure:
(1) At which a vehicle may be manually washed by its owner or operator with equipment that is
activated by the deposit of money in a coin-operated machine or a station of vacuums used in the
cleaning a vehicle whether a coin-operated or not; and
(2) That is accessible and available for use by the general public.
Self-Service Fuel Pump. A fuel pump:
(1) From which a vehicle may be manually filled with gasoline or other fuel directly by its owner
or operator, without the aid of an employee or attendant of the premises at which the fuel pump is
located; and
(2) That is accessible and available for use by the general public.
Solicitation. To ask, beg or plead, whether orally or in written or printed manner or with an object for the
purpose of receiving contributions, alms, charity, or gifts of items of value for oneself or another person.
Solicitation Free Zone. Any area or structure which provides any service, retail sales or entertainment for the
general public and includes any parking lot used for customer parking associated with those areas or structures.
Sunrise. The time of day published by the United States Naval Observatory as the time for sunrise on a
particular day in the city.
Sunset. The time of day published by the United States Naval Observatory as the time for sunset on a particular
day in the city.
Sec. 8.1102 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if he conducts a solicitation in an aggressive or intimidating manner.
(b) A person commits an offense if he conducts a solicitation in any outdoor area in the city at any time after
sunset and before sunrise on any day of the week. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the
solicitation:
(1) Consists exclusively of passive, nonverbal acts; or
(2) Was being conducted on the property with the advance written permission of the owner,
manager or other person in control of the property.
(c) A person commits an offense if he conducts solicitation at any time within a solicitation free zone. It is an
affirmative defense to prosecution under this subsection if the solicitation was being conducted on property with
advanced written permission of the owner, manager, or other person in control of the property.
(d) A person commits an offense if he conducts a solicitation of any person within 30 feet of:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/562
(1) An automated teller machine;
(2) An entrance or exit of a bank, credit union, or other similar financial institution;
(3) An exterior public pay phone;
(4) A self-service carwash;
(5) A self-service fuel pump;
(6) A public transportation stop; or
(7) An outdoor dining area of a fixed food establishment.
Sec. 8.1103 Measurement
For the purpose of Section 8.1102(d), measurement will be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
objects or structures, from the nearest point at which a solicitation is being conducted to whichever is applicable
of the following:
(1) The nearest entrance or exit of a facility in which an automated teller machine is enclosed or, if
the machine is not enclosed in a facility, to the nearest part of the automated teller machine;
(2) The nearest entrance or exit of a bank, credit union, or other similar financial institution;
(3) The nearest part of an exterior public pay phone;
(4) The nearest part of a structure of a self-service carwash;
(5) The nearest part of a self-service fuel pump;
(6) The nearest point of any sign or marking designating an area as a public transportation stop; or
(7) The nearest part of any table in an outdoor dining area or, if the outdoor dining area is
contained within a covered patio, the nearest part of that patio.
Sec. 8.1104 Complaint with Police Department
In addition to any enforcement action by a peace officer for a violation of this article, any person who is a victim
of a solicitation prohibited under this article, or who witnesses a violation of this article may file a complaint
with the police department.
Sec. 8.1105 Penalty
An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(Ordinance 1016 adopted 10/22/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/562
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.100 POLICE DEPARTMENT*
Sec. 9.101 Police Department Established
There is hereby created and established a police department of the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8,
Section 1A)
Sec. 9.102 Composition of Department
The police department shall be composed of a chief of police and such number of detectives and policemen as
the city council may from time to time deem necessary and proper. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8,
Section 1B)
Sec. 9.103 Appointment of Chief of Police
The chief of police shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council, and shall hold his office at the will of
the council. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1C)
Sec. 9.104 Powers and Duties of Chief
The chief of police shall be the chief police officer of the city, shall have supervision, subordinate to the city
manager or his/her designee and the council, over the other members of the police department, and shall have
the power, with the sheriff of the county, to execute the writ of search warrant. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 8, Section 1D; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 9.105 Appointment of Police Officers
The chief of police appoints, subject to confirmation by the council, all other policemen and other personnel in
the police department, including persons to fill vacancies; and all such policemen and other personnel may be
removed by the chief of police with approval of the council. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1E)
Sec. 9.106 Compensation; Oath; Bond
The compensation of the members of the police department shall be by salaries payable monthly in a sum to be
fixed by the council, subject to change from time to time at the discretion of the council, and before entering
upon the duties of their respective offices, the members of such department shall give bond, if same be required
by the mayor, in such sum as may be prescribed by the mayor, conditioned as the mayor may deem best for the
efficiency of the public service, and said members of the police department shall take and subscribe to the oath
of office prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Texas for county officials. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 8, Section 1F)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/562
Sec. 9.107 Police to Quell Riots, Etc.
The chief of police and all policemen and members of the police department shall be active in quelling riots,
disorders and disturbances of the peace within the limits of the city, and shall take into custody all persons so
offending against the public peace. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1G)
Sec. 9.108 Chief May Take Bail
The chief of police shall have the authority to take suitable and sufficient bail for the appearance before the
municipal court of any person charged with an offense within the jurisdiction of said court. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1H)
Sec. 9.109 Chief May Close Theaters, Etc.
The chief of police, in order to prevent a breach of the peace, or to preserve quiet and good order, shall have the
authority to close any theater, bar room, ball room, drinking house, or any other place or building of public
resort, and in the prevention and suppression of crime and arrest of offenders within the city, he shall have like
power, authority and jurisdiction with the Sheriff of the county under the laws of the state. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1I)
Sec. 9.110 Interference With Policemen
The chief of police, policemen, and other members of the police department shall arrest all persons who shall
obstruct or interfere with them in the execution of the duties of their offices, or who shall be guilty of any
disorderly conduct whatever. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1J)
Sec. 9.111 Policemen Also Have Power to Execute Writs, Etc.
Policemen of the city shall have like power with the chief of police to execute all writs and processes issued out
of the municipal court. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1K)
Sec. 9.112 Arrest Without Warrant
(a) The chief of police, policemen, and other members of the police department may, without warrant, arrest
any offender or alleged offender in any of the following cases:
(1) when any felony or disturbance, affray or breach of the peace, or violation of any city
ordinance is committed within the view or presence of the member of the police department making
the arrest;
(2) when a felony or breach of the peace has been committed within the presence or view of a
magistrate and such magistrate shall verbally order the arrest of the offender;
(3) when it is represented to some member of the police department by some creditable person
that a felony or disturbance, affray or breach of the peace, or violation of some city ordinance has
been committed, and that the offenders will probably escape if the arrest is delayed to procure a
warrant; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/562
(4) when persons are found in suspicious places, or under circumstances which reasonably show
that such persons have been guilty of some felony, or threaten, or are about to commit some offense
against the laws of the state or ordinances of the city.
(b) For greater certainty, it is specifically provided that such officers or members of the police department
may so arrest without warrant any and all persons found or apprehended under the following circumstances:
(1) where a person is found lurking or hiding in alleys or on premises not their own, and such
person is unable to satisfactorily explain his actions;
(2) where a person is fleeing under circumstances which indicate that he is attempting to escape
from the scene of some crime on his part;
(3) where a person is caught or found in the night time in a house or residence, or outhouse, barn
or garage appurtenant thereto, and is unable to show or state any right or authority for being in such
place, or is found or caught in any business or public place in the night time and is unable to show or
state any right or authority for being in such place;
(4) where a person is caught or found emerging from any house or building at an unusual hour, or
by an unusual or suspicious means of exit; or
(5) where any person is discovered with any tools, appliances or materials on his person or in his
charge which are of such nature as to indicate that they are intended or designed for use in the
perpetration of some crime.
The foregoing enumeration is not intended and shall not be construed to exclude the right and
authority of such officers to make arrests without warrants in all cases coming within the general
provisions of this subsection, and in all such cases such person may be arrested without warrant and
held to be dealt with according to law.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1L)
Sec. 9.113 Persons Arrested Without Warrant to be Taken Before Magistrate
In all cases of arrest without warrant, the officer making the arrest shall immediately take the person arrested
before the magistrate who ordered the arrest, or if the arrest was made without an order, then before the nearest
or most accessible magistrate having jurisdiction. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1M)
Sec. 9.114 Execution of Writs; Arrests
The chief of police and other members of the police department may execute writs issued out of the municipal
court, and arrest accused persons anywhere within Tarrant County. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8,
Section 1N)
Sec. 9.115 Mayor May Summon Special Police Force
Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary, in order to enforce the laws of the city or to avert danger to or
protect life or property, in case of riot or any outbreak or calamity or great public disturbance, or when he has
reason to fear any serious violation of law or order, or any damage to the city, or the inhabitants thereof, he shall
have the power to summon into service as a special police force all or as many of the citizens as, in his judgment
or discretion, may be necessary and proper, and such summons may be made verbally or by proclamation. Such
special police force shall be subject to the orders of the mayor, and shall have the same power and authority
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/562
while on duty as policemen as regular policemen, and shall receive, as compensation, not to exceed three dollars
($3.00) for each day in actual service. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1O)
Sec. 9.116 Acting Chief of Police
In case of absence, sickness or inability to act, on the part of the chief of police, the mayor shall designate some
other member of the police department, or other suitable person, as acting chief of police during the period of
such absence, sickness, or inability to act, and such persons shall exercise all the rights, powers and duties of the
chief of police during such period. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 1P)
ARTICLE 9.200 RESERVE POLICE FORCE*
Sec. 9.201 Reserve Police Force Established; Supervision of
A reserve police force is hereby established. The reserve police force shall be under the supervision of the chief
of police, subject to the ordinances of the city, laws of the State of Texas, and the laws of the United States.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 2A)
Sec. 9.202 Appointment of Reserve Officers
All reserve policemen shall be of good moral character and subject to a background investigation, a medical
physical, and a physiological test before their appointment to the force. Each appointment shall be approved by
the chief of police. Each dismissal shall be under the control of the chief of police. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 8, Section 2B)
Sec. 9.203 Oath of Office Required Before Commission
All reserve policemen shall take the oath as prescribed by law and after such oath shall be issued a commission.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 2C)
Sec. 9.204 Badges and Uniforms to be Worn
All reserve policemen shall wear the uniform as prescribed by the department and shall wear a badge that will
have the word “Reserve” or the letter “R” to designate their position. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8,
Section 2D)
Sec. 9.205 Reserves May Carry Firearms While on Duty
While said officers are on duty and under the direct supervision of a regular police officer of the city, they shall
have the right to carry and use firearms to the same extent as a regular police officer, but no authority is given
under this section to permit reserve officers to carry firearms when they are off duty. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 8, Section 2E)
Sec. 9.206 No Insurance or Compensation to be Paid to Reserves
Each reserve policeman is insured by the city's workers compensation program while on duty. No salary will be
paid unless approved by the chief of police under necessary circumstances. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/562
8, Section 2F)
Sec. 9.207 Minimum Training Standards Required
All reserve police officers must fulfill the minimum training established by the commission on Law
Enforcement Officer Standards and Education or such other training required by the chief of police. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 2G)
ARTICLE 9.300 CITY EXEMPT FROM FIREFIGHTERS' RELIEF AND RETIREMENT FUND
The city hereby elects to exempt itself from the requirements of the act (Senate Bill No. 411 of the 1977
Legislature) creating the firefighters' relief and retirement fund, and elects not to participate in any state
firefighters' relief and retirement fund. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 3)
ARTICLE 9.400 SOCIAL SECURITY (OLD-AGE AND SURVIVORS' INSURANCE)*
Sec. 9.401 To Enter Into Agreements
The council acting for and on behalf of the city shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state
department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the state and federal laws relating
to old-age and survivors' insurance benefits. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 4A)
Sec. 9.402 Mayor to be Agent to Execute Agreements
The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements
and instruments for and in behalf of said city council and city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section
4B)
Sec. 9.403 City Manager or His/Her Designee to Make Collections, Reports, Etc.
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments,
collections, payments, and reports required by the state department of public welfare. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 8, Section 4C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 9.404 Money to be Appropriated
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of the above-mentioned acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the city social
security fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 4D)
ARTICLE 9.500 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.501 Texas Municipal Retirement System Benefits Elected
The city council of the city, on behalf of said city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all
of the employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (TMRS) as provided in the TMRS Act. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5A)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/562
Sec. 9.502 City Manager or his/her Designee to Notify TMRS of City's Participation
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the TMRS that the city
has elected to participate and have the employees of the city covered in said system. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 8, Section 5B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 9.503 Employee Participation Required
Each person less than sixty (60) years of age (or who was less than sixty (60) years of age when that person
became a full-time employee of the city) who became a full-time employee of any participating department on
or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the TMRS as a
condition of his or her employment. (Ordinance 748 adopted 7/20/04)
Sec. 9.504 City Contributions
In accordance with the provisions of the TMRS Act, the deposits to be made to the TMRS on account of current
service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of six (6) percent of
the full earnings of each employee of said departments. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5D)
Sec. 9.505 Prior Service Credit Allowed
Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed “prior service credit” (as defined in Section 63.101
of the TMRS Act) at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) of the “base credit” of such member, calculated in
the manner prescribed in Section 63.105 of said Act. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5E)
Sec. 9.506 Retirement Annuity Contribution
For each month of current service rendered to this city by each of its employees who are members of TMRS, the
city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or her
retirement, a sum that is two hundred percent (200%) of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of
employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5F)
Sec. 9.507 City Manager or His/Her Designee to Remit City Contributions and Make Reports
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the TMRS, at its
office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the
compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and
the said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of this city the prior
service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the
average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and
all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in
compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the TMRS. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 8, Section 5G; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 9.508 Date of Participation in TMRS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/562
Participation of the above mentioned employees in the TMRS shall become effective on the 1st day of October
1982. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5H)
Sec. 9.509 Additional Rights, Credits and Benefits
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 64.202(f), 64.204, 64.405, 64.406, and 64.410 of Subtitle G of Title
110 B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended by the 70th Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular
Session, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the city, adopts the following provisions
affecting participation of its employees in the TMRS (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the
“system”):
(1) Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a
retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for
one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(8) of the TMRS
Act.
Prior to adopting this article, the governing body has: (A) prepared an actuarial analysis of
member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and (B) held a public hearing pursuant to the
notice provision of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code.
The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted
and in force at the effective date of this article pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(2) If a “vested member,” as that term is defined in Section 64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die
before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the
member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions
in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed
with the system elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the
terms and conditions of said Section 64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn
before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the
surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable
monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been
payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1)
payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the
surviving spouse.
(3) At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to
whom subsection (2) applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of
the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise
payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first
monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this subsection, the accumulated contributions credited
to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse.
(4) The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan
provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS
Act.
(5) Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a
“standard occupational disability annuity” under Section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an “optional
occupational disability retirement annuity” under Section 64.410 of the TMRS Act upon making
application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees
of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to said board of trustees:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/562
(A) that the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties
of the member's employment;
(B) that the disability is likely to be permanent; and
(C) that the member should be retired. Any annuity granted under this section shall be subject
to the provisions of Section 64.409 of the TMRS Act.
(6) The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5)
above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under Sections 64.301 to 64.308 of
the TMRS Act.
(7) This section shall become effective on the first day of January, 1988, provided that it has
previously been determined by the actuary for the system that all obligations of the city to the
municipality accumulation fund, including obligations hereby undertaken, can be funded by the city
within its maximum contribution rate and within its amortization period.
(b) Pursuant to the of Section 854.02 of Subchapter F of Chapter 853, Title 8, Government Code as amended,
the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the TMRS for active
military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an
auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those
employees meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said Subchapter F, and the
amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in Section 853.505.
(c) In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the TMRS (in that
member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which
credit is sought multiplied by $15.00. The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to
be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the
member for military service credit multiplied by the city's current service matching ration in effect at the date the
member applies for such military service credit.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5I)
Sec. 9.510 Updated Service Credits
(a) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 1984.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised
Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the TMRS who has current service credit
or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1984, by reason of
service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited
service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is one hundred percent
(100%) of the “base updated service credit” of the member, (calculated as provided in subsection (c)
of Section 63.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated
service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously
authorized for part of the same service.
(2) In accordance with TMRS, any member who has current service credit or prior service credit in
said system in force and [sic].
(3) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits granted
hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1984.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/562
(b) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 1985.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised
Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the TMRS who has current service credit
or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1985, by reason of
service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited
service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is one hundred percent
(100%) of the “base updated service credit” of the member, (calculated as provided in subsection (c)
of Section 63.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated
service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously
authorized for part of the same service.
(2) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits
required to be made to the TMRS by employees of the several participating departments on account
of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(3) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits granted
hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1985.
(c) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 1986.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised
Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the TMRS who has current service credit
or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1986, by reason of
service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited
service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is one hundred percent
(100%) of the “base updated service credit” of the member, (calculated as provided in subsection (c)
of Section 63.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated
service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously
authorized for part of the same service.
(2) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits
required to be made to the TMRS by employees of the several participating departments on account
of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(3) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits granted
hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1986.
(d) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 1987.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised
Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the TMRS who has current service credit
or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1987, by reason of
service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited
service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is one hundred percent
(100%) of the “base updated service credit” of the member, (calculated as provided in subsection (c)
of Section 63.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated
service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously
authorized for part of the same service.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/562
(2) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 63.601 of said title, any member of the TMRS
who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, and who has
unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1986,
shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject
to adjustment as set forth in said 63.601.
(3) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits
required to be made to the TMRS by employees of the several participating departments on account
of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(4) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits and
increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1987.
(e) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 1988.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised
Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the TMRS who has current service credit
or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1988, by reason of
service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited
service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is one hundred percent
(100%) of the “base updated service credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c)
of Section 63.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated
service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously
authorized for part of the same service.
(2) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits
required to be made to the TMRS by employees of the several participating departments on account
of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(3) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits granted
hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st of January, 1988.
(f) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 1989.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised
Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the TMRS who has current service credit
or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1988, by reason or
service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited
service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is one hundred percent
(100%) of the “base updated service credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c)
of Section 53.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated
service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously
authorized for part of the same service.
(2) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits
required to be made to the TMRS by employees of the several participating department on account of
current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/562
(3) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits granted
hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1989.
(g) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 1991.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.403 of Subtitle of Title 8,
V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, each member of the TMRS who has current service credit
or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 15th day of January, 1990, by reason of
service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited
service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated Service Credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of said title) in an amount that is 8.77% of the “base
updated service credit” of the member [calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of
said title.] The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior
service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part
of the same service.
(2) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of said title, the deposits
required to be made to the TMRS by employees of the several participating departments on account
of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(3) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits granted
hereby shall be and become effective on the 15th day of January, 1991.
(h) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 1992.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title
8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each
member of the TMRS (hereafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service credit or prior
service credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year
preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city (hereinafter called the
“city”), and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall
be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” [as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section
853.402 of the TMRS Act.]
(2) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the
system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has
unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1991,
shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject
to adjustment as set forth in said Section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future
grants under this section.
(3) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred percent
(100%) of the “base updated service credit” of the member [calculated as provided in subsection (c)
of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act.]
(4) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior
service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part
of the same service.
(5) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the
deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating department on
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/562
account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the
full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(6) The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1992,
subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits
shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect
under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year,
the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404
of the TMRS Act.
(7) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, the updated service credit granted
hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1992.
(i) Authorization of Updated Service Credits, January 1, 1999.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title
8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the
TMRS in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by
reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months
of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that
term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(2) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the
system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has
unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality of
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of
January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits
pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said Section
853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section.
(3) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated
service credit” of the member [calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the
TMRS Act.]
(4) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior
service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part
of the same service.
(5) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the
deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on
account of the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5J)
(j) Authorization of Updated Service Credits on January 1, 2019.
(1) Pursuant to sections 853.401 through 853.404 of the TMRS Act, each member of the system
who has current service credit or prior service credit in the System in force and effect on the 1st day
of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of
the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the System, shall be and is
hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402
of the TMRS Act).
(2) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the
system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/562
unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of
January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits
pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said section
853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this ordinance.
(3) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated
service credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the
TMRS Act).
(4) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior
service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part
of the same service.
(5) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the
deposits required to be made to the System by employees of the several participating departments on
account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this ordinance on
the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(6) Date of allowances: The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective
on January 1, 2019, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of
updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January
1st of each subsequent year until this subsection ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of section
853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has
made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(Ordinance 1120 adopted 9/11/18)
Sec. 9.511 Increased Retirement Annuities
(a) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 1985.
(1) On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 1108, Revised Civil Statutes of
Texas, 1925, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases
below stated in monthly benefits payable by TMRS to retired employees and to beneficiaries of
deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising
from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this subsection replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(2) The amount of annuity increase under this subsection is computed as the sum of the prior and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the
annuities are based, multiplied by seventy percent (70%) of the percentage change in consumer price
index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of
this subsection.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this subsection exceeds all previously granted
increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/562
accumulation fund of the TMRS.
(6) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits and
increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1985.
(b) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 1986.
(1) On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of
Texas, 1925, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases
below stated in monthly benefits payable by TMRS to retired employees and to beneficiaries of
deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising
from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this subsection replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(2) The amount of annuity increase under this subsection is computed as the sum of the prior and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the
annuities are based, multiplied by seventy percent (70%) of the percentage change in consumer price
index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of
this subsection.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this subsection exceeds all previously granted
increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality
accumulation fund of the TMRS.
(6) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits and increases
in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January,
1986.
(c) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 1987.
(1) On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of
Texas, 1925, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases
below stated in monthly benefits payable by TMRS to retired employees and to beneficiaries of
deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising
from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this subsection replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(2) The amount of annuity increase under this subsection is computed as the sum of the prior and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the
annuities are based, multiplied by seventy percent (70%) of the percentage change in consumer price
index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of
this subsection.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/562
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this subsection exceeds all previously granted
increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality
accumulation fund of the TMRS.
(6) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the updated service credits and
increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1987.
(d) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 1988.
(1) On terms and condition set out in Section 64.203 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of
Texas, 1925, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases
below stated in monthly benefits payable by the TMRS to retired employees and to beneficiaries of
deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising
from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this subsection replaces any
annuity or increases previously granted to the same person.
(2) The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the
annuities are based, multiplied by seventy percent (70%) of the percentage change in consumer price
index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of
this section.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to
an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of
the TMRS.
(6) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the increases in retirement annuities
granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January 1988.
(e) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 1989.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of
Texas, 1925, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases
below stated in monthly benefits payable by the TMRS to retired employees and to beneficiaries of
deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising
from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(2) The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the
annuities are based, multiplied by seventy percent (70%) of the percentage change in consumer price
index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of
this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/562
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to
an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of
the TMRS.
(6) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the increases in retirement annuities
granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1989.
(f) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 1991.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code,
as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated
in monthly benefits payable by the TMRS to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased
employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service
by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or
increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(2) The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the
annuities are based, multiplied by seventy percent (70%) of the percentage change in consumer price
index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of
this section.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to
an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of
the TMRS.
(6) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the increases in retirement annuities
granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1991.
(g) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 1992.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects
to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the
system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current
service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this
section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(2) The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service
and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the
annuities are based, multiplied by seventy percent (70%) of the percentage change in consumer price
index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/562
of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of
this section.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to
an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of
the system.
(6) The increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1992, subject to
approval by the board of trustees of the system. An increase in retirement annuities shall be made
hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under
subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the
actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of
the TMRS Act.
(7) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of TMRS, the increases in retirement annuities
granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of January, 1991.
(h) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 1999.
(1) On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to
allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the
system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current
service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An
annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to
the same person.
(2) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior
service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose
service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in consumer price index
for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the
person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to
an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of
the system.
(6) Dates of Allowances and Increases. The initial allowance of updated service credit and Increase
in Retirement Annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2000, subject to approval by the
board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement
annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be
in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such
subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of
Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/562
(7) Increased Deposit Rate. All employees of the city, who are members of the TMRS, shall make
deposits to the system at the rate of 6% of their individual earnings effective October l, 1999.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5K)
(i) Increase in Retirement Annuities on January 1, 2019.
(1) On terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to
allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the
system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current
service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An
annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to
the same person.
(2) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior
service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose
service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in consumer price index
for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the
person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to
an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the benefit accumulation fund of the
system.
(6) The initial allowance of increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January
1, 2019, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service
credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1st of each
subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of section 853.404 of the
TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the
determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(7) Increased deposit rate: All employees of the City, who are members of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System, shall make deposits to the system at the rate of 7% of their individual earnings
effective 1st day of January 2019.
(Ordinance 1120 adopted 9/11/18)
Sec. 9.512 Supplemental Disability Benefits Provided
(a) The city, by its city council hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of said
city (as above defined) participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits Funds of the TMRS, as
provided by Sections 62.003, 64.401 through 64.404, 65.313, and 65.408 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes
of Texas, 1925, as amended; and all of the benefits and obligations of participation in said fund are hereby
accepted by the city as to such employees.
(b) The city manager or his/her designee is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the TMRS that
the city, has elected to participate and have the employees of the above mentioned departments participate in the
supplemental benefits fund of said system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/562
(c) Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of
participation of such department in said fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the
supplemental benefits fund of said system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new
employees to said fund but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund.
(d) The city manager or his/her designee is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the
TMRS at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental benefits fund of the TMRS,
such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of said city as may be fixed by the board of
trustees of the TMRS, provided that the rate of contribution to said fund shall not exceed one-half of one
percentum (1/2%) of the earnings of the employees of said city who are covered under said fund; and such
official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the TMRS may prescribe.
(e) Participation of the above mentioned employees in the supplemental benefits fund shall be effective on the
1st day of January 1985.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5L; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 9.513 Supplemental Death Benefits Provided
(a) The city, hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits funds of the TMRS, for the
purpose of providing in-service death benefits for each of the city's employees who are members of said system,
and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits for annuitants whose last covered employment
was as an employee of the city, in the amounts and on the terms provided for in Sections 62.004, 64.601 through
64.605, 65.314, 65.409, and 65.502 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended.
(b) The city is hereby authorized to notify the director of the system of adoption of this benefit, and of the
participation of the city in said fund.
(c) Participation of the above-mentioned employees and annuitants in the supplemental death benefits fund
shall be effective on the 1st day of January 1985.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5M)
Sec. 9.514 Authorization of Restricted Prior Service Credit
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code,
as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the TMRS (hereinafter referred to as
the “system”) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior
service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said Section
853.305 provided that: (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service; and
(2) the service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305.
(b) The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for
retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and
may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits.
(c) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take action required
under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5N)
Sec. 9.515 Reestablishing Canceled Service Credit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/562
Pursuant to Texas Government Code Section 853.003, the city hereby elects to allow any member of the TMRS
who is an employee of this city on the 10th day of October, 2000, who has terminated a previous membership in
said system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, but who has at least 24 months of credited
service as an employee of this city since resuming membership to deposit with the system in a lump sum the
amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five percent (5%) of such amount for each year from date of
such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which
the member had been entitled at date of termination of earlier membership, with life effect as if all such service
had been rendered as an employee of this city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and
hereby assumes the obligations arising out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations
and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to this city's account in the municipality
accumulation fund. The five percent (5%) per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited
to the credit of the city's account in said municipality accumulation fund; and the deposits of the amount
previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his or her individual account in the employees' savings
fund of the system. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 5O)
Sec. 9.516 Current and Prior Service Annual Contribution Rates
Pursuant to section 855.407(g) of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service
contributions to its account in the benefit accumulation fund of the system at such combined rate of the total
compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the system, as the system's actuary shall
annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the
city under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out
of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the
combined rate of city contributions. (Ordinance 1052 adopted 9/8/15)
ARTICLE 9.600 SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT*
(a) There shall be appointed by the city manager or his/her designee of the city a superintendent of the water
and sewer department. If the superintendent of the water and sewer department leaves the employment of the
city, the council will see the qualifications of the replacement before the position is filled. The superintendent of
the water and sewer department shall be the administrative officer of the water works system and sewer system,
including all engine houses, engines, pumps, reservoirs, stand pipes, elevated tanks, pipe lines, hydrants, meters,
wrenches, stop-cocks, gate valves, fire plugs, testing equipment, and all other property and machinery used in or
connected with the water works system. He shall have general supervision over all employees of the water and
sewer systems and shall make frequent trips of inspection over all pipe lines and all other property used in or
connected with the water works and sewer systems and shall make all repairs deemed necessary and consistent
with his duties.
(b) He shall also report all violations to the city manager or his/her designee and shall forthwith proceed to
have prosecuted offenders as set forth in this section or any amendment thereof.
(c) He shall also attend to and control the water supply and at all times see to the sufficiency thereof, and shall
notify the community, unless emergency requires otherwise, of the necessity of shutting off any pipe for the
purpose of making repairs, extensions, connections, etc., should he know beforehand the necessity to so shut off
the water from any line or lines of the system.
(d) In the performance of his duties as required by this article, the superintendent shall be subject at all times
to the city ordinances, rules, and regulations. He shall serve for such term and receive such compensation as may
be fixed by the governing body.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 6; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 9.700 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/562
Sec. 9.701 Declaration of Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper operation of government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people of the city; that governmental
decisions and policy should be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that no official or
member of any board, commission or committee should have any financial or other interest, direct or indirect, or
engage in any business transaction or professional activity, or incur any obligation of any nature which is in
conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest; that no city official should render any
decisions on behalf of the city and the public based on undue influence or favoritism toward any person, entity
or professional organization that the city official may be affiliated with; that public office and public
employment are positions of public trust imposing the duty of a fiduciary upon all city officials who are not to
use their public position for personal gain or for the benefit of any person, entity or professional organization
with whom the city official is affiliated; and that the public should have confidence in the integrity of its
government. To implement such a policy the city council deems it advisable to enact this policy for city officials
to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the city officials but also as a basis for discipline for those
who refuse to abide by its terms. This policy shall be cumulative of other ordinances, city charter provisions and
state statutes defining and prohibiting conflicts of interest.
Sec. 9.702 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them below:
City Board. The city council and any board, commission, committee or other body created by the city council
pursuant to federal or state law or city ordinance, including boards that may be advisory-only in nature.
City Official. The following persons: the mayor; members of the city council; municipal court judges and
magistrates; city manager; assistant city manager; city secretary; municipal court coordinator; all department
heads and assistant department heads; internal auditor and all assistant internal auditors; and members of city
boards, who are appointed by the city council. Reference to the city council or councilmember in this article
shall include the mayor.
Entity. A sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation (including nonprofit corporations), holding
company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, unincorporated association, or any other entity recognized by
law.
Sec. 9.703 Conflicts of Interest
(a) A city official shall disclose the existence of any substantial interest in an entity or real property involved
in any decision pending before such official or the body of which he or she is a member. To comply with this
paragraph a city official shall, prior to any discussion or determination of the matter, either file an affidavit of
disclosure as required by Chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code or if not so required by Chapter 171,
shall publicly disclose in the official records of the body or with the city secretary the nature of the interest, and
shall abstain from further discussion and voting on the matter. The conflicts disclosure statement shall be filed
with the city secretary prior to the official or body of which he or she is a member considering any matter
involving the real property of the entity in which the city official has substantial interest. Nothing in this article
shall be construed to alleviate any duty or action required by a city official under Chapter 171 of the Texas Local
Government Code.
(b) For purposes of this article, a person has a substantial interest in an entity if:
(1) The person owns 10 percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the entity or owns either
10 percent or more or $15,000.00 or more of the fair market value of the business entity;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/562
(2) Funds received by the person from the entity exceed 10 percent of the person's gross income
for the previous year;
(3) The person serves on the board of directors or other governing body of the entity.
(c) For purposes of this article, a person does not have a substantial interest in an entity if all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The person holds a position as a member of the board of directors or other governing board of
an entity; and
(2) The person has been appointed by the city council to serve on such board; and
(3) The person receives no remuneration, either directly or indirectly, for his or her service on such
board; and
(4) The primary nature of the business entity is governmental.
(d) A person has a substantial interest in real property if the interest is an equitable or legal ownership with a
fair market value of $2,500.00 or more.
(e) A city official is considered to have a substantial interest under this section if a person related to the
official in the first degree by consanguinity or affinity, as determined under Chapter 573, Government Code, has
a substantial interest under this section.
(f) Any person who has information that indicates a city official may have violated the provisions of this
section may provide that information to any member of the city council or the city manager in writing. Upon
receiving a written complaint, the city council, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, shall consider whether
the individual against whom a complaint has been made has violated this section. The city council may hear
testimony and consider evidence on the matter. The city council shall make a finding by majority vote whether
the city official has violated this section; provided that the member accused of the violation shall not vote on any
matter involving that member. If no violation is found to have occurred, the city council may issue a statement
finding the complaint is totally without merit, brought for the purpose of harassment, or brought in bad faith.
(g) Except where otherwise provided by state law, it is not the intent for violations of this section to be subject
to criminal penalties. If the city council determines that a city official had violated this section, the city council
may take one of the following actions:
(1) Admonition. A verbal nonpublic statement made by the Mayor to the city official. An
admonition is appropriate when the violation is minor or may have been unintentional.
(2) Reprimand. Administered to the city official by letter. The letter shall be prepared by the
mayor, unless the mayor is accused of the violation in which case, the mayor pro tem shall prepare
the letter. A reprimand is appropriate when a violation has been made knowingly and intentionally.
(3) Censure. A written statement administered personally to the city official at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the city council. The censure shall be administered by the mayor, unless the
mayor is accused of the violation in which case, the mayor pro tem shall administer the censure. The
censure shall be given publicly and the city official shall not make any statement in support of or in
opposition thereto. A censure shall be administered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
city council, regardless of whether the city official appears as required.
(4) Other Sanctions. Any sanction imposed under this section is in addition to and not in lieu of
any other penalty, sanction, or remedy which may be imposed or sought, under state law or charter
provisions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/562
State law reference–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171.
Sec. 9.704 General Regulations
(a) City officials shall at all times treat each other and staff with respect and dignity.
(b) The mayor shall preserve order and decorum of city council meetings. The presiding officer shall preserve
order and decorum of meetings of all other city boards.
(c) City officials shall listen courteously and attentively to all public discussions before the city board. City
officials shall refrain from interrupting other speakers; making personal comments not germane to the public
business before them and posted on the agenda, or otherwise interfere with the orderly conduct of meetings.
(d) During meetings of a city board, all city officials shall refrain from abusive conduct, shouting,
argumentative/aggressive behavior, or verbal attacks upon other board members, councilmembers, city staff
members, or members of the general public.
(e) If any provision of this section is violated during a meeting of a city board, including a city council
meeting, the mayor or the presiding officer shall first request that the city official who is breaching the standards
of conduct cease the disruptive conduct.
(f) If, after receiving a warning from the mayor or the presiding officer, the city official persists in disturbing
any city board meeting, the mayor or the presiding officer shall order the person to leave the meeting. If such
person does not remove himself, the mayor or the presiding officer shall order any law enforcement officer who
is on duty to remove that person from the meeting room.
(Ordinance 970 adopted 8/9/11)
ARTICLE 9.800 LIBRARY BOARD
Sec. 9.801 Library Board Created
There is hereby created a board for the city to be known as “The Lake Worth Library Board.” The said board is
hereby organized and created for the purpose of conducting the affairs of the city public library. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 9A)
Sec. 9.802 Membership
The said board shall be composed of seven (7) members, and the following persons and their terms of office are
hereby designated as the original members of the board:
(1) Floyd Thrash - to serve a four-year term until April of 1966;
(2) Mrs. Roger Reddick - to serve a four-year term until April of 1966;
(3) Adam E. Grubb - to serve a four year-term until April of 1966;
(4) Henry Wernsing - to serve a four-year term until April of 1966;
(5) Mrs. Lucy Keith - to serve a two-year term until April of 1964;
(6) Allison C. Ansley - to serve a two-year term until April of 1964; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/562
(7) Mrs. Henry Wernsing - to serve a two-year term until April of 1964.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 9B)
Sec. 9.803 Term
The members of the board shall be appointed by the city council to serve a four-year term from and after the date
of the expiration of the appointment of the original members. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 9C)
Sec. 9.804 Officers
(a) The following officers are appointed for said board:
(1) Floyd Thrash - Chairman
(2) Allison C. Ansley - Vice-Chairman
(3) Mrs. Roger Reddick - Secretary
(4) Mrs. Henry Wernsing - Treasurer
(b) During the month of April, 1964 and each two years thereafter, the members of the board shall elect their
own officers.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 9D)
Sec. 9.805 Powers and Duties of Board
The board shall be responsible for the affairs of the city public library and it shall establish its own rules and
bylaws and shall be responsible to make recommendations to the city council of the city in connection with
expenditures to be made for the said public library. The board shall make no expenditures without the approval
of the city council. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 9E)
ARTICLE 9.900 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE*
ARTICLE 9.1000 OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES OR AGENTS OF THE CITY
Sec. 9.1001 Emergency Action
Every officer, employee or agent of the city, while responding to or engaging in emergency situations is hereby
authorized to act in such manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency in order to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property or to prevent violations of the law or to apprehend persons that the officer or
employee has reasonable cause to believe has violated the criminal laws of the city, state or federal government.
The exception for emergency actions as provided by article 6252-19, section 14(8) is hereby claimed for all
purposes in emergency situations. This provision shall prevail over any other ordinance or any other law
establishing a standard of care that may conflict with this article. Neither the city nor its agent, officer, or
employee shall be liable for failure to use ordinary care in an emergency situation. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 1, Section 13)
Sec. 9.1002 Indemnification and Defense
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/562
The council hereby provides for the indemnification and defense of the officers and employees of the city,
including members of the council, or any board, commission, or committee, including volunteers, against any
loss, cost, or expense, including court costs and attorneys' fees, to the extent allowed by law, arising out of any
claim, suit, or judgment, or settlement thereof, resulting from any alleged negligent act or omission of such
officer, employee, member, or volunteer during the discharge of his or her duties and within the scope of his or
her office, employment, membership, or assigned voluntary position with the city, or in any other case where the
city is directed or authorized by law to do so, provided however, that such indemnification will not be provided
for any act arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of any penal statute or ordinance arising out of any
conduct determined by final judgment to be an act of fraud or to have been taken with the intent to deceive or
defraud, or for any personal or private business of such officer, employee, member or volunteer, or for the gross
negligence or official misconduct, or willful or wrongful act or omission of such officer, employee, member or
volunteer. (Ordinance 995 adopted 2/12/13)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.100 SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The subdivision and development regulations adopted in Ordinance No. 589, as amended, shall govern the
subdivision, platting and development of property within the City of Lake Worth, Texas. These regulations shall
not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in
the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business
hours.
ARTICLE 10.200 PLAT REQUIRED BEFORE BUILDING
Sec. 10.201 Plat to be Presented and Approved Before Building
No developer, builder or any other person, firm, or corporation shall hereafter build a house upon any lot in the
city unless such person has presented a plat to the city council showing an orderly plan for the installation of
adequate street, curb and gutter facilities and until such plat has been approved by the city council.
Sec. 10.202 Builder and Developer to Agree to Abide by This Article
Upon application for approval of his plat, or upon application for any building permit, the builder and/or
developer must agree to abide by the terms of this article. His failure to abide by the terms of this article shall
constitute grounds for revocation of any permit issued by the city to such person failing or refusing to so abide.
Sec. 10.203 Drainage to be Provided
The person installing the street shall provide adequate drainage to protect the street and the houses to be
constructed in the area and shall present this drainage plans along with the plat for approval by the city council.
(Ordinance 766 adopted 11/9/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/562
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.100 AD VALOREM (PROPERTY) TAXES*
Sec. 11.101 When Taxes are Payable; Delinquent
Ad valorem taxes for the city shall be due and payable on the first day of October for the taxable year in which
they were assessed and levied. Such taxes may be paid without interest or penalty from October 1st until January
31st of the following year. Payment of ad valorem taxes after January 31st of the following year will carry
delinquent penalty and interest charges imposed by the ad valorem tax laws of the state. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 4A)
Sec. 11.102 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 11.102 pertaining to tax discounts and deriving from Chapter 1, Section 4B of the 1987 Code, was
deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 448 adopted by the city on September 14, 1993.
Sec. 11.103 Additional Penalty for Collection of Delinquent Taxes
(a) The city adopts the additional twenty percent (20%) penalty to defray the costs of collection of delinquent
taxes as authorized by Sections 33.07 and 33.08, Texas Tax Code. (Ordinance 748 adopted 7/20/04)
(b) In addition to the collection expenses provided for in subsection (a) above, whenever a delinquent tax suit
is filed, the taxing unit shall be entitled to recover reasonable expenses, subject to the approval of the court, that
are incurred by the taxing unit in determining the name, identity, and location of necessary parties and in
procuring necessary legal descriptions of the property on which a delinquent tax is due, as provided by Section
33.48(a)(3) of the Texas Property Tax Code. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 4C)
Sec. 11.104 Elderly Homestead Tax Exemption
(a) There is hereby created an exemption of the first $50,000.00 of the assessed taxable value rendered by the
county appraisal district of all residence homesteads (for city tax purposes) belonging to a person over the age of
sixty-five (65) years. (Ordinance 839 adopted 8/8/06)
(b) In order to qualify for this exemption, each person holding legal title to such residence homestead must be
over sixty-five (65) years prior to January 1st of the year the exemption is claimed.
(c) In order to qualify for this exemption each person holding legal title to such residence homestead must
register with Tarrant County Appraisal District.
(d) This exemption shall apply to natural persons and not to corporations, partnerships, or associations.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 4D)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/562
(e) This exemption shall be in full force and effect for and after taxable year 2006. (Ordinance 839 adopted
8/8/06)
ARTICLE 11.200 LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX*
Sec. 11.201 Local Sales and Use Tax Levied
Pursuant to Ordinance 127, at an election held on December 5, 1967, the voters of the city adopted a one percent
(1%) local sales and use tax. The election was held as authorized by Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, Art. 1066c.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 5A)
Sec. 11.202 Local Sales Tax Retained on Residential Gas and Electricity
The imposition of the one percent (1%) city sales tax on residential use of gas and electricity is hereby
continued. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 5B)
Sec. 11.203 Local Sales and Use Tax Levied on Telecommunications Services
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this
section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other
telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot
be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The application of the exemption provided for in Article 1066c, Section 4B(a), V.A.T.C.S. is hereby
repealed by the city as authorized by Section 4B(b) thereof.
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city, for all other local
sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the State of Texas.
(d) The city manager or his/her designee shall forward to the comptroller of the State of Texas by United
States registered or certified mail a copy of this article along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote
and discussion on this section.
(e) This section shall become effective as of October 1, 1987.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, Section 5C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 11.300 HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.301 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purpose of this article and except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows:
Finance Director. The duly appointed finance director of the city or the finance directors designee.
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider
and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of
occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable tax, and the means
of payment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/562
Guest. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in
a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement.
Guest Room. A room in a hotel occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for sleeping, and rented for more
than two dollars ($2.00) per day.
Hotel. Building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodation for consideration. The term
includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or bed and
breakfast. The term does not include:
(1) A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; or
(2) A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher
education or a private or independent institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by
Section 61.003 of the Texas Education Code, as amended, that is used by the institution for the
purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or
activity at the institution.
Lodging Provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to the owner or proprietor
of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, or any other person operating such hotel subject to
collecting and remitting the tax imposed upon guests.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel.
Permanent Resident. Any guest who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have
established the right of occupancy to any guest room in a hotel for more that than (30) continuous days.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint
stock company, corporation, or any other group of combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular
number.
Quarter. Shall mean the calendar quarters of:
(1) First quarter to include January, February, and March;
(2) Second quarter to include April, May and June;
(3) Third quarter to include July, August and September;
(4) Fourth quarter to include October, November and December.
Rent. The consideration charged for the occupancy of a guest room, valued in money, whether received in
money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also
the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the guest, without any deduction.
Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article as provided for by Chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.301), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.302 Levy and Amount of Tax
There shall be paid by the guest for every occupancy of guest room in the city a tax at the rate of seven percent
(7%) of the amount of rent unless an exception is provided under Section 11.304. (Ordinance 791, sec. 1
(11.302), adopted 4/12/05)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/562
Sec. 11.303 Collection
Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall collect a tax of seven percent (7%) on the amount of
rent from the guest unless an exception is provided under Section 11.304. The lodging provider shall provide a
receipt to each guest which shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other applicable
taxes. The tax shall be due from the guest, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that
the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect
appropriately. (Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.303), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.304 Exemptions and Refunds
(a) No tax shall be collected from a guest after becoming a permanent resident.
(b) All persons specified in Section 351.006 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, are exempt from the
payment of the tax imposed under this article.
(c) Any person entitled to receive a refund of tax paid under this article may file a refund claim as provided in
Section 156.154 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(d) A person described in Section 156.103(c) of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, shall pay the tax imposed
by this article, but the state governmental entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the
tax paid.
(e) To receive a refund of tax paid under this article, the governmental entity entitled to the refund must file a
refund claim with the finance director on a form prescribed by the state comptroller and provided by the finance
director. A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the city manager only for each calendar quarter for
all reimbursements accrued during that quarter.
(f) No tax shall be collected from a foreign diplomat when presenting a tax exemption card issued by the
United States Department of State.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.304), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.305 Registration of Lodging Providers
(a) Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately
complete a registration for lodging providers and file it with the city no later than thirty (30) days after the date
that this article becomes effective or prior to the opening of the lodging facility.
(b) Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact
business, the location and address of the business and any other information which would facilitate the
administration of the tax as prescribed by the finance director.
(c) The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or
partnership, by a member or partner, in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer.
(d) A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate
shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.305), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.306 Due Dates for Payment and Returns
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/562
(a) On or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period in which tax is
collected, a lodging provider shall file a copy of the Texas Hotel Occupancy Tax Report for the month and a
return with the finance director showing:
(1) The rent paid for all occupancies in the preceding month;
(2) The amount of the tax collected on the occupancies; and
(3) Any other information the finance director may reasonably require.
(b) A lodging provider shall pay the tax due on all occupancies to the city at the time of the filing of the return
required under subsection (a) of this section. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the
20th day of the succeeding month in which it remains unpaid.
(Ordinance 935 adopted 11/10/09)
(c) A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax shall be assessed a penalty to
be added to the tax in the amount of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax. Only the city council of the
city may waive this penalty for good cause.
(d) Delinquent taxes draw interest at the rate of 10 percent per year beginning thirty (30) days from the date
the tax is due.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.306), adopted 4/12/05)
(e) The city council may, for good cause, extend the time for a lodging provider to file its returns for no longer
than thirty (30) days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the
lodging provider. An extension may not be applicable for longer than one (1) year. A lodging provider granted
an extension shall pay an amount equal to the tax paid for the corresponding month of the prior year. This
payment shall be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise be due without the extension. No penalty
shall be assessed during the extension period. (Ordinance 935 adopted 11/10/09)
(f) Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and
shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount
is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be one percent (1%) of the amount due.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.306), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.307 Deficiencies
(a) If the finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns or the amount of the tax required to be paid
to the city by any lodging provider, the director may compute and determine the amount required to be paid
upon the basis of any information within the director's possession or that may come into the director's
possession.
(b) A penalty shall be assessed upon the amount of any deficiency, as provided by Section 11.306(c). The
deficient amount draws interest at the rate of 10 percent per year beginning thirty (30) days from the date the
notice of deficiency is served pursuant to subsection (c).
(c) The finance director shall give to the lodging provider written notice of the deficiency and its amount. The
notice may be served personally or by mail. Service by mail shall be addressed to the lodging provider at the
address as it appears in city records. Service by mail is complete when received by certified mail with a receipt
signed by the addressee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/562
(d) Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency shall be served within
four (4) years after the amount became delinquent or within four (4) years after the return is filed, whichever
period should last expire.
(e) Within ten (10) days of being served a notice of deficiency, the lodging provider may contest such in
writing addressed to the finance director. The lodging provider shall include such documents as it believes may
present grounds for abatement of the determination. The finance director shall give written notice of the decision
on the contest to the lodging provider in the same manner as provided in Subsection (c) above. The decision of
the finance director shall be deemed final unless an appeal is made in writing to the city council within ten (10)
days of the lodging provider having been served with the finance director's decision. The governing authority
shall approve or disapprove the appeal, and notify the applicant of its decision.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.307), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.308 Failure to Provide Return
(a) If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of
the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount or total rentals in the city which
are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging
provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the
possession of the finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in Section 11.307(c),
and the lodging provider shall enjoy the same rights of protest as prescribed in Section 11.307(e).
(b) A penalty assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by Section 11.306(c). The deficient
or delinquent amount draws interest at the rate of 10 percent per year beginning thirty (30) days from:
(1) The date the written notice is served pursuant to subsection (a); or
(2) The date the amount was due under Section 11.306.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.308), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.309 Collection on Selling or Quitting Business
(a) If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out the business or quits the business,
it shall make a final return and payment within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business.
(b) If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his
business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to
cover such amount until the former owner produces from the finance director either a receipt reflecting full
payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due.
(c) If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, the purchaser shall be
personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase price.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.309), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.310 Authority of Finance Director; Retention of Records and Audits
(a) The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/562
(b) Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for the period of time stated in
Section 11.307(d), all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the finance director
may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination
within the city.
(c) The finance director may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other
facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to
verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and
determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging
provision, unless the finance director shall authorize another place within the city.
(d) In administration of the provisions of this article, the finance director may require the filing of reports by
any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest
rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when required by said
official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for
exemption, or such other information as the finance director may prescribe.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.310), adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 11.311 Penalty
(a) A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Fails to collect the tax imposed by this article;
(2) Fails to file a report as required by this article;
(3) Fails to pay the city manager the tax when payment is due;
(4) Files a false report; or
(5) Fails to comply with Section 11.309 when purchasing a hotel.
(b) An offense committed under subsection (a) of this section is punishable by a fine as provided in Section
1.109 of this code. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or
permitted, shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) In addition, the city is authorized to file legal proceedings against the hotel for noncompliance seeking any
other remedies provided by state law. The city may seek to have the lodging provider enjoined from operating
the hotel until such time as the delinquency is paid, as well as to require forfeiture of any applicable collection
fee retained by the lodging provider.
(d) In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a person is liable to the city for all reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the city in enforcing this article against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person
under this article.
(e) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to other available remedies.
(Ordinance 791, sec. 1 (11.311), adopted 4/12/05)
ARTICLE 11.400 TAXATION OF LEASED MOTOR VEHICLES
The city chooses not to exempt leased vehicles and will assess and levy ad valorem taxes on said vehicles as
authorized by Texas Tax Code, Section 11.252. (Ordinance 682 adopted 12/11/01)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/562
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.100 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall, for the purpose of this article, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Abandoned Motor Vehicle. Shall have the meaning ascribed by Texas Transportation Code section 683.002, as
amended. For purposes of this article, the term shall also include motor vehicles left unattended on the right-ofway
of a city street for more than forty-eight (48) hours. (Ordinance 1145, sec. 3, adopted 6/11/19)
Alley. Any street herein defined having no legal or official name other than “alley” or twenty (20) feet or less in
width.
Bus. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) or more passengers and used for the transportation of
persons; and every motor vehicle other than a taxicab designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 1)
Commercial Passenger Transportation. A mode of transportation provided by a bus or motor coach designed to
accommodate more than ten (10) passengers, including the operator, for compensation, and that is powered by a
primary propulsion engine, not including railroad, light rail or taxicabs. (Ordinance 897, sec. 1, adopted
11/11/08)
Crosswalks. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the
sidewalk on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edge of
the traversible roadway.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or
other makings on the surface.
Curb. The line adjacent to the edge of the roadway which may be either a raised or lowered, surface marked or
understood.
Double Park. Parking of a vehicle alongside of a vehicle that is parked parallel to a curb or behind a vehicle that
is angle-parked at a curb or curbline.
Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle or assumes control of a vehicle.
Fire Lane. Any street or part upon which parking either is restricted or prohibited for the purpose of facilitating
the use or passage of equipment of the fire department or is restricted or prohibited as an escape route for
persons from a public place.
Flammable Fluid. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70 degrees F. or less as determined by a tabliabue or
equivalent closed cup test device.
Highway, Limited Access or Controlled Access. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except only at
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/562
such points and in such a manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such
highway, street or roadway.
Horse. Any saddle or harness animal.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 1)
Idle. The operation of an engine in the operating mode, where the engine is not engaged in gear, where the
engine operates at a speed at the revolutions per minute specified by the engine or vehicle manufacturer for
when the accelerator is fully released, and there is no load on the engine. (Ordinance 897, sec. 1, adopted
11/11/08)
Injury, Personal. A wound or injury to any part of the human body which necessitates treatment.
Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none, then
the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in
conflict.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway
of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event
such intersecting highway shall also include two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing
of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as separate intersections.
Limit Lines. Boundaries of parking areas, loading zones, safety or danger zones, crosswalks and lines marked for
the purpose of excluding traffic or parking.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas. Any material which is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons
or mixtures of them: Propane, propylene, butanes (normal butane or isobutane and butylenes).
Loading Zones. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers or materials.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 1)
Mechanical Operations. The use of electrical tools or equipment in construction, maintenance, or repair of
facilities. (Ordinance 897, sec. 1, adopted 11/11/08)
Motor Vehicle. A self-propelled vehicle. (Ordinance 1145, sec. 3, adopted 6/11/19)
Motorcycles. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more
than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
Negligence. Negligence is the want of such care and caution as a person of ordinary prudence would use under
like or similar circumstances. Negligence shall be prima facie presumed from the fact of collision.
Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean Central Standard Time.
Operator. Any person in control of or assuming control of a vehicle.
Owner. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement
for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the condition stated in
the agreement and with the immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee or
mortgager shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/562
Parkway. That portion of a street between the curbline or the lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property
line.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 1)
Passenger Transit Operations. A regional mode of public transportation that is funded through a portion of sales
tax for such region being served. (Ordinance 897, sec. 1, adopted 11/11/08)
Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
Person. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation.
Police Officer. Every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 1)
Primary Propulsion Engine. A gasoline or diesel-fueled internal combustion engine attached to a motor vehicle
that provides the power to propel the motor vehicle into motion and maintain motion. (Ordinance 897, sec. 1,
adopted 11/11/08)
Private Road or Driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner
and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons.
Public Place. A place where people are assembled or to which people commonly resort for the purpose of
business, amusement, recreation or other lawful purposes.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 1)
Recreational Vehicle. Any motor vehicle or trailer designed for temporary or seasonal dwelling, camping, or
recreational purposes. The term shall include travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor coach
homes, converted trucks, vans, and buses, boats, boat trailers, personal watercrafts, and personal watercraft
trailers.
Residential Subdivision. Any platted subdivision zoned or used for any permitted residential use in the city.
(Ordinance 1145, sec. 3, adopted 6/11/19)
Right-of-Way. The privilege of the immediate lawful use of the roadway.
Roadway. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” as used herein shall refer to any such
roadway separately but not to all roadways collectively.
Roadway or Highway, Divided. A highway divided into two (2) roadways by leaving an intervening space, or by
a physical barrier, or by a clearly marked and indicated dividing section between the two (2) roadways.
Roadway, Laned. A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular travel.
Safety Zones. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and
which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
School Bus. Every motor vehicle bearing clearly visible signs with the words “school bus” in letters not less than
eight (8) inches high, owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/562
to and from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to and
from school.
Semi-Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons
or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight load rests
upon or is carried by another vehicle.
Sidewalk. That surfaced portion of a street between either the curbline or the lateral line of a roadway and the
adjacent property line and intended for the use of the pedestrians.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 1)
Stopping, Standing, and Parking. Shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Texas Transportation Code
section 541.401, as it may be amended. (Ordinance 1145, sec. 3, adopted 6/11/19)
Street or Highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel.
Street, Through. Every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from
intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop
signs are erected as provided for in this article.
Streets, One-Way. Any street or highway on which traffic is restricted to proceed in one (1) direction only.
Tire, Metal. Every tire, the surface of which is in contact with the highway, and is wholly or partly of metal or
other hard nonresilient material.
Tire, Pneumatic. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
Tire, Solid. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the
support of the load.
Tractor, Farm. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows,
mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
Tractor, Road. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to
carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
Tractor, Truck. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed so as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while
using any street for the purpose of travel.
Traffic Control Devices, Official. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this article
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
Traffic Control Signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and proceed.
Traffic Section. The traffic section of the police department of the city.
Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/562
Trailer, House. Every vehicle without motive power designed for human habitation and for carrying persons and
property upon its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
Trailer, Pole. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the
towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and
used ordinarily for the transportation of long or irregular shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members
capable, generally, or sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
Truck. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Vehicle, Authorized Emergency. Vehicles of the police department, fire department and such ambulances and
emergency vehicles as are designated and authorized by the chief of police of the city.
Vehicle, Motor. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 1)
ARTICLE 12.200 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 12.201 Traffic Ordinances to be Enforced by Chief of Police
It shall be the duty of the chief of police with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police
department, if any, to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable
to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to carry out those
duties especially imposed upon him by this article and by other ordinances of this city. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 2A)
Sec. 12.202 Chief of Police to Investigate Accidents
It shall be the duty of the chief of police, assisted by other members of the police department, if any, to
investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violation of
law causing or contributing to such accident. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 2B)
Sec. 12.203 Traffic Accident Studies
Whenever the accidents of any particular location become numerous, the chief of police shall cooperate with the
city council in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures and have power to effect
changes. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 2C)
Sec. 12.204 Traffic Accident Reports
(a) The chief of police shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be
available for the use and information of the city council.
(b) The chief of police shall receive and file all accident reports made to him under state law or under any
ordinances of this city, but all such reports of traffic accidents made by drivers or police officers shall be for the
confidential use of the police department and the city council, and no such report shall be admissible in any civil
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/562
or criminal proceeding other than on the request of person making such report or upon request of the court
having jurisdiction and then only to prove a compliance with the laws requiring the making of any such report.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 2D)
Sec. 12.205 Chief of Police to Submit Annual Traffic Safety Report
The chief of police shall annually prepare a traffic report covering the calendar year which shall be filed with the
city council. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters as follows:
(1) The number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic data.
(2) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of
the police department.
(3) The plans and recommendations of the chief of police for future traffic safety activities.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 2E)
Sec. 12.206 Municipal Vehicle Inscription Requirement; Exemption
(a) In accordance with provisions of Texas Transportation Code Section 721.005, those city vehicles used for
the purposes of performing official duties and that are eligible for exemption are hereby exempted from bearing
the inscription generally required of municipal vehicles by Section 721.004. (Ordinance 798, sec. 1, adopted
7/12/05)
(b) The person holding the position of chief of police with the city is hereby authorized to determine which
eligible city-owned vehicles shall bear no inscription as provided by this section. (Ordinance 798, sec. 2,
adopted 7/12/05)
ARTICLE 12.300 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sec. 12.301 Authority of Police Department Officials
(a) It shall be the duty of the chief of police or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce
all street traffic laws of this city and all state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.
(b) The chief of police or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct
all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire departments may direct
traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding provisions of the traffic laws.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 3A)
Sec. 12.302 Required Obedience to Traffic Ordinances
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden by, or fail to perform any acts required in this article.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 3B)
Sec. 12.303 Obedience to Police Department Officials
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/562
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer of the city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 3C)
Sec. 12.304 Persons Propelling Push Carts or Riding Animals to Obey Traffic
Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal
drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this article applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those
provisions of this article which by their very nature can have no application. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
9, Section 3D)
Sec. 12.305 Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices Restricted
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon
any roadway except while crossing a street or a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all
of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 9, Section 3E)
Sec. 12.306 Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations
The provisions of this article shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the
United States Government, this state, country, or city and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any
of the provisions of this article except as otherwise permitted in this article or by state statutes. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 3F)
Sec. 12.307 Exemption to Authorized Emergency Vehicles
(a) The provisions of this article regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to
authorized emergency vehicles as defined in this article except as follows: A driver when operating any such
vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
(1) Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this article.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary
for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the speed limit so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions as
long as he does not endanger life or property.
(b) Those exceptions hereinbefore granted in reference to the movement of an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when the driver of said vehicle sounds a siren, bell, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from the front as a warning to others.
(c) The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 3G)
ARTICLE 12.400 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/562
Sec. 12.401 Authority to Install Control Devices
The chief of police shall have placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals and devices when and where
required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of said ordinance, and may
cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic signs, signals, and devices as he may deem necessary
to regulate traffic, under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4A)
Sec. 12.402 Manual and Specifications for Traffic Control Devices
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the
State Highway Commission or resolution adopted by the legislative body of this city. All signs and signals
required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as is practicable, be uniform as to type and location
through the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this
article shall be official traffic control devices. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4B)
Sec. 12.403 Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject
to the exemptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this article. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4C)
Sec. 12.404 When Traffic Devices Required for Enforcement Purposes
No provision of this article for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official sign was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9,
Section 4D)
Sec. 12.405 Traffic Control Signal Legend
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words “Go,” “Caution,” or “Stop,” or
exhibiting different colors successively one at a time or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and
said terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green (Indication) or “Go” or both.
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the (circular green) signal, except when prohibited under
sections of this article otherwise appropriate and in conflict herewith, may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular
traffic including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and
to pedestrians within the intersection or on an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
(B) Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with
another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated
by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/562
time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(C) Pedestrians facing (any green) signal may proceed across the roadway within any
marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Yellow (Indication) or “Caution.”
(A) When shown following the green of “Go” signal, vehicular traffic facing the signal is
thereby warned that the red or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “Stop” signal is
exhibited.
(B) When shown following the red or “Stop” signal, vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection until the green or “Go” signal is exhibited.
(C) No pedestrian facing a (yellow) signal shall enter the roadway until the green or “Go”
signal is shown unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian “Walk” signal.
(3) Red (Indication) or With “Stop.”
(A) Vehicular traffic facing such signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or at a (stop) line where marked, (and may then turn right or, if the intersecting
streets are both one-way streets and left turns are permissible, may turn left, after standing until
the intersection may be entered safely, yielding right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection, and provided no signs are
posted at the intersection prohibiting such turn. Traffic not so turning shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown.)
(B) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, no pedestrian shall enter the
roadway when facing a (red) signal.
(4) In the event an official control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an
intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by
their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of sign or marking on the
pavement indicating stop, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4E)
Sec. 12.406 Flashing Signals
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(1) Flashing Red (Stop Signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line
when marked and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
(2) Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signals only with
caution. (However, this does not apply at railroad crossings.)
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4F)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/562
Sec. 12.407 Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals, or Markers
(a) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal,
marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation or resembles an official traffic control device or signal,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device, and no person
shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic signal or sign bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways, signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs.
(b) No person shall without lawful authority place, maintain or display upon or in view of any public
sidewalk, curb, or street, any sign, signal, marking or device which indicates reserved parking space or is
designed to reserve parking space upon the street for the adjoining owners or for customers of the adjoining
owners.
(c) No person shall without the proper authority place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any public
sidewalk, curb or street any sign, signal or device or marking which tends to reserve parking for the adjoining
property owners or their customers, where curbs are moved in upon property adjoining the street sufficiently to
permit head-in or angle parking.
(d) Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the
chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(e) No person shall without lawful authority by verbal statement or by gesture, attempt to reserve parking
space upon a street for an adjoining owner or for the customers of an adjoining owner.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4G)
Sec. 12.408 Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices
No person shall without proper authority attempt to, or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any
official traffic control device or any shield, insignia or inscription thereon, or any part thereof. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4H)
Sec. 12.409 Chief of Police to Designate Crosswalks, Establish Safety Zones, and Mark Traffic Lanes
The chief of police is hereby authorized:
(1) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the
roadway, crosswalks at such other places as he may deem necessary where in his opinion, there is
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway.
(2) To establish safety zones of such character and at such places as he may deem necessary for
the protection of pedestrians.
(3) To mark lanes for traffic or street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable,
consistent with the traffic control ordinances of this city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4I)
Sec. 12.410 Affirming and Ratifying Traffic Control Devices
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/562
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings heretofore placed or erected by the police department and
now in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified, and declared to
be official traffic control devices; provided however, said traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the
provisions of state law or this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 4J)
ARTICLE 12.500 ACCIDENTS
Sec. 12.501 Negligence Collisions
(a) No person driving or operating or in charge of any motor vehicle, animal or any other vehicle shall
willfully or with negligence cause or suffer or permit the same to come in collision with any other vehicle of any
nature whatsoever, or with any animal, person, street sign, street post, water plug or any other obstacle or object
whatever, in or on any street, alley, avenue, highway or other public place whatever, in the city. Violation of this
section shall be known as the offense of “negligent collision.”
(b) For the purpose of the subsection (a), negligence shall be the driving at a greater rate of speed than
allowed by law, or the violation of any traffic law or ordinance, or the failure to use that degree of care and
caution that a person of ordinary prudence would use under like or similar circumstances.
(c) Proof of a collision shall be prima facie evidence of the offense of negligent collision and proof of no
intent to injure shall be no defense to the charge of negligent collision.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 5A)
Sec. 12.502 Accidents Involving Death or Personal Injuries
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death of any person shall immediately
stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, but shall then return forthwith to,
and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of Section
12.503 hereof. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 5B)
Sec. 12.503 Duty to Give Information and Render Aid
(a) The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage
to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his name, address, and the registration
number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request, and if available, exhibit his operator's, commercial
operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck, or the driver or occupant or person attending any vehicle
collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable aid and/or assistance, including
the carrying, or the making arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for
medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such is requested by the
injured person.
(b) The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to
any vehicle shall, unless physically disabled, remain at the scene of the accident until released by the
investigating police officer.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 5C)
Sec. 12.504 Accidents Involving Damages to a Vehicle
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/562
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as
possible but shall forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of such accident until he has
fulfilled the requirements of Section 12.503. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than
is necessary. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 5D)
Sec. 12.505 Duty When Striking Unattended Vehicle
The driver of any vehicle which collides with and damages any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately
stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and
address of the driver and owner of the vehicle, striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous
place in, or securely attached to and plainly visible on the vehicle struck, a written notice giving the name and
address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances
thereof. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 5E)
Sec. 12.506 Duty Upon Striking Fixtures Upon a Highway
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damages to fixtures legally upon or adjacent
to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of
such facts and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle striking such fixture and
shall upon request, and if available, exhibit his operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's license, and shall
make a report of such accident as required by the state law and this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
9, Section 5F)
Sec. 12.507 Immediate Reports of Accidents
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person, or total property
damage to an apparent extent of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more, shall immediately by the quickest means
of communication give notice of such accident to the police department. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9,
Section 5G)
Sec. 12.508 Written Reports of Accidents
(a) The chief of police may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be
made as provided in this article, to file supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient in his
opinion and he may require witnesses of accidents to render reports to him.
(b) Every law enforcement officer, who in the regular course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident of
which reports must be made as provided in this section, either at the time of it at the scene of the accident or
thereafter, by interviewing participating persons or witnesses shall within twenty-four (24) hours after
completing such investigation, forward a written report of such accident to the chief of police.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 5H)
Sec. 12.509 Duty of Occupant to Make Report When Driver Unable to
Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically unable or incapable of making a required accident report and
there is another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant
shall make or cause to be made said report. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 5I)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/562
ARTICLE 12.600 DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED
Sec. 12.601 Operation of Vehicles by Persons Under the Influence of Intoxicating Liquor or Narcotic
Drugs
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drive or operate any automobile or any vehicle upon any
street or alley within the limits of the city while such person is intoxicated or in any degree under the influence
of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 6A)
Sec. 12.602 Control of Vehicle by Persons Under the Influence of Intoxicating Liquor or Narcotic Drugs
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to be in actual physical control or to assume control of
any vehicle while such person is in any degree under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs.
(b) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate any vehicle upon any street or alley in the
city while said person is under lawful medication if such medication is capable of rendering said operator
incapable of proper control of said vehicle.
(c) Proof that a person was sitting behind the steering wheel of a vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that
the person was in actual physical control of the vehicle.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 6B)
ARTICLE 12.700 SPEED REGULATIONS
Sec. 12.701 Speed Restrictions
(a) No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions then existing, having regard to the actual and potential hazards when approaching a
crossing or intersection, when approaching or going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions; and in every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be
necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street or highway in
compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(b) Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) above, the
speed of thirty (30) miles per hour shall be lawful, and any speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour shall be
unlawful, unless posted for a greater speed by lawful official traffic signs or devices.
(c) Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) above, the
speed of twenty (20) miles per hour in a sign posted “School Zone” during school or designated hours shall be
lawful and any speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour shall be unlawful.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 7A)
Sec. 12.702 Establishment of Speed Zones
Whenever the city council shall determine upon the basis of a survey conducted by the police department or the
state highway department that the thirty (30) miles per hour speed hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is
reasonable or safe under conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of any
street or highway, the city council shall determine what it considers to be safe and reasonable and safe speed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/562
limit thereat, which shall be effective at all times thereafter when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are
erected at such intersections or other places or parts of such street. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section
7B)
Sec. 12.703 Speed Zone Classifications and Speed Limits
(a) The following speed limits are adopted for vehicles traveling on the following types of streets and
roadways in the city limits, which streets and roadways are shown on the Master Thoroughfare Plan, revised
October 2003, subject however to the exceptions listed in Section 12.704 of this code:
(a) Minor Collector (C) (Red) - Maximum 30 miles per hour
(b) Major Collector (M4U) (Light Green) - Maximum 30 miles per hour
(c) Major Collector (M5U) (Blue) - Maximum of 30 miles per hour
(d) Major Thoroughfare (P6D) (Dark Green) - Maximum 35 miles per hour
(e) Major Thoroughfare (P6U) (Brown) -Maximum 30 miles per hours
(f) Residential (Black/White) - Maximum 20 miles per hour
(g) State Maintained (Gray) - As designated in Section 12.704 of this code
(h) School Zones (As designated in Section 12.704 of this code) - Maximum 20 miles per hour
from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. during school days
(b) A copy of the Master Thoroughfare Plan, revised October 2003, is attached hereto, marked Exhibit “A,” to
Ordinance 760 and is made a part hereof by reference and on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance 760 adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 12.704 Special Speed Zones
(a) State Maintained Roadways. The following speed limits are adopted for the following state maintained
roadways in the city limits:
(1) I.H. 820, Southwest bound and Northeast bound Frontage Roads (from Fort Worth City limits
to Lake Worth City limits) - Maximum 40 miles per hour.
(2) Jacksboro Highway (S.H.199) - Maximum 40 miles per hour.
(3) Boat Club Road (4200 and 4300 Blocks) - Maximum 45 miles per hour, except during school
zone hours when the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour.
(4) Azle Avenue (5900 Block to 6100 Block) - Maximum 45 miles per hour.
(Ordinance 760 adopted 10/12/04)
(b) School Zones. The following streets or roadways are designated “school zones” with a maximum speed
limit of 20 miles per hour during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. during school days, such streets being
shown on the master thoroughfare plan:
(1) Charbonneau Road from Merrett Drive to Shawnee Trail and east Comanche Trail.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/562
(2) Dakota Street from Effie Morris Lane to Charbonneau Road.
(3) Telephone Road from the 6700 block thereof to Delaware Trail.
Note: Refer to subsection (a)(3) above for school zone speed limit for state-maintained roadway.
(Ordinance 1080 adopted 5/9/17)
(c) Park Areas. The maximum speed limit for vehicles traveling upon streets or roads in a city park is hereby
set at 20 miles per hour. The chief of police has the authority to erect such signs as are necessary to inform the
public of the speed limit upon these streets or roads. (Ordinance 760 adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 12.705 Minimum Speed Regulations
(a) No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal reasonable
movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
(b) Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers and apparent willful
disobedience of this provision or refusal to comply with the direction of an officer shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 7E)
Sec. 12.706 When Speed Restrictions are Not Applicable
The speed limitations set forth in this article shall not apply to an authorized emergency vehicle when used in the
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law; or when responding to but not returning from a fire alarm;
or an ambulance upon an emergency call; provided however, that it shall be unlawful to drive an ambulance
upon an emergency call within the city limits of the city at a rate of speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles per
hour upon any street with the exception of State Highway 199, and it shall be unlawful to drive an ambulance
upon an emergency call without a driver of said ambulance sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or whistle and
when such emergency vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) light lamp exhibiting red visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle. This provision
shall not relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of
a reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 7F)
ARTICLE 12.800 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY, OVERTAKING AND PASSING, ETC.
Sec. 12.801 Driving on Right Side of Roadway Exceptions
Upon all roadways the driver of a vehicle shall drive upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules
governing such movements;
(2) When the right half of the roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair;
(3) Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under rules applicable therein;
or
(4) Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8A)
Sec. 12.802 Passing Vehicles Proceeding in Opposite Directions
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways
having width for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least
one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8B)
Sec. 12.803 Overtaking a Vehicle on the Left
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject
to those limitation, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated.
(1) The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass
to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaking vehicle.
(2) Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken
vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not
increase speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8C)
Sec. 12.804 When Overtaking on the Right is Permitted
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following
conditions:
(1) When the vehicle overtaken is making or has signaled to make a left turn.
(2) Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles or
sufficient for two (2) or more lines.
(3) Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one (1) direction
of movement when the roadway is free from obstruction and of sufficient width for two (2) or more
lines of moving traffic.
(4) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only on
conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving
off the pavement or main traveled portion of the roadway.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8D)
Sec. 12.805 Limitations on Overtaking on the Left
No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction of the vehicle overtaken. In every
event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the roadway before coming within (two
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/562
hundred (200) feet) of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
9, Section 8E)
Sec. 12.806 Further Limitations on Driving to Left Center of Roadway
(a) No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
(1) When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in a street or highway where the driver's
view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might
approach from the opposite direction.
(2) When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or while traversing any intersection.
(3) When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel.
(b) The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way street.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8F)
Sec. 12.807 Driving on Roadways Laned for Traffic
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules
in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply:
(1) The driver of any vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and the
vehicle shall not be moved from such lane until the driver first ascertains that such movement can be
safely made.
(2) Upon a roadway which has been divided into three (3) lanes, the driver of the vehicle shall not
drive in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left
turn, or when such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction
the vehicle is proceeding and is marked to give notice of such allocation.
(3) Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or
designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center
of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of every such sign.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8G)
Sec. 12.808 One-Way Roadways and Rotary Traffic Islands
(a) The governing body may designate any alley, street or highway for one-way traffic and it shall be the duty
of the chief of police to erect upon any roadway so designated appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(b) The governing body shall have the authority to designate for one-way by resolution and to erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof:
(1) Any section of roadway specifically designed for one-way operation, such as interchange
roadways which are remotely separated for overpass purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/562
(2) Those access drives which require one-way operation for convenience or safety.
(c) Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, the driver of a vehicle shall drive only in
the direction so designated.
(d) The driver of a vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall drive only to the right of such island.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8H)
Sec. 12.809 Following Too Closely
(a) The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent,
having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street or highway.
Proof of collision by the front end of one (1) vehicle with the rear end of another vehicle, both of which had
immediately been proceeding in a forward direction, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection
(a) above, by the driver of the vehicle first mentioned.
(b) The driver of any motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway
outside of a business or residential district and which is following another motor truck or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle, shall whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter
and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or other vehicle.
(c) Motor vehicles being drawn upon any roadway outside of a business or residential district in a caravan or
motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between such
vehicles or combination of vehicles as to allow any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger.
This provision shall not apply to a funeral procession.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8I)
Sec. 12.810 Driving on Divided Streets or Highways
Whenever any street or highway has been divided into two (2) or more roadways by leaving an intervening
space or by physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic,
every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or
within any such dividing space, barrier or divided section except through an opening in such physical barrier or
divided section or space or at a cross-over or intersection established by public authority. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 8J)
ARTICLE 12.900 RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sec. 12.901 Vehicles Approaching or Entering Intersections
(a) The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has
entered the intersection from a different highway.
(b) When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets or highways at approximately the same
time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 9A)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/562
Sec. 12.902 Vehicle Turning Left at Intersection
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as
required by this article, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection
from said opposite direction shall yield right-of-way to the vehicle making the turn. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 9, Section 9B)
Sec. 12.903 Vehicle Entering “Through” Street or Stop Intersection
(a) The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this article at the entrance to a through street and shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from said through street or which are
approaching so closely on said through street as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver having so
yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on said street shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the through street.
(b) The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop sign as required herein at an intersection
where a stop sign is erected at one (1) or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through street and shall
proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obligated to stop which are within the intersection or approaching
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard; but may then proceed.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 9C)
Sec. 12.904 Vehicle Entering “Yield” Intersection
(a) The chief of police shall design an appropriate sign to be used upon streets for the purpose of controlling
the right-of-way intersections other than through streets and state highways. The sign shall bear the word
“Yield” and when its design has been approved by resolution of the governing body it shall be an official sign
for streets.
(b) The chief of police shall investigate unmarked intersections of non-through streets and determine which
are hazardous; at each such intersection he shall install “Yield” signs to control and restrict travel over the
intersecting street that he generally finds, receives or for proper traffic movement should receive, a larger
proportion of vehicular traffic.
(c) The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection where a “Yield” sign is erected at the vehicle's entrance
thereto shall retard the speed of the vehicle and proceed cautiously, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles within
the intersection or to vehicles approaching on the intersecting street so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
(d) Proof that any driver drove past any yield sign and immediately thereafter was involved with, or interfered
with the movement of a vehicle proceeding along the intersecting street, shall constitute prima facie proof of a
violation of this section.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 9D)
Sec. 12.905 Vehicles Entering Street or Highway From Private Road or Driveway
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway from a private road or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said street or highway. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/562
Section 9E)
Sec. 12.906 Operation of Vehicles on Approach of Authorized Emergency Vehicles
(a) Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp
exhibiting a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the front of such vehicle and/or when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the
driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to,
and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop
and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed except when otherwise directed
by a police officer.
(b) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard to the safety of all persons using the highway.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 9F)
ARTICLE 12.1000 TURNING; STARTING; SIGNALS ON STOPPING AND TURNING
Sec. 12.1001 Required Position and Method of Turning at Intersections
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows:
(1) Both the approach for a right turn and right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right
hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2) Approach for a left turn shall be made in the left turn lane, or, if none, in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to enter the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being
entered.
(3) Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in the left
turn lane, or if none, in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and
by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection.
(4) Approach for a left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made as close as
practicable to the left hand curb lane and by passing to the right of the center line of the street being
entered upon leaving the intersection.
(5) Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and the left turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the left hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10A)
Sec. 12.1002 Authority to Place and Obedience to Turning Markers
(a) The chief of police is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than prescribed by law or ordinance.
(b) When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver shall disobey the directions of such indications.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10B)
Sec. 12.1003 Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs
The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not
make a right turn, left turn, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10C)
Sec. 12.1004 Obedience to No-Turn Signs
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no turn, no right, or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver
of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10D)
Sec. 12.1005 Limitations on Turning Around
(a) The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street
except at an intersection. The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite
direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with such other traffic.
(b) The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street
in a business district or upon any through street which has been designated and sign posted as such.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10E)
Sec. 12.1006 Special U-Turns Enumerated
It shall hereafter be unlawful for motor vehicles traveling westbound on State Highway 199, (Jacksboro
Highway) to execute a “U-turn” in the median crossover at the point where Boat Club Road intersects with
Jacksboro Highway. The chief of police is authorized to erect, or have erected, “No U-turn” signs in said
highway median. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10F)
Sec. 12.1007 Starting Parked Vehicle
(a) No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can
be made with safety.
(b) The driver of a vehicle which is stopped, parked, standing or double parked shall not put the vehicle in
motion without caution. The driver shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians and vehicles lawfully approaching so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10G)
Sec. 12.1008 Turning Movements and Required Signals
(a) No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway
as required in Section 12.1001 above, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or drive or otherwise turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with
safety.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/562
(b) No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal
in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10H)
Sec. 12.1009 Signals by Hand and Arm or Signal Device
Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal
lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device of a type approved by the Department of Public Safety of the State of
Texas, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the
front and rear of such vehicle then said signals must be given by such a lamp or lamps or signal device. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10I)
Sec. 12.1010 Method of Giving Hand and Arm Signals
(a) All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the
following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) Left Turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally.
(2) Right Turn. Hand and arm extended upward.
(3) Stop or Decrease Speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(b) The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamp or signal
device approved by the Department of Public Safety of the State of Texas.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 10J)
ARTICLE 12.1100 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Sec. 12.1101 Authority to Designate One-Way Streets and Alleys
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street, or alley, the chief of police
shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs
are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where
movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 11A)
Sec. 12.1102 One-Way Streets and Alleys
Upon these streets and parts of streets and in these alleys which may be designated as such by resolution of the
governing body, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
9, Section 11B)
ARTICLE 12.1200 INTERSECTIONS, THROUGH STREETS, STOPPING
Sec. 12.1201 Intersection Where Stops Required
The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon
other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/562
intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 9, Section 12A)
Sec. 12.1202 Authority to Designate Through Streets
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates a through street, the chief of police shall cause to
be erected and maintained signs giving notice thereof on each and every intersection of such through street.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 12B)
Sec. 12.1203 Signs to Bear the Word “Stop”
Every sign erected pursuant to this article shall bear the word “Stop” and every such sign shall be located as near
as practicable at the nearest line of a crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if none, at the nearest line
of the roadway. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 12C)
Sec. 12.1204 Vehicles and Buses to Stop at Stop Sign
When stop signs are erected as herein provided at or near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a
vehicle and every operator of a bus shall stop such vehicle or bus at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line
before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 12D)
Sec. 12.1205 Emerging From Alley or Private Driveway
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alley or private driveway, yielding the
right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching from either direction. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section
12E)
Sec. 12.1206 Stop When Traffic Obstructed
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 12F)
ARTICLE 12.1300 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Sec. 12.1301 Unattended Motor Vehicles
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the
engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition and effectively setting the brake thereon, and,
when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the road or highway. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13A)
Sec. 12.1302 Use of Headlamps
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/562
On the streets in the city the operation of any motor vehicle which will project glaring or dazzling headlights to
persons in front of such headlamps is hereby prohibited:
(1) if the headlamps are not depressed, dimmed or tilted;
(2) if the upper beams of multibeam headlamps are used;
(3) if any part of the main bright portion of the headlight beam projects higher than a level of five
(5) inches below the level of the center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of twenty-five
(25) feet ahead and in no case higher than forty-two (42) inches above the level on which the vehicle
stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet ahead.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13B)
Sec. 12.1303 Following Emergency Equipment or Vehicles Prohibited
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any emergency vehicles or fire
apparatus traveling on an emergency call closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm or where a police vehicle has stopped
to respond to an emergency call. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13C)
Sec. 12.1304 Crossing Fire Hose
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid on any street, private
driveway or alley without the consent of the fire department official in command. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 9, Section 13D)
Sec. 12.1305 Driving Through Funeral or Other Procession
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while
they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this article. This
provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13E)
Sec. 12.1306 Drivers in a Procession
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand side or edge of the roadway as
practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 9, Section 13F)
Sec. 12.1307 Funeral Procession to be Identified
Each driver in a funeral procession shall turn the headlamps of the vehicle on and it shall be the duty of the
undertaker having charge of a funeral procession to notify each driver of a motor vehicle of this method of
identification. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13G)
Sec. 12.1308 Putting Glass, Etc., on Street Prohibited
No person shall throw or deposit upon any street any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other
substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/562
Section 13H)
Sec. 12.1309 Permit Required Before Mixing Cement on Paved Roadway
No person shall mix or cause to be mixed cement, on the paved portion of any roadway in the city without first
obtaining a permit from the city manager or his/her designee, and when permitted to mix cement on said
roadway it shall be the duty of the permittee to see that all cement, sand, gravel and other materials are
immediately removed from said roadway after said mixing operation has been completed. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13I; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 12.1310 Vehicles Not to be Operated When Load or When Passengers Obstruct Driver's View or
Control of Vehicle
(a) No person shall drive a vehicle when it is loaded with material or passengers so as to obstruct the view of
the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle.
(b) No passenger in a vehicle or bus shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's or operator's
view ahead of or to the sides, or to interfere with control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or bus.
(c) The operator of a motorcycle when in use on the streets, shall not carry any other person upon the handle
bars, frame or tank thereof, nor shall any person ride upon any such vehicle.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13J)
Sec. 12.1311 Clinging to Moving Vehicles
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or in any toy vehicle shall not attach
the same or himself to any motor vehicle upon any roadway. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13K)
Sec. 12.1312 Precautions Required When Load Extends Beyond Rear of Vehicle
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to carry thereon a load of any material which extends to the
rear four (4) feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle unless a red flag, not less than twelve (12)
inches square is displayed in the daytime at the extreme rear end of said load, and so hung that the entire area is
visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear; and a red light, visible under normal conditions for a
distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the sides and rear, is displayed at night at the point of greatest
projection of such material extending beyond the rear of said vehicle. The red light required under this article
shall be in addition to the red light required upon every vehicle. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section
13L)
Sec. 12.1313 Vehicle Shall Not be Driven on a Sidewalk
The driver of a vehicle shall not operate or park any vehicle on any sidewalk except at a permanent or temporary
driveway. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13M)
Sec. 12.1314 Using Vehicle for Primary Purpose of Advertising
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/562
No person shall operate or park any vehicle on any street nor shall any owner suffer or permit any vehicle
belonging to him to be operated or parked for the primary purpose of advertising. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 9, Section 13N)
Sec. 12.1315 Quiet Zones
(a) All territory within two hundred (200) feet of any hospital or rest home in the city is hereby created and
established as a zone of quiet.
(b) The chief of police shall have the power to establish temporary zones of quiet upon any street where a
person is seriously ill if requested to do so by the written statement of at least one (1) registered physician
certifying to its necessity. Said temporary zones of quiet shall embrace all territory within a radius of two
hundred (200) feet of the building occupied by the person named in the request of said physician. Any temporary
zone of quiet and any other zone of quiet declared by ordinance shall be designated by the chief of police by
placing in a conspicuous place in, or at the curbline of the street a sign or marking bearing the words “Quiet
Zone.”
(c) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet no person operating a motor vehicle
within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of said vehicle, except in an emergency.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13O)
Sec. 12.1316 Limitations of Backing
(a) The driver of a vehicle shall not back into an intersection or over a crosswalk. The driver of a vehicle shall
not in any event or at any place back a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
(b) Proof that the driver of a vehicle backed upon or in a street and interfered with another vehicle or with a
pedestrian shall constitute a prima facie proof of a violation of this section.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13P)
Sec. 12.1317 Unlawful to Drive Over Unimproved Roadways
(a) No motor vehicle may travel upon any portion of city park except roadways which are paved and
improved as roadways.
(b) Motor vehicles are prohibited from traveling over any grassy area of said park or over any area of said
park which is not based with asphalt concrete or other concrete.
(c) Any person who drives or propels a motor vehicle in city park in violation of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 13Q)
ARTICLE 12.1400 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 12.1401 Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited; No Signs Required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/562
(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the following
places:
(1) On a sidewalk.
(2) In front of a public or private driveway.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, unless otherwise marked.
(5) On a crosswalk.
(6) At an intersection within thirty (30) feet of an existing intersecting curbline or projection of an
intersecting curbline, unless otherwise marked.
(7) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the chief of police has indicated a different
length by signs or marking.
(8) Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
(9) Alongside or opposite any excavation or street obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking
would obstruct traffic.
(10) In the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(11) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a street tunnel or
underpass.
(12) At any place where official signs or markings prohibit a stopping.
(13) Beside any curb painted red in color.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from
a curb such distance as is unlawful.
Sec. 12.1402 No Street Parking Established
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any motor vehicle upon any portion of the
Jacksboro Highway, State Highway 199, described below:
(1) Any portion of the right-of-way on the north side of said highway between its intersection with
Boat Club Road easterly for a distance of four hundred thirteen point six (413.6) feet to the
intersection of Loop 820 West Frontage Road.
(b) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on the south side of State Highway 199 (Jacksboro Highway)
from a point three hundred (300) feet west of its intersection with Boat Club Road to a point three hundred (300)
feet east of the said point where State Highway 199 intersects with Boat Club Road. The chief of police is
authorized and directed to erect “no parking” signs in said six hundred (600) foot area.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any motor vehicle upon any portion of
Foster Drive, described below:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/562
(1) Any portion of the right-of-way on the north and south sides of said street from its intersection
with Ranch Drive westerly for a distance of five hundred twenty-eight (528) feet to the Fort Worth
city limit line.
(d) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any motor vehicle upon any
portion of Tompkins Corner, described below:
(1) Any portion of the right-of-way on the east and west sides of said street from its intersection
with Foster Drive northerly for a distance of one hundred seventy-eight (178) feet to the Fort Worth
city limit line.
Sec. 12.1403 Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as
to leave available less than fifteen (15) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
Sec. 12.1404 Parking in Alleys
(a) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway to any
abutting property.
(b) No person shall park a vehicle which is not a commercial vehicle as defined in section 12.1406 below,
within any alley situated in any business district.
Sec. 12.1405 Parking on Streets Under Repair
In any case where any street in the city is being torn up, repaired, paved or where any work is being done upon
the same, making necessary the regulation of traffic thereon, the chief of police is hereby authorized to prevent
parking either altogether or to any extent deemed wise by him for any certain period of time that he may deem
necessary, or to close the street to traffic altogether for such period of time, by erecting thereon official signs
with the parking restrictions clearly stated thereon.
Sec. 12.1406 Parking Prohibited on Public Roadways or Public Right-of-Way in Residential
Subdivisions
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle having a manufacturer's rated carrying
capacity of more than one and one-half (1-1/2) tons or exceeding twenty-one (21) feet in length (measured from
the outer most edge of the bumper or any appurtenances attached to such vehicle to the outer most edge of the
bumper or appurtenance attached to the opposite end of such vehicle), any trailer, recreational vehicle, or any
abandoned motor vehicle on any public roadway or public right-of-way in any residential subdivision at any
time, except as follows:
(1) Where the operator is using such motor vehicle or trailer as defined above to make bona fide
pickups or deliveries, or for the temporary loading or unloading of the vehicle, provided that the
operator furnishes evidence to that effect upon demand by a peace officer and provided that the
operator removes such motor vehicle or trailer from the roadway immediately upon completion of
said pickups, deliveries, loading or unloading;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/562
(2) Maintenance vehicles, trailers and equipment owned and operated by, or on behalf of, the city,
or any public utility or governmental entity, where the person operating the vehicle, trailer or
equipment is engaged in maintenance work;
(3) Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in Texas Transportation Code section 541.201,
and any amendments thereto, provided such vehicle is conclusively identified;
(4) Any bus or school bus actively engaged in the receiving or discharging of passengers;
(5) Motor vehicles and trailers left at or on an active jobsite under a current valid permit issued by
the city.
Sec. 12.1407 Overnight Parking of Certain Vehicles Restricted
No vehicle having a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of more than one and one-half (1-1/2) tons or
exceeding twenty-one (21) feet in length (measured from the outer most edge of the bumper or any
appurtenances attached to such vehicle to the outer most edge of the bumper or appurtenance attached to the
opposite end of such vehicle), or any trailer, recreational vehicle, or abandoned vehicle shall be parked upon any
public roadway or public right-of-way in the city between the hours of ten p.m. (10:00 p.m.) and six a.m. (6:00
a.m.) except for repairing or servicing necessitated by an emergency.
Sec. 12.1408 Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicles for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicles except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(3) Displaying for sale or selling any merchandise.
Sec. 12.1409 Parking Adjacent to Schools
The chief of police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent
to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
Sec. 12.1410 Parking in Front of Entrances to Certain Buildings
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in front of any entrance which provides access to hotels, motels, theaters,
skating rinks or to the upper floors of any building two (2) or more stories in height. Such entrances shall remain
open for fire or other emergency purposes.
Sec. 12.1411 Parking Prohibited on Narrows Streets
(a) The chief of police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the
width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicating no parking
by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
(b) When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/562
Sec. 12.1412 Standing or Parking on One-Way Roadways
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one (1) direction of
travel upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The chief of police is authorized to
determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and
to erect signs giving notice thereof.
Sec. 12.1413 No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous or Congested Places
(a) The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate, by proper signs, places in which the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual
delay in traffic.
(b) When authorized official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
Sec. 12.1414 Owner Not to Permit Car Registered in His Name to be Illegally Parked
(a) No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in the city in
violation of any provisions of this article regulating the standing or parking of vehicles.
(b) If a vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street, highway, alley or other public place, in
violation of any provision of this article regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, the same is
hereby declared a nuisance per se, and the fact that the vehicle is unattended or unoccupied by any person shall
be prima facie evidence that the owner unlawfully stopped, placed or parked such vehicle.
Sec. 12.1415 Officers Authorized to Remove Illegally Stopped Vehicles
(a) Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or highway in violation of any of the
foregoing provisions of this article such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver
or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same to a position off the paved or main traveled part of
such highway or street.
(b) Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a highway to the nearest garage or other
place of safety designated by the city, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
(1) When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway or in any tube or
tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
(2) When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway, and it
is impracticable to move such vehicle from in front of the driveway to another part of the highway.
(3) When any vehicle is found upon the highway and report has previously been made that such
vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and warrant thereon issued, charging that such
vehicle has been embezzled.
(4) When any such officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any such vehicle has been
abandoned.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/562
(5) When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or
impracticable and the persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury
or other reason to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or are not in
immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle.
(6) When an officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and
such officer is by this Code of Ordinances or other law required to take the person arrested
immediately before a magistrate.
(c) A reasonable fee for removing the vehicle and for storage shall be charged against the vehicle.
(d) Any vehicle standing unattended may be moved by any member of the police or fire department and any
policeman or fireman may require the moving of such vehicle if it obstructs the free movement of such persons
in the actual discharge of their duties.
(e) Any member of the police department is hereby authorized to remove any vehicle parked or standing in or
on any portion of the highway when in the opinion of said member of the police department, the said vehicle
constitutes a hazard or by reason of any catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstances the safety of said
vehicle is imperiled.
Sec. 12.1416 Handicapped Parking
It shall be a misdemeanor for the operator of any vehicle which does not display such handicapped identifying
tag to park in a parking space designated for handicapped parking. Such person shall be fined in accordance with
the general penalty provision set forth in this code.
Sec. 12.1417 Prohibited Parking Areas Where No Signs Are Required
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic in
compliance with the law, or to obey the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following locations:
(1) In a place or manner which obstructs any portion of a sidewalk;
(2) Within street right-of-way in front of or within five (5) feet of a public or private driveway
serving single-family or duplex uses, or in front of or within twenty (20) feet of a driveway serving a
use other than single-family or duplex (for purposes of this section, the driveway does not include the
rounded or clipped corner at the intersection of the driveway and the public street);
(3) Within the rounded corner (curb return) at an intersection;
(4) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
(5) Adjacent to the curb of any public street unless parking is parallel and immediately adjacent to
the curb of the street, the vehicle is oriented in the correct direction of travel and parking is not
otherwise prohibited on the street, or unless parking is in compliance with section 12.1406(1) of this
article; or
(6) Within the roadway or public right-of-way of any arterial roadway so designated by the city
within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 12.1418 Habitation of a Vehicle
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/562
No person shall inhabit a vehicle, including a recreational vehicle, at any time when such vehicle is parked upon
a public roadway or public right-of-way located within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 12.1419 Presumption in Prosecution for Offense Involving Stopping, Standing, or Parking of an
Unattended Motor Vehicle
In a prosecution for an offense involving the stopping, standing, or parking of an unattended motor vehicle, it
shall be presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person who stopped, stood, or parked the
vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. The registered owner of the vehicle may rebut this
presumption by showing that he or she did not stop, stand or park the vehicle.
(Ordinance 1145, sec. 4, adopted 6/11/19)
ARTICLE 12.1500 REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 12.1501 Effect of Regulations
(a) It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this
article.
(b) The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such
child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article.
(c) These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or in
any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15A)
Sec. 12.1502 Traffic Laws to Apply to Persons Riding Bicycles
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles, or by the traffic ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of vehicles, except as to special
regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can
have no application. No person shall operate a bicycle upon a public street or place unless and until said bicycle
has been inspected and licensed by the chief of police of the city or has a current license tag or plate from
another city, in which event the chief of police shall register said bicycle for the current year. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15B)
Sec. 12.1503 Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices
(a) Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs, and
other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(b) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person
operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of such sign, except where such person dismounts from the
bicycle to make such turn, in which case or event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to
pedestrians.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15C)
Sec. 12.1504 Riding on Bicycles
(a) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached
thereto.
(b) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15D)
Sec. 12.1505 Riding on Roadways and Bicycle Paths
(a) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway
as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(b) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(c) Whenever a suitable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use
such path and shall not use the roadway.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15E)
Sec. 12.1506 Speed of Bicycles
No person shall operate a bicycle at a greater speed than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing, and in no event shall said bicycle be operated at a greater speed than is set for vehicles. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15F)
Sec. 12.1507 Emerging From Alley or Driveway
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building, shall upon approaching a sidewalk or
the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on said roadway. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15G)
Sec. 12.1508 Clinging to Vehicles
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15H)
Sec. 12.1509 Carrying Articles Hindering Rider
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or articles which prevents the rider from keeping
at least one hand upon the handle bars. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15I)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/562
Sec. 12.1510 Parking
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk
in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15J)
Sec. 12.1511 Riding on Sidewalks
(a) No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
(b) No person fifteen (15) or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district.
(c) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15K)
Sec. 12.1512 Lamps and Other Equipment on Bicycles
(a) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a
signal audible for a distance of at least [five hundred (500) feet), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with
nor shall any person use upon any bicycle any siren or whistle.
(b) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid
on dry, level, clean pavement.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 15L)
Secs. 12.1513-12.1520 Reserved
Division 2. Licensing Bicycles
Sec. 12.1521 Bicycles to be Licensed
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate a bicycle upon the public streets,
alleys, or thoroughfares of the city unless such bicycle is licensed by the chief of police. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 22A)
Sec. 12.1522 License Fee
The fee for such license shall be one dollar ($1.00) per year. The license shall be valid for the calendar year in
which it is issued. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 22B)
Sec. 12.1523 When License Not to be Issued
The chief of police shall not issue a license for any bicycle which is not equipped with proper lights, reflectors
and brakes, all of which shall be subject to the inspection of the chief of police before a license is issued. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 22C)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/562
ARTICLE 12.1600 PEDESTRIANS RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Sec. 12.1601 Pedestrians Subject to Traffic Control Signals
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared in Section 12.405 of this chapter, but
at all other places, pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 16A)
Sec. 12.1602 Pedestrians Right-of-Way in Crosswalk
(a) When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the rightof-
way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no
pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is
so close that it is impossible for the driver of a vehicle to yield. A pedestrian's right-of-way is modified under the
condition and as stated in Section 12.1605 of this article.
(b) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk at any intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass any such stopped
vehicle.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 16B)
Sec. 12.1603 Pedestrians to Use Right Half of Crosswalk
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 9, Section 16C)
Sec. 12.1604 Crossing at Right Angles
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curbs or by the
shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 16D)
Sec. 12.1605 When a Pedestrian Shall Yield
(a) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(b) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing
has been provided shall yield right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(c) The foregoing rules in this article have no application under the conditions stated in Section 12.1606, when
pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 16E)
Sec. 12.1606 Prohibited Crossing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/562
(a) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross
at any place except in a crosswalk.
(b) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in a business district.
(c) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any point where the visibility under normal conditions shall be less
than one hundred (100) feet.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 16F)
Sec. 12.1607 Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways
(a) Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.
(b) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when
practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
(c) No person shall stand in the roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 16G)
Sec. 12.1608 Miscellaneous Rules and Regulations Governing Pedestrians
Pedestrians shall:
(1) Stand on sidewalks or within a safety zone or island while waiting for a street bus.
(2) Enter or leave a safety zone at a crosswalk only and in the event that such crosswalk is at an
intersection controlled by a traffic signal or signals. Pedestrians shall cross between the safety zone
and the sidewalk only on the appropriate signal indicated.
(3) Stand on the side of a sidewalk either at or near the curb or property line, so as not to interfere
with other pedestrians.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 16H)
Sec. 12.1609 Drivers to Exercise Due Care
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to
avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when
necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person
upon a roadway. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 16I)
ARTICLE 12.1700 LOADING ZONES
Sec. 12.1701 Traffic Engineer to Designate Curb Loading Zones
The governing body is hereby authorized to determine the location of freight curb loading zones and shall direct
the chief of police to place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same. These zones shall be operative
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/562
from 7:00 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., except Sundays and legal holidays. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section
17A)
Sec. 12.1702 Permits for Curb Loading Zones
(a) For the purpose of regulating and supervising loading zones and to provide a fund to cover all costs
involved in installing adequate signs or curb markings designating loading zones and to pay the cost of periodic
maintenance of same, there is hereby imposed against the applicant for a loading zone and against any person,
firm or corporation who desires the maintenance of a loading zone abutting their property, a charge per month
per lineal foot of such space reserved to be determined by motion or resolution of the council. A loading zone
shall be designated by upright signs and/or painted curb marking of a distinctive color. However, if the zone
applied for lies within a section of curb at which parking is normally prohibited, such zone shall be designated
by yellow curb markings and/or upright signs.
(b) Every person, firm or corporation desiring or requiring a loading zone shall make application on
appropriate forms to the city manager or his/her designee. If such approval is granted, the chief of police, before
setting aside such zone by exhibiting signs, will have the collection of the annual fee provided herein certified by
him by the city manager or his/her designee of the city. The city manager or his/her designee shall thereafter
collect the renewal fee on the same basis for subsequent years, and in the event the same is not promptly paid, he
shall advise the chief of police who will remove the signs or curb markings designating such loading zones.
(c) No loading zone permit shall be granted where the flow of traffic would be impeded or traffic hazards
created by such zones.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 17B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 12.1703 Standing in Passenger Curb Loading Zone
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed five (5)
minutes. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 17C)
Sec. 12.1704 Loading Zone Not Exclusive
All loading zones shall be available to anyone who may have loading or unloading to be in the immediate
vicinity. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 17D)
Sec. 12.1705 Stopping in Unloading Zone
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as an unloading zone during
hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section
17E)
ARTICLE 12.1800 PROCEDURE ON AND AFTER ARREST
Sec. 12.1801 Procedure Upon Arrest for Violation of Traffic Ordinance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/562
Whenever any person is arrested for violation of any provision of this article except as otherwise provided by
state law, the arresting officer shall take the violator's name, address, make of car and the registration or license
number of said motor vehicle involved, and issue to such violator, in writing on a form provided by the city, a
notice to answer the charge against him within not more than ten (10) days, during the hours and at the place
specified in the notice. The officer shall thereupon have the violator give his written promise to appear or answer
as specified in this notice, and upon securing such written promise, shall release such violator from custody.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 18A)
Sec. 12.1802 To Give Officer Correct Name
It shall be unlawful for any person upon being arrested by a police officer of the city for any violation of this
article or any other law to give such arresting officer as his name any other than his correct and true name. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 18B)
Sec. 12.1803 To Give Officer Correct Address
It shall be unlawful for any person, upon being arrested by a police officer of the city for any violation of this
article or any other law, to give such arresting officer as his address, any other than his true and correct address.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 18C)
Sec. 12.1804 Violation of Promise to Appear
(a) Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court, given as provided in this article, is
guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested.
(b) The failure of a driver or owner of a vehicle to appear as directed by notice to appear placed upon a
vehicle shall be a misdemeanor.
(c) Proof that the vehicle was unlawfully parked or stopped or had been used in violation of a provision of
this chapter and that the notice to appear was placed thereon shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner
failed to appear.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 18D)
Sec. 12.1805 Disposition of Fines and Forfeitures
All fines and forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon forfeitures of bail of any person charged with a
violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be paid to the city manager or his/her designee and shall be
deposited in the general fund. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 18E; Ordinance 707 adopted
6/10/03)
Sec. 12.1806 Arrest Without Warrant
Any police officer is authorized to arrest without warrant any person found committing a violation of any
provision of this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 18F)
Sec. 12.1807 City Judge to Designate Fine
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/562
The judge of the municipal court shall designate the fine to be paid for the first, second and subsequent offenses
which may be satisfied by payment of the same to the clerk of the municipal court provided said fines are within
the limits established as penalties for violations of the provisions of this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 9, Section 18G)
Sec. 12.1808 Office of Clerk of the Municipal Court Created
(a) The office of clerk of the municipal court to assist the court with the clerical work of all court cases is
hereby created.
(b) The clerk and the deputy clerks shall have the power to do and perform all things and acts usual and
necessary to be performed by clerks of court in issuing process of said court and the conducting the business
thereof and the governing body may require additional duties as it deems proper.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 18H)
Sec. 12.1809 Payment of Fines
(a) Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under this article may
within the time specified in the notice, appear before the judge of the municipal court for a disposition of the
charges against him or he may appear at the city hall before the clerk of the municipal court and answer the
charges set forth in such notice by paying a prescribed fine, and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge
waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the person in charge of the bureau to make such a
plea and pay such a fine in court.
(b) Any person who has been guilty of three (3) or more traffic violations except as otherwise provided in this
article, within the preceding twelve (12) months, shall not be permitted to pay a fine to the clerk of the municipal
court, and he must make statutory bail for appearance in court.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 18I)
ARTICLE 12.1900 TEXAS UNIFORM ACT REGULATING TRAFFIC ON HIGHWAYS ADOPTED
The city council of the city hereby adopts the Texas Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, known as
Article 6701d of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as passed and amended by the Legislature of the State of
Texas and ordains that such act shall be and is hereby in full force and effect upon all streets, roads, alleys and
thoroughfares within the city limits of the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 19)
ARTICLE 12.2000 CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW
If there be a conflict between any of the provisions of this article and the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on
Highways as enacted by the Legislature of the State of Texas, or the rules, regulations and requirements of the
Interstate Commerce Commission or the Railroad Commission of Texas, relating to the equipping and other
safety requirements of vehicles, motor vehicles, truck-tractors, trucks, buses, trailers, semi-trailers, or pole
trailers, compliance by the owners or operators of such vehicles with statute, orders, rules and regulations of the
Interstate Commerce Commission and the Railroad Commission of Texas, shall be deemed in compliance with
this chapter; except that any requirement of this article in addition to, but not in conflict with, said statute or
requirement of the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Railroad Commission shall be complied with. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 20)
ARTICLE 12.2100 PROOF OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE OR SIGNAL
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/562
In any prosecution for any violation of this article, it shall not be necessary for the prosecution to prove the
installation or authority therefor, of any traffic control device or signal, but any person charged with a violation
of this article shall have the right to prove the same was not so installed or authorized as a defense. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 21)
ARTICLE 12.2200 INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Sec. 12.2201 Leaving Inoperative Vehicles on Streets and on Private Property
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stand or park, or allow to stand or park, any
wrecked or mechanically inoperative automobile, truck or any other motor vehicle or trailer upon any public
street, or upon any private property not enclosed by a solid wall, building or a solid fence, anytime in excess of
ten (10) days from notice that said motor vehicle or trailer is in violation of this article. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 23A)
Sec. 12.2202 Nuisance
Vehicles or trailers found to be in violation of this article are hereby declared to be nuisances and may be towed
away by the police department or any person designated by the chief of police, and such vehicle or trailer shall
not be claimed, except upon proof of ownership and payment of the towing charges and cost of storage. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 23B)
ARTICLE 12.2300 SPECIAL WEIGHT LIMIT REGULATIONS CONTINUED IN EFFECT
The following special regulations limiting the load weight limit to eight (8) tons on the streets and highways
respectively designated, are hereby continued in force and effect as fully and completely as if they were
incorporated in full in this code of ordinances:
(1) Ordinance 118A, passed January 10, 1967: Hodgkins Road from Highway 199 north to the city
limits.
(2) Ordinance 155, passed May 26, 1970: Roberts Cutoff Road from Lake Worth Boulevard
(Highway 199) north to Azle Avenue; Boat Club Road from Lake Worth Boulevard (State Highway
199) north to Azle Avenue; and Williams Spring Road from Lake Worth Boulevard (State Highway
199) north to the city limits.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 24)
ARTICLE 12.2400 COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES
Sec. 12.2401 Commercial Motor Vehicles to be Operated Only on Designated Truck Routes
(a) No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer,
or any combination thereof through the city in inter-city travel, without a local destination or point of
origin, except on streets designated truck routes by this article.
(b) Where it becomes necessary to leave designated truck routes, the vehicles shall remain on streets
designated commercial delivery routes unless to proceed to or return from a point of destination or service
facility by the quickest possible route.
(c) Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/562
(1) To emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call.
(2) To vehicles operated by a public utility for the purpose of inspecting or maintaining said utility.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 25A)
Sec. 12.2402 Truck Routes Designated; Signs to be Erected
(a) The following streets are designated truck routes under this article:
NAME OF STREET
Loop 820
State Highway 199
F.M. 1220 (Boat Club Road - Azle to city limits;
Azle - Boat Club Road to Broadview Drive).
These truck routes shall fall under the jurisdiction of the Texas State Highway Department.
(b) The following streets are designated commercial delivery routes under this article:
NAME OF STREET
Boat Club Road (199 to Azle)
Hodgkins Road
Fire Hall
Merrett Azle
(199 to Boat Club Road)
Navajo Trail (from Shawnee Trail East to city limit)
Foster
Charbonneau
Shawnee Trail
(c) The city manager or his/her designee shall erect appropriate signs and markings to designate the routes
described herein.
(d) Whenever any street designated as a truck route or commercial delivery route is being repaired or is
otherwise temporarily out of use, the city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to designate alternate
routes for such period as might be necessary.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 25B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 12.2403 Size; Weight; Exceptions; Permits and Fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/562
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for anyone to
operate or move, on any public street within the corporate limits of the city, any commercial motor vehicle, with
or without the load, contrary to any regulation contained in this section.
(b) The restrictions as to size stated in this article shall not apply to farm implements, machinery used for the
drilling of water wells, or to highway building or maintenance machinery owned or operated by or for the State
of Texas or any political subdivisions thereof.
(1) Maximum width shall not exceed eight (8) feet except farm tractors which shall have a
maximum width of nine (9) feet.
(2) Maximum height shall not exceed 13'6.”
(3) Maximum allowable length of vehicle:
(A) Single vehicle (except pole trailer): 35 feet.
(B) Combination of vehicles: 50 feet.
(C) Mobile home and motor vehicle: 55 feet.
(D) These provisions shall not apply to any disabled vehicles being towed to an intake place
for repairs.
(4) Maximum allowable overhang shall be three (3) feet beyond the front and four (4) feet beyond
the rear.
(c) No commercial motor vehicle or combination thereof shall be operated on any public street within the
corporate limits of the city having a weight in excess of any one or more of the following limitations:
(1) The restrictions and limits on truck routes which are designated in this article being State
Highways, shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas State Highway Department.
(2) In no event shall the total gross weight, with load, of any vehicle or combination of vehicles
exceed 16,000 pounds of a vehicle traveling on city streets without origin or destination within the
city.
(3) Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mix concrete, other building materials or materials
manufactured or delivered within the city, may operate upon the public streets of the city while
making deliveries with a gross load not to exceed 48,000 pounds.
(d) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call.
(2) Vehicles operated for the purpose of constructing or maintaining any public utility in the city.
(e) Upon application made by any person or corporation which desires to operate or cause to be operated on
the public streets within the corporate limits of the city, overweight and/or oversize equipment for the
transportation of commodities which cannot be dismantled where the total gross weight or size of the vehicle or
its load exceed the limits allowed by this article, the city shall issue a permit for the operation of such equipment
or fleets of equipment for a specified period of time over a designated route.
(f) A fee shall be charged for each permit as follows: The fee shall be determined at a minimum of twenty
dollars ($20.00) or ten dollars ($10.00) per ton for each ton over twenty-four (24) tons for each vehicle trip.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 25C)
Sec. 12.2404 Not to Permit Cargo to Fall Out of Vehicle, Etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle on a public
street of the city in such manner as to permit any portion of its cargo, either liquid or solid, to fall out of, spill
from, or blow out of such vehicle. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 25D)
Sec. 12.2405 These Regulations Declared to be Governmental
All of the regulations provided in this article are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety
and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council, any city official or employee charged with
the enforcement of this article, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself
personally liable, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that might accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his said duties. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 25E)
Sec. 12.2406 Violations May be Enjoined
Any violation of this article can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent
jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this article or in the city code. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 25F)
ARTICLE 12.2500 FIRE LANES*
Division 1. Procedure for Establishing
Sec. 12.2501 Approval of Fire Lanes and Appeal Procedure
(a) The fire chief of the city is hereby authorized to approve or disapprove all fire lanes on property
appurtenant to building or the entrances or exits to buildings, where, in his opinion, such areas must be kept free
of parked vehicles and other obstructions to provide ready access to such buildings in case of fire or other
emergencies.
(b) An appeal from the decision of the fire chief may be taken whenever any party in interest is aggrieved by
the action of the fire chief on a proposed fire lane. Following the fire chief's action, the aggrieved party shall file
a written appeal with the city manager or his/her designee and final action by the city council to determine
whether or not the fire chief committed error.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 26.5A; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 12.2502 Fire Lanes; When Required
(a) No building of any type construction for occupancy shall be constructed in such a manner that any part of
the structure is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street or highway; provided, however, that
such structure may be erected at a greater distance if the owner designates, constructs and maintains a fire lane
or access easement having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum height clearance of fourteen
(14) feet terminating within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the furthest point of such structures; provided further,
however, that no fire lane shall be required for:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/562
(1) Buildings of noncombustible construction when equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler
system or standpipe system.
(2) Any single-family or duplex dwelling.
(b) Any fire lane more than one hundred (100) feet in length shall either connect at each end to a dedicated
street or be provided with a turn-around having a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet when measured from curb to
curb. All fire lanes shall be maintained and kept in a state of good repair at all times by the owner, manager or
person in charge of the premises, and the city shall never be responsible for the maintenance thereof.
(c) The fire chief or his authorized representative is hereby authorized to designate adequate fire lanes and/or
turn-arounds to any building when deemed necessary for fire department access in the event of fire in such
building.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 26.5B)
Sec. 12.2503 Fire Lane Signs
The owner, manager or person in charge of any building to which fire lanes have been approved by the fire chief
or his authorized representative shall post and maintain appropriate signs in conspicuous places along such fire
lanes stating: NO PARKING - FIRE LANE. Such signs shall be twelve (12) inches wide and eighteen (18)
inches high. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 26.5C)
Sec. 12.2504 Destruction of Fire Lane Signs
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt or in fact alter, destroy, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any sign designating a fire lane erected under the terms of this article. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 26.5D)
Sec. 12.2505 Abandonment or Closing
No owner, manager or person in charge of any premises served by a required fire lane shall abandon or close
such fire lane without permission of the fire chief of the city. It shall likewise be unlawful for the owner,
manager or person in charge of any premises to permit, allow or tolerate obstruction such as motor vehicles or
other encumbrances placed within fire lanes adjacent to or behind the premises owned or managed by the person
in charge. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 26.5E)
Sec. 12.2506 Parking in Fire Lane Prohibited
(a) No person shall park, place, allow, permit or cause to be parked, placed or remain unattended any motor
vehicles, trailer, boat or similar obstruction within or upon any area designated as a fire lane, when appropriately
marked.
(b) Any motor vehicle, trailer, boat or similar obstruction found parked or unoccupied in such a manner as to
obstruct in whole or in part any such fire lane shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner unlawfully
parked, placed or permitted to be parked or placed such obstruction within a fire lane.
(c) The records of the state highway department or the county highway license department showing the name
of the person to whom the Texas Highway License or boat or trailer license is issued shall constitute prima facie
evidence of ownership by the named person.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 26.5F)
Sec. 12.2507 Enforcement; Issuance of Citations; Impoundment of Obstructions
(a) The fire chief, any member of the fire department designated by the fire chief, the chief of police or any
member of the police department designated by the chief of police are hereby authorized to cause fire lanes to be
maintained free and unobstructed at all times for fire department uses.
(b) The chief of police or any member of the police department designated by the chief of police are hereby
authorized to issue parking citations for any motor vehicles, trailer, boat or similar obstruction found parked or
unattended in or upon a designated fire lane and may have such obstruction removed by towing. Such vehicle or
obstruction may be redeemed by payment of the towage and storage charges in the same manner and at the same
rate as any vehicle impounded by the city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 26.5G)
Sec. 12.2508 Submission of Plot Plans; Duties of Contractors
(a) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, two (2) plot plans with designated fire lanes shall be submitted
to the building inspection department for review by the fire chief and city manager or his/her designee of the
city.
(b) The fire chief or his authorized representative then will approve or disapprove the designated fire lanes
and indicate the needed signs and payment markings. One of these plans shall be retained by the city and the
other returned to the owner for his use.
(c) The contractor or person in charge of any construction site for commercial, industrial mercantile,
educational, institutional, assembly, hotel, motel, multi-family dwelling, or mobile home park occupancies shall
provide and maintain during construction an approved all weather fire lane, not less than twenty (20) feet in
width, as shown on approved plot plans. Final paving of such fire lane shall be completed prior to issuance of
any certificate of occupancy.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 26.5H; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Secs. 12.2509-12.2515 Reserved
Division 2. Fire Lanes Established*
Two twenty-five feet (25') fire lanes are hereby established in the 6600 Block of Azle Avenue. The first fire lane
established hereby shall be the easterly twenty-five feet (25') of Lot A, Block 14-R-A, Highland Lake Addition
from the Azle Avenue right-of-way line a distance of ninety feet (90') northerly across said Lot A. The second
fire lane established hereby shall be the westerly twenty-five feet (25') of Lot B, Block 14-R-A, Highland Lake
Addition from the Azle Avenue right-of-way line a distance of ninety feet (90') northerly across said Lot B. The
fire lanes established hereby shall be clearly marked under the direction of the chief of police who shall direct
the erection of signs to warn the public against parking in said fire lanes. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9,
Section 26)
ARTICLE 12.2600 TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Sec. 12.2601 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/562
For the purpose of this article the following terms are defined:
Dallas-Fort Worth Metropolitan Area. Any location within Dallas County or Tarrant County, Texas.
Hazardous Materials. Any quantity, group, form or class of material designated as hazardous material in any
official publication of the Secretary of Transportation of the United States under the authority of U.S.C.A.
Section 1803 (1976), as amended, including any such publication issued after the effective date of this article.
Requiring Placards. That the material to be transported is hazardous and is in sufficient quantity to require
placarding in accordance with Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Regulations [49 U.S.C.A.
Section 1801, et seq (1976).]
Transport. To move any motor vehicle requiring placards upon any public thoroughfare or highway.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 27A)
Sec. 12.2602 Routes Established for Transmitting Hazardous Materials
No person shall knowingly transport hazardous materials or knowingly cause hazardous materials to be
transported upon any public street within the corporate limits of the city except on the following:
(1) That portion of Interstate 820 lying within the corporate limits of the city.
(2) That portion of any federal or state highway or public thoroughfare used to reach a destination
or point of departure by the most direct route within corporate limits of the city.
(3) That portion of any federal or state highway or public thoroughfare within the corporate limits
of the city used to reach a destination or point of departure by the most direct route within the Dallas-
Fort Worth Metropolitan area.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 27B)
Sec. 12.2603 U.S. Department of Transportation Placards Required; Driver's Duty
(a) The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials requiring placards shall:
(1) Apply and display appropriate placards meeting U.S. Department of Transportation
specifications on each side of the vehicle; and
(2) Before operation, inspect the vehicle and determine that:
(A) the brakes are in good working condition;
(B) the steering mechanism is in good working condition;
(C) the electrical wiring is well insulated and firmly secured;
(D) the vehicle is in a safe condition to transport hazardous materials; and
(E) all emergency features on bulk transport carriers are installed and operative as outlined in
U.S. Department of Transportation specifications and requirements.
(b) It should be presumed for purposes of prosecution under this article that a transportation vehicle contains
hazardous materials if it bears a placard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 27C)
Sec. 12.2604 Enforcement Agencies
Both the city fire department and the city police department are expressly authorized to enforce the provisions of
this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Section 27D)
ARTICLE 12.2700 IDLING OF VEHICLES
Sec. 12.2701 Applicability
Enforcement of this article shall be year round. (Ordinance 969 adopted 8/9/11)
Sec. 12.2702 Idling Prohibited
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the primary propulsion of a motor vehicle to idle for more than
five (5) minutes when the motor vehicle is not in motion. (Ordinance 897, sec. 2, adopted 11/11/08; Ordinance
969 adopted 8/9/11)
Sec. 12.2703 Exceptions
The provisions of this article do not apply to:
(1) A motor vehicle that has a gross vehicle rating of 14,000 pounds or less or of 14,400 pounds for
motor vehicles equipped with a system that provides heating, cooling, or electrical service to a
commercial vehicle's sleeper berth for the purpose of reducing the idling of a motor vehicle;
(2) A motor vehicle forced to remain motionless because of traffic conditions over which the
operator has no control;
(3) A motor vehicle that is being used:
(A) As an emergency or law enforcement motor vehicle; or
(B) By the United State military, National Guard, or reserve forces;
(4) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is providing a power source necessary
for mechanical operation of the vehicle other than:
(A) Propulsion; or
(B) Passenger compartment heating or air conditioning;
(5) The primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle that is being operated for maintenance or
diagnostic purposes;
(6) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being operated solely to defrost a
windshield;
(7) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being used to supply heat or air
conditioning necessary for passenger comfort/safety in those vehicles intended for a commercial
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/562
passenger transportation or school buses in which case idling up to a maximum of thirty (30) minutes
is allowed;
(8) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being used for transit operations in
which case idling up to a maximum of thirty (30) minutes is allowed;
(9) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being used to provide air conditioning
or heating necessary for employee health or safety while the employee is using the vehicle to perform
an essential job function related to roadway construction or maintenance;
(10) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being used as airport ground support
equipment; or
(11) The owner of a motor vehicle rented or leased to a person who operated the vehicle and is not
employed by the owner;
(Ordinance 897, sec. 2, adopted 11/11/08; Ordinance 969 adopted 8/9/11)
(12) A motor vehicle when idling is necessary to power a heater or air conditioner while a driver is
using the vehicle's sleeper berth for a government-mandated rest period and is not within two miles
of a facility offering external heating and air-conditioning connections at a time when those
connections are available;
(13) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle being used to provide air conditioning or
heating necessary for employee health or safety in an armored vehicle while the employee remains
inside the vehicle to guard the contents or while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded; and
(14) Any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating greater than 8,500 pounds that is
equipped with a 2008 or subsequent model year heavy-duty diesel engine or liquefied or compressed
natural gas engine that has been certified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
another state environmental agency to emit no more than 30 grams of nitrogen oxides emissions per
hour when idling.
Sec. 12.2704 Penalties
Violation of this article shall be a class C misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(Ordinance 969 adopted 8/9/11)
Sec. 12.2705 Burden of Proof
For any violation of this article, the person seeking to establish an affirmative defense or an exception shall have
the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that would otherwise be a violation of
this article is subject to one of the exceptions, set forth in Section 12.2703. (Ordinance 897, sec. 2, adopted
11/11/08)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/562
ARTICLE 13.100 WATER SERVICE
Sec. 13.101 Application for Water Service
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any connection to the mains or pipes of the
waterworks system of the city without first making application to the city, stating fully the several and various
uses for which water is wanted, giving the name of owner of the property, the number of the lot and block, name
of the street and house number. Upon the payment of the tapping fee, the superintendent shall make, or have
made, the necessary connections and furnish a cast iron curb stop box and curb cock, the cost of which is
included in the tapping fee, and every premises connected with any water main, or being supplied with any
water from the city waterworks, shall have a separate service connection, curb stop box and curb cock. If the
application is approved, a permit will be issued. All fees and charges shall be paid for at amounts and rates fixed
by this article or by resolutions of the governing body. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 1A;
Ordinance 756 adopted 9/14/04)
Sec. 13.102 Discontinuance of Water Service
Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplies from the waterworks system must give notice
thereof to the city, otherwise the charge will be entered until such notice has been given. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 1B Ordinance; 756 adopted 9/14/04)
Sec. 13.103 Employees to Report Leaks Etc., to Superintendent
It shall be the duty of all employees of the city, including officers and members of the police force to report to
the superintendent any leaks or unnecessary waste of water that may come to their attention, also any violation
of this article. (Ordinance 934, sec. 1, adopted 11/10/09)
Sec. 13.104 Meters
All meters, whether private or belonging to the waterworks system shall be set by the employees of the city. If
the meter gets out of order and fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily consumption,
as shown by the meter when in order. All water that passes through the meter shall be charged for, whether used
or not. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 1D)
Sec. 13.105 Separate Connections, Etc.
Each consumer of water, living in a separate house, must have a separate connection and meter for each house.
Provided where a residence is not in reach of a city water main, arrangements may be made at the option of the
city to secure water from another user of city water, in which case the minimum monthly ready for service
charge shall be made for each additional residence taking water through such meter. The regular minimum, the
additional minimum and all water used by such consumers shall be charged to the customer having the meter.
(Ordinance 934, sec. 2, adopted 11/10/09)
Sec. 13.106 Water Deposits and Other Fees
(a) Each water and/or sewer customer shall put up a deposit which will be applied to the final bill. The
following deposits shall be made, per meter or account.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/562
Residential: Owner responsible for payment of bill $100.00
Residential: Nonowner/renter responsible for payment of bill $175.00
Apartments: per unit $25.00
Bingo Halls $300.00
Car Wash $300.00
Church $200.00
Day Care $300.00
Fast Food Restaurants $200.00
Manufacturing/Repair/Beauty Shops $200.00
Mobile home parks: per unit $50.00
Nursing Homes $500.00
Office $150.00
Restaurant $300.00
Retail $200.00
Washateria $300.00
Hotel/Motel $500.00
Fire Hydrant/Construction Meter $1,000.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/562
Other Commercial $100.00
(b) In addition to the meter or account deposit, water/sewer customers will be charged the following fees:
(1) Meter Testing Fee (fee is waived if meter is
defective)
$50.00
(2) Transfer Fee (Nonrefundable fee. Must pay any
arrears balance of bill plus nonrefundable fee in
advance of transferring service from one address
to another within the city's service area.)
$20.00
(3) Rental Inspection Fee for residential
nonowner/renter accounts, as provided in
Section 3.401 Chapter 3.
(4) Fire Hydrant/Construction Meter hook ups are
subject to compliance with double-check
valve/backflow prevention requirements at the
applicant's expense for installation.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 1F; Ordinance 756 adopted 9/14/04; Ordinance 847,
secs. 1, 2, adopted 11/14/06; Ordinance 934, sec. 3, adopted 11/10/09)
(5) Man hours (minimum of 1 hour) $20.00 per hour
(6) Tamper Fee $50.00
(7) Broken Locking Devices $25.00
(8) Broken Stop Fee $50.00 + man hour(s)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/562
(9) Replacement/damaged meter: $150.00 + man hour(s).
(10) Replacement/damaged transmitter: $150.00 + man hour(s).
(11) Meter removal/reinstall due to disconnection for nonpayment: $50.00 + man hour(s).
(12) Damaged meter box: $45.00 + man hour(s).
(13) Jumper removal fee: $35.00 + man hour(s).
(14) Removal of water service line: $300.00 + man hour(s).
(Ordinance 847, sec. 3, adopted 11/14/06)
(15) Reconnect fee (this fee is in addition to the disconnect list processing charge as provided in
section 13.108(c)(4)): $30.00.
(16) After hours reconnect fee (after hours is defined as when water is reconnected any time
outside of 8:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding any time the city hall
offices are closed): $50.00.
(17) Temporary water service fee: $25.00 per day plus consumption, if any..
(Ordinance 934, sec. 4, adopted 11/10/09)
Sec. 13.107 Water Rates
The rates for city-operated water supply shall be a follows:
(1) Residential Water Rates/Inside Corporate City Limits:
(A) Ready for service fee: $7.50 per customer.
(B) Rates by volume:
(i) Tier 1 (1K–5K): $3.10 per thousand gallons.
(ii) Tier 2 (6K–10K): $3.16 per thousand gallons.
(iii) Tier 3 (11K–30K): $3.23 per thousand gallons.
(iv) Tier 4 (>31K): $3.29 per thousand gallons.
(2) Residential Water Rates/Outside Corporate City Limits:
(A) Ready for service fee: $11.25 per customer.
(B) Rates by volume:
(i) Tier 1 (1K–5K): $4.65 per thousand gallons.
(ii) Tier 2 (6K–10K): $4.74 per thousand gallons.
(iii) Tier 3 (11K–30K): $4.85 per thousand gallons.
(iv) Tier 4 (>31K): $4.94 per thousand gallons.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/562
(3) Commercial Water Rates/Inside Corporate City Limits:
(A) Ready for service fee: $15.50 per customer.
(B) Rates by volume:
(i) Tier 1 (1K–5K): $5.35 per thousand gallons.
(ii) Tier 2 (6K–10K): $5.46 per thousand gallons.
(iii) Tier 3 (11K–30K): $5.57 per thousand gallons.
(iv) Tier 4 (>31K): $5.68 per thousand gallons.
(4) Commercial Water Rates/Outside Corporate City Limits:
(A) Ready for service fee: $23.25 per customer.
(B) Rates by volume:
(i) Tier 1 (1K–5K): $8.03 per thousand gallons.
(ii) Tier 2 (6K–10K): $8.19 per thousand gallons.
(iii) Tier 3 (11K–30K): $8.36 per thousand gallons.
(iv) Tier 4 (>31K): $8.52 per thousand gallons.
(5) Fire Hydrant/Construction Meter Rates/Inside Corporate City Limits:
(A) Ready for service fee: $25.00 per customer.
(B) Rates by volume:
(i) Tier 1 (1K–5K): $5.35 per thousand gallons.
(ii) Tier 2 (6K–10K): $5.46 per thousand gallons.
(iii) Tier 3 (11K–30K): $5.57 per thousand gallons.
(iv) Tier 4 (>31K): $5.68 per thousand gallons.
(6) Fire Hydrant/Construction Meter Rates/Outside Corporate City Limits:
(A) Ready for service fee: $37.50 per customer.
(B) Rates by volume:
(i) Tier 1 (1K–5K): $8.03 per thousand gallons.
(ii) Tier 2 (6K–10K): $8.19 per thousand gallons.
(iii) Tier 3 (11K–30K): $8.36 per thousand gallons.
(iv) Tier 4 (>31K): $8.52 per thousand gallons.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/562
(7) City municipal facilities/locations that have water service shall be charged at the same
commercial water rates as other commercial accounts.
(Ordinance 1127, sec. 1, adopted 9/11/18)
Sec. 13.108 When Water Bills are Due; Late Charge; Reconnect Fee
(a) Disconnection. All charges for water service furnished or rendered by the city waterworks of the city shall
be due and payable on the fifteenth (15th) day of each month at the office of the water department of the city and
if not paid after the fifteenth (15th) day, the city reserves the right to cut off and discontinue water service to the
premises without further notice and same shall not be reconnected and no additional water furnished until all
past due accounts and charges are paid in full. Where service has been disconnected for failure to pay for
services rendered, fees must be paid in accordance with subsections (c) and (d).
(b) Delinquency Charges. If the water bill is not paid by the due date, the account shall be assessed a one-time
late charge equal to 10 percent of the delinquent amount or $6.00, whichever is greater. The delinquency charge
may be waived for unforeseen circumstances such as a death, illness, serious injury or a similar circumstance
where a reasonable person could not have made the payment on the due date. A request for a waiver must be
made in writing to the city manager or his/her designee within five (5) days of the assessment of the late fee. A
waiver may be granted provided all charges are paid in full and no delinquent balances were incurred in the past
twelve months.
(c) Reconnection Charges After Delinquency. If water service has been disconnected because of a delinquent
bill, the service may not be reconnected until the following charges are paid:
(1) All delinquent amounts;
(2) Assessed delinquency charges, if any;
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 1H; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
(3) Any and all additional charges incurred due to disconnect and/or damage; and (Ordinance 847,
sec. 4, adopted 11/14/06)
(4) A disconnect list processing charge of $30.00, nonreversible once list leaves city hall,
regardless if water has actually been turned off or not. (Ordinance 934, sec. 5, adopted 11/10/09)
(d) Exceptions. If a water bill is large due to circumstances beyond the customer's control, a payment plan
may be set up to pay that month's bill. The entire amount must be paid in six (6) months or less unless otherwise
approved by the city manager or his/her designee. Current month balances must be paid on time during the
payment plan period. If current bills are not paid, the entire balance will become due. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Section 1H; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
(e) A water account that has been cut off for nonpayment may be finaled out by the water billing department if
no contact has been made by the customer by the 15th of the following month that the water service was
disconnected for. Once finaled out, a customer must re-apply for water/sewer service and pay applicable deposits
in addition to paying any past due amount from prior account(s). (Ordinance 847, sec. 5, adopted 11/14/06)
Sec. 13.109 Tapping Charges
The rates for tapping charges for connections with the city water mains and laterals shall be as follows:
(1) 3/4-inch connection: $155.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/562
(2) 1-inch connection: $250.00.
(3) 1-1/2-inch connection: $475.00.
(4) 2-inch connection: $675.00.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 1I)
Sec. 13.110 Certain Acts Unlawful
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to do, commit or assist in committing any of the
following things or acts in the city:
(1) To open or close any fire hydrant or stopcock connected with the waterworks system of the
city, or lift or remove the covers of any gate valves or shutoffs thereof, without the permission of the
superintendent, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the fire department.
(2) To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure, or wantonly force open any gate, or door, or in
any way whatsoever destroy, injure, or deface any part of any engine house, reservoir, standpipe,
elevated tank, building or buildings, or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs, or fixtures or property
appertaining to the waterworks system.
(3) To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps, on any elevated water storage tank or standpipe of
the waterworks system, except by permission of the superintendent.
(4) To place any telegraph, telephone, electric light pole, or any obstruction whatsoever within
three feet (3') of any fire hydrant.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 1J)
(5) To resort to any fraudulent device (i.e. jumper) or arrangement for the purpose of procuring
water for himself or others from private connections on premises contrary to the city regulations or
ordinances. If at any time two (2) or more such devices are found at the same location, this would
result in capping the service line. To reinstate service would require all fees associated with new
service and fees associated with removal of the old line be paid up front. (Ordinance 847, sec. 6,
adopted 11/14/06)
(6) To interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain hydrant, pipe, cock, valve, or other
apparatus pertaining to the waterworks system, or to turn on or off without authority the water in any
street hydrant or other water fixture, or to hitch or tie any animal thereto.
(7) To make or permit to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the
waterworks system or to turn on or use the water of said system without first obtaining a permit
therefor.
(8) To cover over or conceal from view any water valve box, service or meter box.
(9) To remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or to any manner change, interfere
with or tamper with any water meter; provided that the provisions of this article shall not apply to the
employees of the city when acting in their official capacity.
(10) To turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been
turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly water charge or for the violation of any rule or
ordinance governing the waterworks system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/562
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 1J)
ARTICLE 13.200 WATER WELLS*
Sec. 13.201 Permit Required
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drill a water well in the city without a permit
from the city. The permit must be received from the city council upon recommendation of the water and sewer
superintendent and the city engineer. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 2A)
Sec. 13.202 Application for Permit; Fee
The applicant shall first pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and present his name, his address, the
location of the proposed water well, the proposed depth of the well (within 25 feet) and the diameter of the
proposed well. The proposed application shall be addressed to the city manager or his/her designee. (1987 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 2B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 13.203 Considerations for Approval or Disapproval
In considering approval or disapproval of the application the water and sewer superintendent, the city engineer
and the city council shall consider the health and public safety of the entire city as it relates to the depth of the
proposed well, its proximity to public water supply wells and tanks and its proximity to public streets, alleys and
thoroughfares. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 2C)
ARTICLE 13.300 SEWER SERVICE
Sec. 13.301 Definitions
Domestic Service Connection. Service to any dwelling unit occupied as living quarters for one (1) or more
persons, which establishment or unit has sanitary water or sewage facilities.
Fixture Connection. Either a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower, commode, washing machine, floor drain, dish
washing vats and any other plumbing fixture from which wastewater or sewage passes through and into the
house drain and into the house sewer, not including wash racks in garages and filling stations, provided that
when three (3) or less dish washing vats are connected as one (1) unit, with one (1) drain, same shall be
considered as the one (1) fixture connection.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3A)
Sec. 13.302 Permits and Connections
(a) No person, persons, firm or corporation shall have the right to connect any property with the sewer system
of the city, and no connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be made until the owner of such
property, or his agent duly authorized, shall have received from the city a permit to do so, after having met the
requirements herein specified to obtain such permit. The owner of any property desired to be connected with the
sewer system of the city, or his duly authorized agent, shall first make an application in writing signed by such
owner, or his agent, duly authorized in writing to sign such application for and in the name of the owner, upon
blanks furnished by the city and delivered to the officer in charge of the water and sewer department of the city,
for a permit to connect any such property with the city sewer system; such application shall contain the precise
location of the property to be drained; the type of structure and the purpose for which same is used, give the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/562
name of the owner of the property, and the number and class of plumbing fixtures to be contained within the
private system or property to be drained and the name of the person or firm employed to do the plumbing work
contemplated to be done and connected with the sewer system. Such application shall further contain an
agreement on the part of such applicant owner of the property sought to be connected and drained by the sewer
system of the city that he will promptly pay to the city the rental charges then or thereafter to be prescribed by
the city for the use of the sewer system, at the times and in the manner prescribed now or hereafter by the
ordinances of the city; that he will abide by and observe the rules and regulations governing the use of the city
sewer system and that he will be responsible for the rental charges accruing up to the time that he gives actual
notice in writing to the city of a change in ownership of said property, or to discontinue service thereto.
(b) Any such permit issued shall remain in force only so long as the owner of the property, and the applicant
therefor, shall comply with the rules and regulations now or hereafter prescribed for the use of the sewer system,
and shall pay the rental charges as provided and upon the failure of such property owner in either or any respect
to fully comply with the provisions hereof, said permit shall be subject to cancellation, and the city shall have
the right to discontinue sewer service to such property. This stipulation shall also be contained in the application
for a permit.
(c) Before the application for a permit shall be received and permit granted, there must be paid to the city,
inspection fees and one (1) month's rental for sewer service in advance; said advance payment to be applied in
payment of the rental and service charge for the first month following commencement of service, if permit is
issued following the 15th day of any calendar month. If permit is issued on or prior to such day, charge for sewer
service shall commence on the first day of the month in which permit is issued.
(d) Whenever any property for which permit has been issued and sewer service is being furnished changes
ownership, the new owner shall make application for a continuation of sewer service to such property, and such
application shall be made upon the same blanks and be subject to the same terms and conditions and contain the
same stipulations as an original application, and such application shall be marked application for continuation of
sewer service.
(e) When any person owning any property served by the sewer system in the city shall change the plumbing in
premises, other than single-family dwellings, used exclusively as such, to be connected with the sewer system,
so as to increase the number of plumbing fixtures connected with the city sewer system, such person shall make
a new application, upon the same blanks, terms and conditions as an original application herein set out.
(f) When sewer service for any property has been discontinued for any reason, same shall not again be
continued until the owner of such property shall have made application as is set out herein for an original
application.
(g) No permit shall be deemed to authorize anything not stated in the application.
(h) A permit to make a connection with the sewer system or for a continuation of sewer service will be issued
only when the plumbing in the structure or property to be connected and drained is in accordance with the
provisions for plumbing as are provided in the plumbing code for the city, now in effect and hereinafter adopted,
and has been inspected and approved by the city plumbing inspector.
(i) There shall be no reduction or abatement of sewer rental charge for any property, so long as said property is
connected with the sewer system of the city.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3B)
Sec. 13.303 Tap Fees
(a) Every application for a connection to the city sewer system shall be accompanied by a tap fee in the
amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per tap, which sum shall be paid directly to the city manager or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/562
his/her designee. No connection shall be permitted unless such fees has been paid.
(b) If the sewer main and street are adjacent to the property where sewer line is to be connected, the city will
install and maintain a street service line running from the street sewer main to such property owner's curb and
gutter or sidewalk line, or to owner's property line when no curb and gutter or sidewalk exists. The property
owner will install and maintain the remainder of the service line.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3C; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 13.304 Sewer Service Charges
(a) Definitions.
Abnormal Sewage. Any sewage having suspended solids or BOD content which is, in the judgment of the
director of the waterworks department, significantly in excess of, or below, that found in normal sewage, but is
otherwise acceptable into the city sanitary sewerage system.
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand.) The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure as specified in “Standard Methods” in five (5) days at twenty
(20) degrees centigrade expressed as parts per million by weight (milligrams per liter.)
Commercial Customer Class. Those customers which have three (3) or more living units served by a single
water meter, or which have one (1) or more businesses served by a single water meter.
Industrial Customer Class. Those customers whose sewage contains wastewater from a product manufactured,
processed or fabricated by the customer.
Living Unit. A residential unit providing complete, independent, living facilities for one (1) family, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.
Monitored Group Class. Those customers determined by the director of the waterworks department to be
producers of wastewater that is, in his judgment, abnormal sewage.
Normal Sewage. Sewage which when analyzed, shows by weight a daily average of not more than 260 mg/l of
suspended solids and not more than 170 mg/l of BOD, and which is otherwise acceptable into the city sanitary
sewerage system.
Residential Customer Class. Those customers which have not more than two (2) living units served by a single
water meter.
Standard Methods. The “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” prepared and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Waterworks Association and the Water
Pollution Control Federation, 12th Edition, Second Printing, March, 1966.
Suspended Solids. Solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquid and
which are removable by laboratory filtering.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3D)
(b) Rates for Sewerage Service in the City:
(1) Residential monthly service charge: $14.95 per customer.
(2) Commercial service charge: $22.10 per customer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/562
(3) Residential sewer rates (monthly volume charge): $4.29 per 1,000 gallons of water used.
(4) Commercial sewer rates (monthly volume charge): $5.72 per 1,000 gallons of water used.
(Ordinance 1127, sec. 2 adopted 9/11/18)
(5) All trailer homes within trailer parks will be charged the above residential rates.
(6) Apartment units will be charged upon consumption only under the above commercial rates.
(7) The monthly volume charges for residential class customers will be based on the individual
customer's average monthly water use during the preceding winter quarter months of December,
January and February, but in no event shall the volume used to compute this monthly charge exceed
16,000 gallons. The volumes used to compute these charges are based on the amount of water used
by the residential class customer as measured by a meter. Where no preceding winter quarter is
available from records, the director shall estimate a volume to be used for this monthly volume
charge, such estimated volume not to exceed 16,000 gallons.
(8) Commercial and industrial class customers shall be charged a monitoring charge and related
charges according to the current rate schedule established by the City of Fort Worth under its sanitary
sewer contract with the city.
(9) All customers connected to the sanitary sewer system who have a source of water supply that is
in addition to or in lieu of the city water supply shall have a meter approved and tested by the city
waterworks department on that source of water supply, and the volume charge as set forth
hereinabove shall be based upon the sum of the volumes delivered by all sources of supply. Such
method of volume determination will not be applicable if the customer installs a meter approved by
the city waterworks department on the wastewater produced by the customer before it enters the city
sanitary sewer.
(10) The city council authorizes the city manager or his/her designee to adjust the rates established
in subsections (3) and (4), above, after notice to the customer, to reflect the customer's proportional
share of any increase or decrease in fees the city of Fort Worth charges the city to provide sewer
service.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3D; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
(c) Rates for Sewerage Service Outside the City Limits. The rates for city sewer services outside of the city
limits shall be one-and-one-half (1-1/2) times the in-city rates. (Ordinance 672 adopted 8/28/01)
(d) City municipal facilities/locations that have sewer service shall be charged at the same commercial sewer
rates as other commercial accounts. (Ordinance 957 adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 13.305 When Sewer Bills are Due
(a) All accounts for sewer services rendered shall be payable each month in advance at the office of the city
manager or his/her designee in the city, upon the date as provided in invoice rendered for such service.
(b) Bills for sewer service shall be rendered monthly, and any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to pay
the sewer rental and charge within fifteen (15) days after same shall have become due, shall be subject to have
his service for his building, house or other structure discontinued by the city. When the sewer service has been
discontinued and the sewer line disconnected from the property of any party for failure to pay the rental and
charges as herein stipulated, no connection to any such building, house or structure and the sewer line therefrom
with the sewer system of the city shall again be made until the owner of said property shall first make written
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/562
application for said reconnection on blanks furnished by the city manager or his/her designee, and pays all sewer
rental past due for service for any such building, house or structure to the city, together with a current deposit
and all costs of disconnection and reconnecting any such sewer line with the city sewer system; provided in case
of non-payment of sewer charge where user's property is connected with the city water system, the city shall
have the right to discontinue water service, even though charges made for water service has been paid.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3E; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03; Ordinance 756 adopted
9/14/04)
Sec. 13.306 Sand and Grease Traps
(a) Before any residential garage may be connected to the city sewer, same shall be equipped with a cast iron
sand trap, provided with removal receptacle inside of trap to remove mud, sand and other refuse washed into
same. This provision does not apply where such drain is located in such a manner as to receive drainage
exclusively from a washing machine used for laundry purposes.
(b) Before any wash racks at all commercial garages and filling stations may be connected to the city sewer
system, same shall be equipped so that wastewater therefrom shall discharge into a two (2) compartment sand
and grease trap made of concrete.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3F)
Sec. 13.307 Mandatory Connection to Public Sewer if Within One Hundred Feet (100')
(a) At any time after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or
corporation owning, renting, leasing, or controlling, in whole or in part, any premises situated within any section
of the city where sanitary sewer shall exist and where the property line of such premises approaches or extends
to within one hundred feet (100') of any such sewer, to construct, use or maintain, or permit to be constructed,
used or maintained, on such premises, any septic tank, privy, cesspool, water closet, urinal basin, slop sink, slop
drain, bathtub, or water waste drain from dwellings, laundries, livery stables, garages, filling stations or other
places, or any receptacle whatever used or to be used for the purpose of receiving or removing sewer matter, or
slop of any kind, unless the same shall be connected with the system of sanitary sewage of the city.
(b) All defective septic tanks, cesspools and other structures, devices or other class outdoor facilities used for
the purpose of receiving human sewage that may be on any premises, as of the effective date of this article, the
property line of which, at any point, extends to within one hundred feet (100') of a city sanitary sewer, shall be
removed or abated after the giving of notice as herein provided for removal and abatement of same.
(c) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to
install suitable toilet facilities herein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, within
ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred feet
(100') of the property line. All connections to the public sewer system shall be made under the supervision of the
city and its representatives.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3G)
Sec. 13.308 Certain Acts Unlawful
It shall be unlawful:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/562
(1) To uncover the public sewer or branches thereof unless by consent and under the supervision of
the officer in charge of the water and sewer department of the city.
(2) For the owner or occupant of any building located on any lot reaching within one hundred feet
(100') of any city sanitary sewer, any portion of which is used for any purpose during any portion of
the day, to fail to have at least one (1) water closet connection with the public sewer.
(3) For the owner or occupant of any building, located on any lot reaching within one hundred feet
(100') of any city sanitary sewer, in which food is cooked or clothing is washed, to fail to have a
suitable sink, slop stone or hopper for the reception of water and connected with the city sewer
system.
(4) To throw or allow to be thrown or deposited upon the surface of the ground or in any hole or
vault in or under the surface of the ground on any lot within one hundred feet (100') of any city
sanitary sewer, any water which has been used for domestic or manufacturing purposes, or any liquid
or any solid filth, feces or urine.
(5) To throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited in any vessel or receptacle connected
with the city sewer system, any newspaper, garbage, hair, fruit, ashes, vegetable peelings or refuse,
rags, cotton, cinders, or any other matter whatsoever, except feces and/or urine, the necessary closet
paper or liquid slops.
(6) To fail or refuse to connect with the sanitary sewer all washstands or slop stands in house or
yard, where a city sanitary sewer is within one hundred feet (100') of the property line, or to allow
any slops, wash or wastewater of any kind to flow over or under the pavement into the streets or
alleys.
(7) To enter in or upon the premises of the sewage disposal plant site and to in anywise tamper
with, or injure in any manner whatsoever, the buildings, fixtures and equipment of the sewage
disposal plant, nor any fixtures, equipment or supplies that may be stored on said site.
(8) To discharge any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city
any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided.
(9) To construct or maintain within the city any septic tank, privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended for the disposal of sewage.
(10) No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the
municipal sewage works.
(11) To discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer any of the following described
waters or wastes:
(A) Any waste or water which contains more than 75 parts per million of fats, oil or grease.
(B) Any gasoline, benzine, naptha, fuel oil, or other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas.
(C) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(D) Any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/562
(E) Any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(F) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3H)
Sec. 13.309 Responsibility for Injuries to Sewer or Street
The property owner or plumber, or both, shall be held responsible for any injuries the plumber shall cause to the
sewer or street in making such connections. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3I)
Sec. 13.310 Septic Tanks, Privies, Etc., Not to be Connected With Sewer
No person or corporation shall connect any open gutter, septic tank, cesspool, privy, vault or cistern with any
public sewer or any private sewer connected with the public sewer. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10,
Section 3J)
Sec. 13.311 Not to Deposit Garbage, Etc., in Sewer Openings, Etc.
No person or corporation shall deposit any garbage, offal, dead animals filth or any substance having a tendency
to obstruct the flow of sewage in any manhole, flush tank or sewer opening. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
10, Section 3K)
Sec. 13.312 Not to Injure Sewer System
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to obstruct or in any way injure any of the pipes, drains,
works, or machinery belonging to or connected with the sewer system of the city, or to place any substance
whatever into any sink, water closet, bathtub, vessels, drains, or other receptacles, belonging to or connected
with said sewer system which may obstruct or injure same. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3L)
Sec. 13.313 Notice for Opening Streets, Etc.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to lay pipes for water, gas, steam or any purpose, in any street or alley
upon which sewers are laid, shall give at least twenty-four (24) hours notice to the city officer in charge of water
and sewer department, before opening the street or alley, and the manner of excavating the trenches and laying
the pipe and back filling over the same shall be subject to the approval of the officer in charge of the water and
sewer department. All such work shall be planned and executed in accordance with the provisions of the
plumbing and other ordinances of the city so that no injury shall occur to any street, public sewer or drain or to
any house or other sewer drain connected therewith. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3M)
Sec. 13.314 Barriers and Lights to be Placed
Proper barriers and lights must be maintained on the banks of the houses or other sewer trench to guard the
public against accidents during the progress or work. In back filling, no stone shall be used and the earth shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/562
carefully rammed or flooded so as to keep the pipe in proper position and to avoid settling. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3N)
Sec. 13.315 Connection of Buildings Outside the City
The owner or occupant of any building not located within the city shall be allowed to make connection with the
sewer system after obtaining a permit as provided herein, and such work of connection shall be subject to the
regulations and inspections herein provided for and the owner or occupant of any building thus connected shall
be required to pay the inspection, installation and the service charges herein exacted. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Section 3O)
Sec. 13.316 Approval of Connections Required
It shall be unlawful to connect any old house plumbing to the city sanitary sewer system unless same conforms
in all respects to all requirements of the plumbing code of the city and shall be approved by the plumbing
inspector. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3P)
Sec. 13.317 Connections to Comply with Plumbing Code
All connections of house sewer lines into the main and lateral sewer lines shall be in accordance with the
specification as is provided in the plumbing code of the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3Q)
Sec. 13.318 Basement Drains
No permit for a basement drain shall be granted until the owner of the building has executed and signed a
written agreement releasing the city from any damage that may result from basement being flooded by the
stoppage of sewers, which agreement shall be filed with the city manager or his/her designee. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3R; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 13.319 Certain Pipes Prohibited
No rainwater or down-spout pipes, range boiler pipe, or other pipe used to convey water or other substances of
like character, except the pipes necessary to plumbing systems shall be connected to the sewer system. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3S)
Sec. 13.320 Pipe Materials
All drains from four feet outside of building to main sewer must be of vitrified clay or cement pipe with bells, or
extra heavy cast iron pipe laid to a uniform grade. Joints of clay pipe shall have bell holes provided or hemp
gaskets put in and joints well cemented with two parts of well screened sand and one part of best Portland
cement, and cast iron pipe shall be caulked and molten lead and oakum. No vitrified clay or cement pipe shall be
used for sewer connections unless it is at least 12 inches under ground. Extra heavy cast iron shall be used where
the depth of such pipes is less than twelve inches under ground. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section
3T)
Sec. 13.321 Fall Requirement
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/562
All sewer, soil and waste pipe drains shall have a continuous fall of not less than one-quarter of an inch to a foot
is obtainable. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3U)
Sec. 13.322 Entrance onto Premises for Enforcement Purposes
It shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the sewer department, or his duly authorized agents, to enter all
premises as may be necessary in the enforcement of this article and he is hereby so empowered; and it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to interfere with any inspection being made by the city plumbing
inspector, or the officer in charge of sewer department, or his authorized agents, in carrying out the provisions of
this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3V)
Sec. 13.323 Improvements and Extensions
(a) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct or extend or make any extensions of any main or
sub-lateral lines to be attached to any of the main sewer lines or manholes installed, shall be required to file an
application with and to secure a permit from the officer in charge of the city sewer system authorizing said
officer in charge, four copies of plans and specifications of the proposed extensions and any subsequent changes
thereto, and before any action is taken thereon, same shall be submitted to the state health department for its
approval and upon receiving said approval, said plans and specifications shall be approved by the consulting
engineer of the city; said application shall contain the provisions that said applicant agrees that permission is
thereby given to the agents of the state health department, and the city, to inspect all of the work during its
progress as often as may be desired; and applicant further shall agree that the plumbing work installed in all
structures to be connected to said extensions shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the city and state
laws and that the extensions or lines being constructed with all easements therewith, shall, after the completion
thereof, be conveyed to the city, Texas, without cost and without reservations of any kind.
(b) All plans and specifications for sewer improvements and extensions shall include the following:
(1) Profiles of all sewers proposed.
(2) Details of construction of manholes, flush tanks and substructure.
(3) Shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than three hundred feet (300') to the inch nor less than
one hundred feet (100') to the inch.
(4) Lines and figures, shall be clearly and distinctly made thereon and extensions to be built to be
shown by solid lines: ____________. Existing sanitary sewers shall be shown by the following
symbols: ........; and combined sewers by a dot and dash: .-.-.-.-.-.-.-; all topographical symbols to be
the same as those of the United States Geological Survey.
(5) Elevations of the surface of the streets to be placed outside the street lines in the upper right
angle, or opposite their respective positions in the street. The elevations of sewer inverts should be
shown at street intersections, ends of lines and wherever a change of grade occurs. The elevations of
surface shall be shown to the nearest 1/10 foot; those of the sewer invert to the nearest 1/100 foot.
The sizes and gradients of all proposed and existing sewers shall be marked along the line of the
sewer.
(6) All sewer appurtenances and unusual features, such as manholes, lampholes, flush tanks,
siphons, pumps, etc., shall be designated on the plans by suitable symbols and referenced by a legend
near the title.
(7) Profiles of sewer lines shall be prepared and drawn to such a scale as to show clearly the
structural features of the sewer. For ordinary use the following scales are suggested: Vertically ten
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/562
feet (10') to one inch (1"); horizontally one hundred feet (100') to one inch (1"). Both scales must be
clearly shown upon each sheet. Upon these profiles shall be shown all manholes, flush tanks,
lampholes, siphons and stream crossings, with elevations of stream bed and normal water. Figures
showing the sizes and gradients of sewers, surface elevations, sewer inverts, etc., should be shown
with the same frequency as required for the map.
(8) When grades lower than those given in the recommended practice are used, an explanation and
reasons for the use of such grades should be included in the engineer's report. On each sheet of
profiles must be given, under the title, an index of the streets appearing on that sheet. Profile sheets
shall be numbered consecutively.
(9) The detail plans shall be drawn to such a scale as to show suitably and clearly the nature of the
design and all details, such as manholes, frame covers, iron pipes, valves, gates, etc.
(10) Title. Each drawing shall have legibly printed thereon the name of the town or persons for
whom the drawing is made, the name of the engineer in charge, the date, the scale and such
references and the title as are necessary for the complete understanding of each drawing.
(c) Applicant shall furnish built-in drawings in as many copies as may be required by the city when the work
is completed.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3W)
(d) New Extensions to be Inspected. All new extensions to the city sewer system, and appurtenances thereto,
shall be inspected and approved by the officer in charge of the sewer system, and the consulting engineer of the
city, or his duly authorized representative, before backfilling any part thereof. Any person, firm or corporation
violating this provision shall be subject to the penalty in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth
in Section 1.109 of this code, and shall be compelled to uncover said extension or any part thereof, so that same
may be fully inspected as provided therein. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3X)
Sec. 13.324 Injunctions; Civil Remedies
In case of any willful or continued violation of the terms, conditions and provisions of this article, the city, in
addition, to imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in any
court having jurisdiction to restrain, correct or abate such violation; and the definition of any violation of the
terms, conditions and provisions of this article as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city, from invoking the
civil remedies given it by laws of the State of Texas, but same shall be cumulative and subject to the prosecution
as hereinabove prescribed for such violation. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 3Y)
ARTICLE 13.400 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM FACILITY ACCESS FEES*
Sec. 13.401 Definitions
When used in this article, these terms shall be defined as follows:
Building Permit. A permit required by the city for the construction of any new dwelling or building.
City. City of Fort Worth, Texas and/or the City of Lake Worth, Texas.
Commercial. Any customer served by a single meter or meters that is engaged in any type of business, except
the processing, fabrication, or manufacturing of any goods or products and any type of dwelling unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/562
Commercial-Multiple Unit. Any customer that has a single meter or meters serving more than one (1) business
per meter and/or three (3) or more dwelling units per meter.
Director. The director of the water department of the City of Fort Worth, or his authorized representative (and/or
the engineer of the city, or his authorized representative.)
General Benefit Facility. Wastewater facilities that provide utility services and benefits common to all customers
of the utility; this includes wastewater treatment plants, control systems and appurtenances, and all major
collectors and interceptors that are eighteen inches (18") and greater in diameter.
Industrial. Any customer served by one (1) or more water meters whose sewage contains wastewater from a
product fabricated, processed, or manufactured by the customer.
Industrial-Monitored Class. Any customer determined by the director to be a producer of any sewage having a
suspended solids of BOD content which is significantly in excess of that found in normal sewage, but is
otherwise acceptable into the city sanitary sewerage system.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 4A)
Initial Water or Wastewater Service. The first water or wastewater service to be provided by the city at a specific
property location. (Ordinance 987, sec. 2, adopted 8/14/12)
Living Area. The enclosed area of a dwelling that does not include garages, carports, and outside patios or
porches.
Meter. A device that measures the quantity of water used. The types of meters used herein are those described in
the American Water Works Association C700 through C703 and M6 Standards.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 4A)
New Development. Subdivision of land; the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which
requires initial water or wastewater service. New development includes the sale of water taps resulting from the
conversion of an individual well to the city's water utility and includes the sale of sanitary sewer taps resulting
from the conversion of an individual septic or other individual waste disposal system to the city's sanitary sewer
utility. New development also includes increasing the size of the water meter serving the property. (Ordinance
987, sec. 2, adopted 8/14/12)
Public Utility. Any person, firm, corporation, cooperative corporation, or any combination of these persons or
entities including a municipal corporation, water supply or sewer service corporation, or other political
subdivision of the state, or their leasees, trustees, and receivers, owning or operating for compensation
equipment or facilities for the provision of potable water to the public or for the collection and treatment of
sewage for the public, but does not include any person or corporation not otherwise a public utility that furnishes
the services only to itself or its employees or tenants as an incident of that employee's service or tenancy when
that service is not resold to or used by others.
Residential. Any customer living in a dwelling having the necessary living facilities for one (1) unit that is
served by a single water meter. This class also includes a duplex dwelling where no more than two (2) living
units are supplied water through a single meter.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 4A)
Sec. 13.402 Payment Required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/562
(a) No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall be entitled to initial water or wastewater service until
payment of the appropriate system facility access fee as set forth in Section 13.403 hereof. Payment of the
system facility access fee is required as a condition precedent to establishing initial water or wastewater service.
All other conditions for initiating service, such as deposit requirements, tap fees, extension agreements, and
service charges as covered elsewhere in this code and are in addition to the system facility access fee.
(b) Prior to the initial connection of any building, structure, premises, or lot after the effective date of this
article to the city's water or wastewater system, the owner of that building, structure, premises or lot shall pay
the system facility access fee as established in Section 13.403, such fee to be paid in cash prior to the issuance of
the building permit.
(Ordinance 987, sec. 3, adopted 8/14/12)
Sec. 13.403 System Facility Access Fee (Fort Worth Impact Fee)
The system facility access fees are those imposed upon the city by the City of Fort Worth for providing water
and wastewater service to new development contained within the incorporated city limits of Lake Worth and to
which service is provided either directly or indirectly by the City of Fort Worth water and wastewater systems.
The system facility access fees for residential and other classes of customers shall be the applicable system
facility access fees (impact fees) set and assessed by the City of Fort Worth pursuant to the wholesale water and
wastewater contracts between Fort Worth and Lake Worth. (Ordinance 1078 adopted 4/11/17)
Sec. 13.404 Private and Public Facilities
(a) If any property within or outside the city's corporate limits utilizes a water well, a septic tank, or an
individual waste disposal system and the property owner requests to be connected to the city's water or
wastewater system, the customer shall be assessed the fee established by this article before the property is
connected to the city's water or wastewater system. Should the property owner request only a wastewater
connection while retaining a private water well, the appropriate fee to be assessed will be determined by the
director.
(b) A system facility access fee will not be assessed to any property which is receiving service from a
wastewater treatment plant owned by a public utility when such public utility is acquired by the city and
connected into the city's wastewater system.
(Ordinance 987, sec. 5, adopted 8/14/12)
Sec. 13.405 Clarifications and Determinations
Where a question arises as to the classification of a customer's service class and/or the appropriate meter size,
the director (or superintendent) shall make the determination in accordance with the existing city code as of the
date the question arises. Any customer shall have the right to request in writing from the director (or
superintendent) an interpretation or clarification of the basis upon which a system facility access fee was
assessed. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 4E)
Sec. 13.406 Increasing Size of Meter
(a) If a customer requests an increase in meter size to an existing service, the customer shall pay the fee
difference between the new level of service and the existing level of service as set out in Section 13.403 hereof.
The additional fee shall be paid prior to the installation of the enlarged meter service.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/562
(b) A request for additional sewer connections for improved property shall not result in the assessment of an
additional System Facility Access Fee so long as no increase in the size of the water meter is made.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 4F)
Sec. 13.407 Exceptions
No system facility access fee shall be assessed an application for initial wastewater service provided:
(1) all approach and on-site mains and facilities are in place and final inspection has been
conducted and accepted by the water department;
(2) such application for the initial wastewater service is presented to the city on or before May 1,
1987; and
(3) the application for a building permit for the same property as the initial wastewater service
application is presented to the city on or before September 30, 1987.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 4G)
ARTICLE 13.500 SEPTIC TANKS
Sec. 13.501 Standards Herein Necessary to Health and Welfare
The city council specifically finds that it is necessary to adopt and enforce the standards prescribed in this article
in order to protect the health and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Section 5A)
Sec. 13.502 Permit Required
No person, firm, or corporation shall install a septic tank for disposal of waste material until a permit is issued
by the city manager or his/her designee. Any person wishing to install a septic tank shall make application with
the city manager or his/her designee for such permit. Each application must be accompanied by a cash fee of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) which shall be the amount of the permit fee. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10,
Section 5B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 13.503 Minimum Standards
The following minimum standards for septic tanks are hereby established:
(1) Size of Tank.
(A) Two (2) bedroom residence; at least 900 gallons.
(B) Three (3) bedroom residence; at least 1100 gallons.
(C) Four (4) bedroom residence; at least 1300 gallons.
(D) Five (5) bedroom residence; at least 1500 gallons.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/562
(2) Lateral Lines. A minimum of three hundred feet (300') of lateral lines shall be required for a
two (2) bedroom residence with fifty (50) additional feet for a garbage disposal unit. The lateral lines
must be at least eighteen inches (18") wide at least eight inches (8") of washed, graded gravel under
the line and at least two inches (2") of washed, graded gravel over the line. The field lines must be on
a flat grade, or if the contour of the lot will not permit a flat grade, step-down approved by the
plumbing inspector may be installed if an earthen or concrete dam is constructed immediately before
the step-down. No lateral line shall be closer than ten feet (10') to the property line.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 5C)
Sec. 13.504 Percolation Test Required
No septic tank permit shall be issued until a percolation test has been conducted upon the lot in question by a
licensed engineer. Such test must be conducted in the presence of the city plumbing inspector. After testing, the
engineer must certify in writing that the land is suitable for use of a septic tank system with a subsurface
absorption field. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 5D)
Sec. 13.505 Permit for Septic Tank Required Before Building Permit, Etc.
No building permit shall be issued for a lot nor on a sewer system until such owner has procured a permit for the
installation of a septic tank pursuant to this article. No person shall be given a final inspection upon any house
until his septic tank is installed pursuant to the terms of this article. No person shall be entitled to tie onto the
city water system until his septic tank is installed pursuant to this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10,
Section 5E)
Sec. 13.506 Plumbing Inspector to Inspect Septic Tanks
The city plumbing inspector shall inspect each septic tank installation to insure that all requirements set out in
Section 13.503 above have been met. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to give notice to the city
plumbing inspector that an inspection is required at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of each phase of
construction. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 5F)
ARTICLE 13.600 INDUSTRIAL WASTE REGULATIONS*
Sec. 13.601 Definitions
When used in this article, these terms shall be defined as follows:
Abnormal Sewage. Any industrial waste discharged into the authority's sanitary sewer which, when analyzed,
shows by weight a total suspended solids (TSS) concentration greater than 250 mg/L or a biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) concentration greater than 250 mg/L. In addition, the authority may judge independently a
waste's suitability for discharge to the POTW that requires additional treatment, based upon BOD, TSS or other
characteristics, as abnormal. Any waste in this classification must be made acceptable for discharge into the
POTW as defined in this article.
Act. The Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq), as amended.
Approval Authority. The director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (“TCEQ”).
Authority. The City of Lake Worth, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/562
Authorized Representative of the Industrial User. Authorized representatives (authorized signatories) for
wastewater discharge permit applications and for reports submitted under section 13.605 of this article are:
(1) A responsible corporate officer, if the discharger submitting the application or report is a
corporation. This includes the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation.
(2) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the
manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure longterm
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary
systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit or any control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(3) For a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner of the proprietor, respectively.
(4) The principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility if the discharger is a federal, state or local governmental entity, or their agents.
(5) A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4)
above if:
(A) The authorization is made in writing by the individual described above in subsections (1),
(2), (3) or (4);
(B) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates (such as a plant manager),
or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company;
(C) The written authorization is submitted to the city; and
(D) If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility, a new authorization must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any
reports signed by an authorized representative.
Best Management Practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures,
and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 13.603(e)(4), 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1)
and (b) and to prevent or reduce the pollution of the MS4 and waters of the United States. BMP's include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20° C), expressed as parts
per million by weight or in terms of milligrams per liter.
Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams or wastewater from any portion of a discharger's wastewater
treatment equipment or pretreatment facility.
Categorical Industrial User. An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical
standard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/562
Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Limitations on pollutant discharges to POTW's promulgated by EPA in
accordance with section 307 of the Clean Water Act, that apply to specified process wastewaters of particular
industrial categories, 40 CFR 403.6 and Parts 405–471.
CFR. Code of Federal Regulations.
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD). The measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic matter present
in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/L as determined by the amount of oxidant consumed from a
chemical reflux. Such term does not, however, differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter, and
therefore does not necessarily correlate with BOD.
City. The City of Lake Worth, Texas.
Combined Wastestream Formula (CWF). A procedure found in 40 CFR 403.6(e) for calculating fixed alternative
discharge limits at industrial facilities applicable when regulated process wastewater, subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard, is mixed with nonregulated wastewaters prior to sampling.
Composite Sample. A mixture of grab samples collected at the same sample point at different times and
composed of not less than four samples. The series of samples may be collected on a time or flow proportional
basis.
(1) Time Proportional Composite Sample. A sampling method which combines discrete samples of
constant volume collected at constant time intervals (e.g., 200 milliliter samples collected every half
hour for a 24-hour period).
(2) Flow Proportional Composite Sample.
(A) A sampling method which combines discrete samples collected over time, based on the
flow of the wastestream being sampled. There are two methods used to collect this type of
sample. One method collects a constant sample volume at time intervals which vary based on
the stream flow [e.g., 200 milliliters of sample collected for every 5,000 gallons discharged].
The other method collects samples of varying volume, based on stream flow, at constant time
intervals.
(B) Flow proportional composite will be used only in locations that have the capability to
measure flow during the sampling period.
Control Authority. The City of Fort Worth, Texas, as holder of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(TPDES) permit.
Cooling Water. The water discharged from any system of condensation such as air conditioning, cooling,
refrigeration or water used as a coolant in cooling towers where the only pollutant is thermal.
Director. The director of public works of the city, or his/her authorized representative.
Discharge. In its verb form: to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or otherwise release or
dispose; to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. In its noun form: the product of any of these
acts.
Discharger. Any user discharging an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force
mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting ditches, and all constructed
devices and appliances appurtenant thereto. The term includes owners and occupants of such premises.
Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of industrial, liquid or
hazardous waste into or on land, water or the POTW.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/562
EPA. Environmental Protection Agency of the federal government.
Existing Source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the
publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
Garbage. Animal and vegetable waste or residue from preparation, cooking or dispensing of food or from the
handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
Generator. A person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces waste.
gpd. Gallons per day.
Grab Sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow of the
wastestream and without consideration of time. The sample is collected over a period of time not exceeding 15
minutes.
Hazardous Waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes), which because of its
quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics is:
(1) Identified as hazardous waste in 40 CFR Part 261; or
(2) Identified or listed as a hazardous waste under the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act, Texas
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 361.
Indirect Discharge or Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
Industrial User or User. A source of indirect discharge.
Industrial Waste. Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business
process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete grab or composite sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and
(2) Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's TPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act; or
(3) Therefore is a cause of a violation of a wastewater contract for sewage disposal or of receiving
water quality standards.
Maximum Daily Average. The maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a discharge as determined from
a laboratory test of a daily composite sample. The daily composite sample is the concentration of discharge of a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/562
pollutant measured during a calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day for
purposes of sampling.
Maximum Grab. The maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a discharge as determined from a
laboratory test of a grab sample.
May. Is permissive.
mg/L. Milligram per liter.
Monitored User. Commercial and industrial users which are not classified as significant industrial users and do
not discharge a significant amount of regulated pollutants on a regular basis.
Monthly Average Limit. The highest allowable average of “daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated
as the sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily
discharges” measured during that month.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). National pollutant discharge elimination system
permit program of the environmental protection agency, and/or the permit program of the state agency delegated
to act on the Environmental Protection Agency's behalf with an approved pretreatment program (e.g. TPDES or
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System).
New Source. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
(1) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is
located;
(2) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source;
(3) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered;
(4) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsections (2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment; or
(5) Construction of a new source under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator
has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program;
(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;
(ii) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/562
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
Noncontact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with raw materials,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial User. An industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment
standards may, at the sole discretion of the director, be permitted as a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
(NSCIU) if the following conditions are met:
(1) The industrial user, prior to city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable
categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
(2) The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in section 13.605(d)
(1), see 40 CFR 403.12(q), together with any additional information necessary to support the
certification statement; and
(3) The industrial user never discharges any categorical process wastewater into the sanitary sewer.
Normal Wastewater. Wastewater in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than
250 mg/L and BOD is not more than 250 mg/L, and which is otherwise acceptable to be discharged into a
sanitary sewer under the terms of this article.
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). A system used by the federal government for
collecting and organizing industry-related statistics. The NAICS codes are updated every five years to stay
current with industry developments.
O and M (or O&M). Operation and maintenance.
Other Wastes. Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, and all other
substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
Over Load. The discharge of BOD/COD, solids or wastewater volume in excess of the POTW's capacity.
Owner or Occupant. The person, firm, or public or private corporation, using the lot, parcel of land, building or
premises connected to and discharging sewage, industrial wastewater or liquid, into the sanitary sewage system
of the city, and who pays, or is legally responsible for the payment of, water rates or charges made against the
said lot, parcel of land, building or premises, if connected to the water distribution system of the city, or who
would pay or be legally responsible for such payment if so connected.
Pass Through. The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which are a cause of or significantly contribute to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
TPDES permit.
Permit. Wastewater discharge permit, issued to nondomestic dischargers into the sanitary sewerage system of the
POTW.
Person. Any individual, business entity, partnership, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision, or
any agent or employee thereof.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of
solution; a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/562
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid, waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt
and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
Polluted Water. Water and/or liquid waste containing any of the following:
(1) Free or emulsified grease, and/or oil.
(2) Acids or alkalis.
(3) Phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water.
(4) Toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution.
(5) Noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases, liquids or solids.
(6) More than ten (10) mg/L of total suspended solids or BOD, or both.
(7) Color; either true or apparent, exceeding fifty (50) units.
(8) More than 500 mg/L of dissolved solids, more than 250 mg/L of chlorides or more than 250
mg/L sulfates.
(9) A pH value of less than 5.0 or higher than 12.0 for discharges to Fort Worth.
(10) Any water or wastewater not approved for discharge into water of the state by the TCEQ.
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewer.
Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a
pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
Pretreatment Standard. The term pretreatment standard, or standard means prohibited discharge limits
established pursuant to 40 CFR Part 403.5, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits, including
BMP's.
Process Wastewater. The water that comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, waste product, or wastewater.
Public Sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying sanitary or storm wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of
abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city.
Public Works Utility Superintendent (or Superintendent). Public works utility superintendent of the city, or his
authorized representative.
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, which is
owned by the control authority. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any other conveyances
which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
Sanitary Sewer.
(1) A publicly owned pipe or conduit designed to collect and transport industrial waste and
domestic sewage to the POTW.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/562
(2) A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW.
Septage. Wastes removed from a septic tank.
Severe Property Damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which
causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can be
reasonably expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
Sewage. Water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm or other waters as
may be present.
Shall. Is mandatory.
Significant Change. An increase or decrease in the volume of wastewater discharged by more than twenty
percent (20%) from the data submitted in the permit application, or the deletion or addition of any pollutant
regulated by the authority or by a categorical standard. Volumes are those measured by the water service meter, a
verifiable estimate, or a permanently installed effluent flow meter approved by the authority.
Significant Industrial User (SIU).
(1) An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards and any other industrial user
that:
(A) Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to a
POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling or boiler blowdown wastewater);
(B) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of a POTW; or
(C) Is designated as such by the authority on the basis that the industrial user has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting a POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement.
(2) An industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards may, at the discretion of
the director, be permitted as a nonsignificant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) based on a finding
that the industrial user never discharges categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard)
and the following conditions are met:
(A) The industrial user, prior to city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable
categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
(B) The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in section
13.605(d)(9), see 40 CFR 403.12(q), together with any additional information necessary to
support the certification statement; and
(C) The industrial user never discharges any categorical process wastewater into the sanitary
sewer.
(3) Upon a finding that a noncategorical industrial user meeting the criteria for a significant
industrial user has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting a POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may at any time on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from a noncategorical industrial user, determine such
user is not a significant industrial user.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/562
Slug Load or Slug Discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the
prohibited discharge standards in this article. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable
potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits
or permit conditions.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. The codes which best describe the activities conducted at the
facility or establishment. SIC codes are 4-digit numbers used by the Bureau of Census as part of a system to
categorize and track the types of business activities conducted in the United States. The first two digits of the
code represent the major industry group and the second two digits represent the specific subset of that group. A
classification pursuant to the standard industrial classification manual issued by the United States Office of
Management and Budget.
Standard Methods. “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,” a publication prepared
and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Waterworks Association and the
Water Pollution Control Federation, as it may be amended from time to time.
State. The State of Texas.
Storm Sewer. All roads with drainage systems, streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, watercourses and
storm drains, which are designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation including snowmelt.
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) Permit. Permit issued by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general
area-wide basis.
Total Suspended Solids (TSS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or in suspension in, water, sewage or
other liquid and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
Total Toxic Organics (TTO). The sum of masses or concentration of the toxic organic compounds listed in 40
CFR 122 Appendix D, Table II, excluding pesticides, found in industrial users' discharges at a concentration
greater than 0.01 mg/L. Only those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the city,
if any, shall be analyzed for with noncategorical industries. With categorical industries, the list of TTO's is
specific for every applicable federal category. TTO's will be sampled for as stipulated in the particular category
or those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the city, where not stipulated.
Toxic Pollutant. Any substance that is identified as hazardous waste in 40 CFR Part 261 or established pursuant
to 40 CFR Part 403.
Transporter. A person who owns or operates a vehicle used for the purpose of transporting waste, or a person
who authorizes such operation.
Upset. An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of
noncompliance with the standards established in this article, due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the
discharger and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation thereof. Any affirmative defense to upset only apply to federal court actions as per section 13.606(g)
(3) of this article.
U.S.C. United States Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/562
User. A person who is a source of an indirect discharge.
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic,
agricultural, commercial or industrial activities.
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial waste and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
Watercourse. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
Waters of the State. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs,
aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which contained within, flow through or border upon the
State or any portion thereof.
Sec. 13.602 Purpose and Policy; Administration
(a) This article provides for prohibitions on discharges of certain substances into the public sewer system of
the city from all sources, domestic, commercial, or industrial. A further purpose of this article is to set forth
uniform requirements for industrial dischargers into the authority's wastewater collection and treatment systems,
and to enable the authority to protect the general public's health and POTW personnel in conformance with all
applicable state and federal laws relating thereto, including the Clean Water Act. Parts of this article are enacted
pursuant to regulations established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as set forth in 40 CFR
Part 403 and all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code 1251 et
seq.) and as set forth in 40 CFR Part 403.
(b) All categorical pretreatment standards, lists of toxic pollutants, recordkeeping requirements, industrial
categories and other standards and categories which have been or which will be promulgated by the EPA shall be
incorporated as a part of this article, as will EPA regulations regarding sewage pretreatment established pursuant
to the act, and amendment of this article to incorporate such changes shall not be necessary. The authority shall
maintain current standards and regulations which shall be available for inspection and copying.
(c) The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the authority wastewater system that will interfere
with the normal operation of the system, including interference with the use or disposal of sludge, or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW, and which will pass through the
system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or which are otherwise incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system;
(4) To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and
improvement of the POTW;
(5) To prevent the entrance of pollutants into watercourses within the city and to maintain the
quality of water consistent with public health and enjoyment;
(6) To ensure that the quality of wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level that
allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/562
(7) To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of
their employment and to protect the general public; and
(8) To enable the city to comply with its contracts with the City of Fort Worth and to enable the
City of Fort Worth to comply with their NPDES or TPDES permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other federal and state laws to which the POTW is subject.
(d) The regulation of discharges into the authority's wastewater system under this article shall be
accomplished through the issuance of permits, as specified in section 13.605, and by monitoring and inspection
of facilities, according to this article.
(e) Administration.
(1) The director and the director's authorized representatives (“director”) are authorized to
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Additionally, the director and the
director's authorized representatives (“director”) are authorized to make inspections pursuant to this
article and to take enforcement action against violators.
(2) The director shall have the authority to promulgate such administrative regulations as are from
time to time necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(3) For the purpose of promoting consistency of enforcement throughout the city's jurisdiction and
service area, the director shall promulgate, implement and enforce an enforcement response plan.
Sec. 13.603 Prohibited Discharges
(a) Discharges to Storm Drains and Watercourses. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to
be discharged any wastewater into any storm drain or watercourse within the city, except for those persons with
approved permits for such discharges.
(b) General Prohibited Discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, and unpolluted wastewater or
drainage from downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds, or lawn sprays into any sanitary
sewer.
(2) Water from unpolluted industrial water or cooling water from various equipment shall not be
discharged into sanitary sewers if an alternate acceptable means of disposal is available. If an
alternate acceptable means of disposal is not available, such water may be discharged into the
sanitary sewer with the approval of the city.
(3) No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater
which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other local, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(c) Prohibited Sewer Connections. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge into the sanitary
sewer any liquid or solid waste, including trucked or hauled wastes, unless such deposit or discharge has been
approved by the authority.
(d) Specific Discharge Prohibitions. No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly,
into any public sanitary sewer any of the following described substances, materials, water or waste:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/562
(1) Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150° F), sixty-five degrees Centigrade (65° C) or a temperature which inhibits or
interferes with biological activity in the POTW treatment plant. In no case shall wastewater be
introduced which would have a temperature exceeding one hundred and four degrees Fahrenheit
(104° F) or forty degrees Centigrade (40° C) upon entering the POTW treatment plant;
(2) Solidifying Substance. Any water or waste which contains wax, grease, oil, petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cuffing oil, products of mineral oil origin, plastic or other substance that will
solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees (32°) to one
hundred fifty degrees (150° F) Fahrenheit, thereby contributing to the clogging, plugging or
otherwise restricting the flow of wastewater through the collection system;
(3) Explosive. Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer system or POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty
degrees Fahrenheit (140° F) sixty degrees Centigrade (60° C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR Part 261.21. This includes flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases such as gasoline,
kerosene, benzene, naphtha, etc., which by reason of their chemical properties or quantity may be
sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause fire or explosion;
(4) Obstruction. Solid or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing obstruction in the
flow in sewers or other interference, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, asphalt, concrete,
cement, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint
residues, or bulk solids;
(5) Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension;
(6) Gases. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life,
or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair;
(7) Sludge. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges, or
scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process as
determined pursuant to criteria in this article. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW
cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state
standards applicable to the sludge management method being used;
(8) TPDES. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its TPDES or other disposal
system permits, or the receiving stream water quality standards;
(9) Objectionable Color. Any substance with objectionable color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
(10) Slugload. Any dump or slugload;
(11) Hazard to Human Life. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance;
(12) Toxicity Test. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment
plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/562
(13) Swimming Pool. Swimming pool drainage from private residential pools may not be
discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Swimming pool drainage from public and semipublic
swimming pools may be discharged to the POTW with the prior consent of the authority. Swimming
pool filter backwash may be discharged to the POTW;
(14) Detergents. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive
foaming in the POTW;
(15) Medical Waste. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the authority in a
wastewater discharge permit;
(16) Pollutants. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the
POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(17) Interference. Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with
other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
(18) Oils. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or product of mineral oil origin in amounts
that will cause interference or pass through;
(19) Trucked or Hauled Pollutants. Trucked or hauled pollutants, at discharge points designated by
the authority in accordance with subsection (c);
(20) pH. Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case
discharges with pH lower than 5.0, unless the works is specifically designed to accommodate such
discharges;
(21) Oil and Grease.
(A) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or nonpolar products of mineral oil origin in
concentrations greater than two hundred (200) mg/L;
(B) Visible free floatable polar oils, fats, or grease or a concentration greater than two
hundred (250) mg/L in wastewater discharged from industrial or commercial facilities into the
POTW; or
(C) In no case shall discharges in amounts that cause interference or operational problems
with the POTW be allowed.
(22) BTEX. BTEX concentration greater than 1.0 mg/L;
(23) Gases. Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide in excess of ten (10) parts per
million;
(24) Radioactive. Radioactive wastes or isotopes with a half-life or concentration exceeding limits
established by the authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
(25) Toxics. Toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or to pass through the treatment plant and impair aquatic life in receiving water, as
expressed by the results of acute or chronic toxicity tests of the POTW effluent;
(26) Categorical. Pollutants in excess of the limitations established in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard set forth in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/562
(27) Explosive. Wastewaters which emanate vapors causing the atmosphere in the sewer system to
exceed twenty percent (20%) of the lower explosive limit in the immediate area of the discharge.
(e) Wastewater Limitations. The following local pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through
and interference. The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The director
may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing:
(1) Acids or Alkalies. Acids or alkalies capable of causing damage to sewage disposal structures or
personnel or having a pH value lower than 5.0 or higher than 12.0; or
(2) Local Limits. Metals in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations exceeding
the following:
Instantaneous Maximum
Allowable Discharge Limit
(mg/L)
Arsenic 0.25
Cadmium 0.15
Chromium 5.0
Copper 4.0
Lead 2.9
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 2.0
Silver 1.0
Zinc 5.0
(3) Cyanide. Cyanide or cyanogen compounds (expressed as total Cn) in excess of 1.0 mg/L.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/562
(4) Best Management Practices. The director may develop best management practices (BMP's), by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to help implement local limits and other
pretreatment standards.
(5) A person commits an offense if with criminal negligence the person processes or stores
pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
(f) Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plan. The director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges at the time of SIU
determination or at least by the first year. All the activities associated with slug control evaluation and results are
to be kept in the industrial user file. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively,
the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the authority of any accidental or slug discharge, as
required by section 13.604(b) of this article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including
solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
Sec. 13.604 Special Rules Relating to Industrial Dischargers
(a) Compliance with Standards.
(1) Applicable Laws. All dischargers shall be subject to those federal, state, and local requirements
and limitations which are the most stringent. All limitations listed in this article shall apply at the
point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW.
(2) Dilution. No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way for the
purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the standards set forth in this article.
(3) Mass Limitations. Where deemed appropriate the authority may apply mass limitation
expressed in pounds per day of pollutant discharged.
(4) Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(A) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass
or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the authority may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(B) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with
wastewater not regulated by the same standard, director shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/562
(C) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can
prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(D) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40
CFR 403.25.
(b) Accidental Discharge.
(1) Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated
materials or substances established by this article. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and
expense. When applicable, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the authority for review, and shall be approved by the authority
before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by
the authority shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary
to meet the requirements of this article.
(2) Dischargers shall notify the authority immediately upon the occurrence of a “slug” or
accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this article. The notification shall include location of
discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, corrective actions taken,
and be signed by the discharger's authorized representative. Within five (5) days following such
discharge, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report which specifies:
A description and cause of the discharge, including location of the discharge, type,
concentration, and volume of water; duration of noncompliance including exact dates and times
of noncompliance and, if the noncompliance is continuing, an immediate response to cause the
noncompliant discharge to cease; and all steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent continuation or recurrence of such an upset, slug load, or accidental discharge, spill, or
other conditions of noncompliance. Any discharger discharging slugs of prohibited materials
shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater system and the POTW, in
addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the authority under state or federal law.
(3) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in this subsection. Each
employer shall instruct all applicable employees, who may cause or discover such a discharge, with
respect to emergency notification procedure including the proper telephone number of the authority
to be notified.
(c) Wastewater Discharges into Private Sewer Systems. All dischargers who discharge wastewater into a
private sewer system shall comply with this article including section 13.605, provided, however, that flow
measurement may be based on metered water consumption. Each discharger shall provide an agreement, signed
by the owner of the sewer system, which authorizes the authority's personnel to enter onto the owner's property
for purposes of inspection and monitoring of discharger's premises, and for enforcement pursuant to the term of
this article.
(d) Prohibition of Bypass.
(1) Bypass. Bypass of a discharger's treatment equipment or treatment facility is prohibited and the
authority may take enforcement action against the discharger unless:
(A) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/562
(B) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastewater, or maintenance during normal periods of
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if, in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment,
adequate backup equipment should have been installed to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or maintenance; and
(C) The discharger submitted advanced, written notice of the need for a bypass.
(2) The discharger shall submit oral notice to the authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds
categorical standards or other discharge limits within 24 hours of the time the discharger becomes
aware of the bypass. Written notice shall be provided within 5 days of the time the discharger
becomes aware of the bypass. The written notice shall include a description of the bypass and its
causes, duration of the bypass, steps taken to prevent the reoccurrence of the bypass, and must be
signed by the authorized representative of the discharger.
(3) The authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if it
determines that the bypass will meet all of the conditions of subsection (d)(1).
(e) Notification of Hazardous Waste Discharges. All dischargers shall notify the authority, the control
authority, the EPA's regional waste management article director, and the approval authority in writing of any
discharge into a wastewater system or POTW of any substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Any notification under this subsection must be submitted in
conformance with 40 CFR Part 403.12(p).
(f) Pretreatment Facilities.
(1) Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall
achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set
out in this article within the time limitations specified by EPA or TCEQ, the state, or the director,
whichever is more stringent.
(2) The user shall provide, operate, and maintain any facilities necessary for compliance at the
user's sole expense.
(3) The director may require a user to submit detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures to the director for review. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no
way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article.
Sec. 13.605 Administration by Permit
(a) Wastewater Discharge Permit Required; Classification of Dischargers.
(1) All nondomestic users which discharge into the POTW shall be grouped according to the
following definitions:
(A) Group I. Significant industrial users.
(B) Group II. Commercial facilities and nonsignificant industrial users (NSIU). Those
commercial facilities and industrial users which are not included in group I. Examples include,
but are not limited to, automotive service shops, carwashes, small food processors, and
photographic developing shops.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/562
(C) Group III. Classed high strength users. Restaurants or other businesses which can be
classed according to any average strength or abnormal strength of their wastewater.
(D) Group IV. Wastewater haulers. Septage and chemical toilet waste haulers desiring to
discharge into the POTW. Waste must be generated within the city's service area.
(E) Group V. Groundwater remediation dischargers. Dischargers who are retrieving
contaminated underground water, pretreating such water, and then discharging into the POTW.
(F) Group VI. Nonsignificant categorical industrial user (NSCIU). Facility that never
discharges categorical wastewater even though categorical process(es) are located on site.
(2) No group I, group IV or group V or group VI user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director.
(3) The director may require any group II or group III user to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit. Within thirty (30) days after being notified by the director that a wastewater discharge permit
is required, the user shall submit a completed application in compliance with this article. After sixty
(60) days from the date a group II or group III user is notified by the director that a permit is
required, the user shall cease discharge to the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit.
(4) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a
violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this
article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
(b) Permits. All industrial users determined by the director to be a significant industrial user shall submit a
wastewater discharge permit application to the authority on a form provided by the authority. For significant
industrial users, an application shall be filed with the director at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon
which any discharge will begin or recommence. Nonsignificant categorical industrial users (NSCIU) and
nonsignificant industrial users (NSIU) shall be required to submit applications at dates specified by the director.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
(1) The application shall contain:
(A) All information required by subsection (d);
(B) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of
all raw materials and chemical used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged into the POTW;
(C) Number and type of employee, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of
operation;
(D) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
(E) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(F) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers,
floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(G) Time and duration of discharge;
(H) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the authority to evaluate the
wastewater discharge permit application; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/562
(I) All dischargers shall submit an industrial waste questionnaire. The questionnaire will be
reviewed by the public works utility superintendent or authorized representative. If deemed
necessary, dischargers may also be required to obtain a permit as outlined herein.
(2) No new group I, group IV, group V or group VI user shall be allowed to discharge until issued
a valid permit.
(3) The authority will evaluate the completed applications and data furnished by the discharger and
may require additional information. If, after evaluation, the application is deemed satisfactory, then a
wastewater discharge permit shall be issued after the evaluation is complete. The wastewater
discharge permit shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified herein and to the regulations of
the authority.
(4) If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for such
denial. If denial is based on the authority's determination that the applicant cannot meet the
wastewater discharge limitations of this article, the authority may specify that the applicant be
required to provide pretreatment of the waste before it is deemed acceptable for sewer discharge.
(5) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to
comply with this article, pursuant to subsection (b)(3), the discharger shall provide a declaration of
the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
implement added operational and maintenance activities.
(A) The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for
the discharger to comply with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to dates,
relating to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contract(s) for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all
other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this article.
(B) The time increments established between milestone dates shall be the shortest practicable
for the completion of the required work. Under no circumstances shall the authority permit a
time increment for a single step in the compliance schedule to exceed 9 months. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
applicable categorical pretreatment standards.
(C) Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date
for compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the authority, including a
statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the
construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than 9 months elapse between
such progress reports to the authority.
(6) Prior to the approval of a permit, unless exempted by the authority, all dischargers shall provide
monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and/or flow measurement of wastewaters before
entering the sanitary sewer of the authority. Each monitoring facility shall be located on the
discharger's premises; provided, however, where such location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship to the discharger, the authority may approve the placement of monitoring facilities in the
public street or sidewalk area. All monitoring equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a safe
and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger. Failure to provide proper monitoring
facilities shall be grounds for denial of a permit.
(c) Permit Conditions. Permits are issued to a specific discharger for specific operation and are not assignable
to another discharger or transferable to any other location without the prior written approval of the authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/562
(1) Wastewater discharge permit transfer may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee gives advance notice to the authority and the authority approves the wastewater discharge
permit transfer. The notice to the authority must include a written certification by the new owner or
operator which:
(A) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and process;
(B) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(C) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge
permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as
of the date of facility transfer.
(2) Wastewater discharge permit requirements:
(A) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall
exceed five (5) years;
(B) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to the city in accordance with subsection (c)(1), and provisions for furnishing the
new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(C) Effluent limits and best management practices based on applicable general pretreatment
standards as set forth in CFR Part 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state
and local law;
(D) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements.
These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practices)
to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal,
state, and local law; and
(E) Permits shall contain a statement of the civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. Such
schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by federal, state, and
local law.
(3) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following
conditions:
(A) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(B) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
(C) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(D) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW, the unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharge to the POTW;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/562
(E) The unit charge of schedule of user charges and fees for management of the wastewater
discharge to the POTW;
(F) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment;
(G) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit;
(H) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the authority to ensure compliance with this
article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations;
(I) Limits on the maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics and location of
approved discharge points; and
(J) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the director to be necessary.
(d) Reporting Requirements for Dischargers.
(1) Baseline Report. Within 180 days following the effective date for new or revised categorical
pretreatment standards, or at least 90 days prior to commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
shall submit to the authority a report (in a form provided by the authority), indicating the nature and
concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and
maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M or pretreatment is
necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment
standards. The report shall also contain:
(A) Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(B) Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
(C) Description of Operations. A brief description of nature, average rate of production,
standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description
should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.
(D) Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(E) Measurement of Pollutants.
(i) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(ii) The result of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or
mass, where required by the standard or by the authority, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set
out in subsection (d)(4). In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/562
management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the city or the applicable standards to determine compliance
with the standard.
(iii) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection
(d)(4).
(iv) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data
necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. However, the director may
allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the
data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures. Historical data that can represent the current discharge only can be accepted as
a baseline report.
(v) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods
of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal
work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(F) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(G) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment, best management practices and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this subsection must meet the
requirements set out in this section.
(H) Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports shall be signed by an
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional as stated in 40 CFR Part
403.12(b)(6).
(2) 90-Day Compliance Report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance by the
discharger with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or 90 days following commencement of
the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to
categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the authority a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and
maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements, including best management practices. This report shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the discharger.
(3) Periodic Compliance Reports.
(A) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no
case less than twice per year (once in June covering the six-month period December 1st through
May 31st and once in December covering the six-month period June 1st through November
30th), submit a report containing at a minimum:
(i) The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
pretreatment standards;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/562
(ii) The measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting
period;
(iii) In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit
documentation required by city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance status of the user; and
(iv) Contributing information as is determined necessary to account for water usage,
materials recovery, or disposal practices.
(B) All nonsignificant categorical industrial (NSCIU) users shall submit a report annually in
the month specified by the director. The report shall be completed according to the city's current
reporting requirements, including the submittal of any applicable certification statements.
(C) If the director has determined that a nonsignificant industrial user (NSIU) needs a permit,
then the NSIU shall submit a report annually in the month specified by the director. The report
shall be completed according to the city's current reporting requirements, including the
submittal of any applicable certification statements.
(D) All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with
subsection (d)(9) of this section.
(E) All wastewater samples shall be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater
monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and
maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring
equipment in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(F) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (d)(4) of
this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(4) Analysis and Sampling Procedures.
(A) All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures contained in 40 CFR Part
136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator of
the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by EPA.
Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in
question, or where EPA determines that the Part 136 techniques are inappropriate for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical
methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by
the POTW or other parties, approved by EPA.
(B) Sample Collection.
(i) Except as indicated in subsection (ii) the user must collect wastewater samples using
24-hour flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional
sampling is infeasible, the authority may authorize the use of time proportional sampling
or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide
a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the
analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/562
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters
unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies
may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required
to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
(ii) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile
organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(iii) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance
reports required in 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four (4) grab samples must
be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data does not exist; for facilities for
which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum.
(iv) For the reports required by (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance
by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(5) Reporting Additional Monitoring. If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of
this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the authority, using the
procedures prescribed in subsection (d)(4), the results of this monitoring, including chain-of-custody
forms, shall be included in the report.
(6) Significant Industrial User Reporting. Significant industrial users shall submit to the authority
at least once every six months (on dates as specified by the authority) a description of the nature,
concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the authority. These reports shall
be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in
accordance with the techniques described in subsection (d)(4). This sampling and analysis may be
performed by the authority in lieu of the significant industrial user.
(7) Notification of Changed Discharge. Dischargers shall give prior written notification to the
authority and the City of Fort Worth of any potential or actual significant changes in the volume or
character of pollutants in the discharge.
(A) The notification to the authority shall be received at least thirty (30) days prior to change.
(B) The authority may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed
necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater
discharge permit application.
(C) The authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(D) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow
increases or decreases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, the discharge of any previously
unreported pollutants, and the deletion of any pollutant regulated by this article or a permit
issued pursuant to this article.
(E) Significant industrial users that discharge wastewater to treatment plants operated by the
City of Fort Worth shall provide prior written notification to the city and City of Fort Worth of
changes to its wastewater discharges and any changes at its facility that affect the potential for a
slug discharge.
(8) Authority Monitoring. Sampling and analysis for the reports required by subsections (d)(1), (2),
(3) and (6) may be performed by the authority in lieu of the discharger. If all information required for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/562
the report, including flow data, is collected by the authority, the discharger will not be required to
submit the report.
(9) Signatory Requirements.
(A) All applications and compliance reports submitted to the authority must contain the
following certification statement and be signed by the authorized representative:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under
my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of
the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information and for not reporting known violations, including possibility
of fine and imprisonment.”
(B) Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A facility determined
to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by the director pursuant to section 13.601 and
subsection (a) must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance
with the signatory requirements in 40 CFR 403.120(1). This certification must accompany an
alternative report required by the director:
“Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR _____, I certify
that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from [month, day, year]
to [months, days, year].
(i) The facility described as [facility name] met the definition of a nonsignificant
categorical industrial user as described in subsection (a)(1);
(ii) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements
during this reporting period;
(iii) The facility never discharged categorical process wastewater on any given day
during this reporting period; and
(iv) This compliance certification is based on the following information:
_____________.”
(10) Wastewater Analysis. When requested by the authority, a user must submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within the time frame requested by the authority. The
authority is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update
this information.
(e) Inspection and Flow Measurement.
(1) Inspection.
(A) The authority shall inspect the facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with
the requirements of this article for SIU's, NSCIU's and NSIU's at least once per year. The
director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs a plan to control slug discharges at the time of
SIU determination, or at least by the first year.
(i) The discharger shall allow the authority or its representatives to enter upon the
premises of the discharger at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/562
sampling, or examination of records. All reports and records related to the provisions of
this article shall be made available for copying and inspection by the authority. If entry is
denied or if a person in control cannot be located, the director shall have every recourse
provided by law to secure entry. Such recourse shall include the right to obtain a search
warrant under the guidelines of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; and for the
purposes of same, any person with enforcement authority under this article is hereby
declared to be a “health officer.” The inspectors, agents or representatives of the authority
charged with the enforcement of this article shall be deemed to be performing a
governmental function for the benefit and health and welfare of the general public and
neither the authority nor any individual inspector, agent or representative shall be held
liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been
caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function. The failure or
refusal of such owner or discharger to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the
disconnection of water or sewer service to the facility.
(ii) The authority shall have the right to set upon the discharger's property such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and metering or
measuring operations. User shall provide ample room in or near the monitoring facility to
allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples and analysis and whether constructed
on public or private property, the monitoring facilities should be provided in accordance
with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications, and such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such manner so
as to enable the city to perform independent monitoring activities.
(B) Facilities regulated under this article are subject to the authority of the following agencies
concerning access to information and right of entry onto property for purposes of implementing
and enforcing federal and state pretreatment programs and other applicable law:
(i) The EPA under Section 308 of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section
3318), as amended; and
(ii) The state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) under Sections 26.014 and
26.015 of the Texas Water Code, as amended, and Sections 361.032 and 361.037 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, provisions of the Texas Water Code and
Texas Health Safety Code.
(C) The industrial waste discharged or deposited into the sanitary sewers shall be subject to
periodic inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the authority.
Samples shall be collected in such manner as to be representative of the character and
concentration the waste under operational conditions. The laboratory methods used in the
examination of said waste shall be those set forth in 40 CFR Part 136. The determination
of the character and concentration of industrial waste shall be made at such times and on
such schedules as may be established by the authority. Should a discharger desire a
determination of the quality of such industrial waste be made at some time other than that
scheduled by the authority, such special determination may be made by the authority at
the expense of the owner or discharger.
(D) The authority shall conduct surveillance activities to identify, independent of information
supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment
standards. The authority shall inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial
user at least once a year. The result of such activities shall be available to the approval authority
upon request.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/562
(2) NOV/Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a
violation, the user shall notify the control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware
of the violation. Within ten (10) days submit to the director a report which addresses:
The time, date, location, processes, and operations associated with the violation, and the
personnel assigned responsibility and/or present during the violation; the cause or probable
cause of the noncompliance; and the actions taken and implemented to meet permit conditions.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis
to the control authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation, except the
industrial user is not required to resample if:
(A) The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least
once per month; or
(B) The control authority performs sampling at the user between the time when the user
performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling.
(C) Measurement of Flow. The volume of flow used in computing sewage charges shall be
based upon metered water consumption or discharge as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the city's water department.
(i) Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the director that a substantial portion of
the metered water does not enter the sanitary sewer, the director may require or permit the
installation of additional approved meters at the user's sole expense, to measure the
quantity of water actually entering the sewer system. If approved by the director, the
measured quantity of water actually entering the sewer system will be used to determine
the sewer service charge.
(ii) Any discharger who procures all or part of its water supply from sources other than
the city's water department, all or part of which is subsequently discharged into the
sanitary sewer, shall install and maintain at its expense an effluent meter or flow
measuring device approved by the director for the purpose of determining the proper
volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges. Such meters or measuring
devices shall be read monthly.
(iii) If the director determines that it is not practicable to measure the quantity or quality
of waste by the aforesaid meters or monitoring devices, the quantity or quality of the
waste shall be determined in any manner or method the director may find practicable in
order to arrive at the percentage of water entering the sanitary sewage system of the
authority and/or the quality of the sewage to be used to determine the sewer service
charge.
(f) Permit Modifications.
(1) The authority reserves the right to amend any permit issued hereunder in order to assure
compliance by the authority with applicable laws and regulations. The authority may amend any
permit for good cause including, but not limited to the following:
(A) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
(B) Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or
discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/562
(C) A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
(D) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the authority's or
POTW's collection and treatment systems, authority or POTW personnel or the receiving
waters.
(E) Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit.
(F) Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or
in any required reporting.
(G) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
(H) To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
(I) Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any
applicable requirements, standards, laws, rules or regulations.
(J) To incorporate, revise, or revoke new or existing best management practices.
(2) All categorical pretreatment standards promulgated and adopted by the EPA after the effective
date of this article shall automatically become a part of this article. Where a discharger, subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a permit as
required by subsection (a), the discharger shall apply for a permit from the authority within 180 days
after the promulgation of the applicable categorical pretreatment standard by the EPA. In addition,
the discharger with an existing permit shall submit to the authority within 180 days after
promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, the information required by
subsection (b). The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30
days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include
a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(g) Confidential Information.
(1) All information and data submitted by a discharger to the authority or POTW may be submitted
to any state or federal agency governing the POTW. Such information shall be considered subject to
public disclosure, provided, however, that the discharger may request that information not be subject
to public disclosure, in accordance with 40 CFR Part 2 as follows:
(A) A discharger may assert a business confidentiality claim covering part or all of the
information in a manner described below, and that information covered by such a claim will be
disclosed only by means of the procedures set forth below.
(B) If no claim of business confidentiality is asserted, all information will be subject to public
disclosure without further notice to the discharger.
(2) Asserting Business Confidentiality Claim. A discharger that is submitting information to the
authority may assert a business confidentiality claim covering the information by placing on or
attaching to the information, at the time it is submitted to the authority, a cover sheet, stamped or
typed legend, or other suitable form of notice employing language such as “trade secret,”
“proprietary,” or “company confidential.” Allegedly confidential portions of otherwise
nonconfidential documents should be clearly identified by the discharger, and may be submitted
separately to facilitate identification and handling by the authority. If the discharger desires
confidential treatment only until a certain date or until the occurrence of a certain event, the notice
should so state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/562
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the disclosure of information and data regarding the nature
and content of a discharger's effluent, and the frequency of discharge, or a standard or limitation to be
met by the discharger, and this information shall be available to the public with no restrictions.
Effluent data which cannot be held as confidential is as defined in 40 CFR 2.302.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall be subject to any public disclosure requirements which
may exist under the Texas Public Information Act, Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code, as
amended.
(h) Duty to Reapply. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater
discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with subsection (b) prior
to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. An expired permit will continue to be
effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued. The user will not be subject to penalties if:
(1) The user has submitted a complete permit application at least sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration date of the user's existing permit; and
(2) The failure to reissue prior to expiration of the previous permit is not due to any act or failure to
act on the part of the user.
Sec. 13.606 Enforcement
(a) Nonemergency Termination of Water Supply and/or Discharge. A user who violates the following
conditions is subject to the termination of its city-provided water supply and/or its discharge:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and
characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or
sampling;
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards of this article;
(6) Pay sewer charges;
(7) Meet compliance schedules;
(8) Fulfill the conditions of its permit, or this article, or to obey any final judicial order with
respect thereto;
(9) Failure to meet effluent limitations; including best management practices, based on applicable
pretreatment standards; or
(10) Knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application,
record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
article or individual discharge permit.
(b) Notice of Violation.
(1) Whenever the authority finds that any user has engaged in conduct which justifies
nonemergency termination of water supply, pursuant to subsection (a), the authority shall serve or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/562
cause to be served upon such user a written notice, either by personal delivery or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, notifying the user of the proposed termination of its water
supply and/or discharge and the nature of the alleged violation. The user may petition for a
reconsideration and hearing.
(2) Within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the user shall respond in person or in
writing to the authority with a report containing the following:
(A) The problem(s) per the NOV issued;
(B) The possible cause of the problem(s);
(C) The steps being taken to minimize or curtail the reoccurrence of the problem(s).
(3) The user shall not recommence its discharge until the director so authorizes and:
(A) The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the noncomplying discharge has
ceased;
(B) The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the conditions creating the threat
of imminent and substantial danger have been eliminated;
(C) The user pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating services.
(4) Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any
other enforcement action against the user.
(c) Administrative Orders. Where the violation cited under subsection (a) is not corrected by means of
enforcement action listed in subsection (b), the following enforcement escalations may be used. Terms may or
may not be negotiated with an industrial user.
(1) Consent Order. An agreement between the authority and the industrial user normally
containing three elements: compliance schedules; stipulated fines or remedial actions; and signatures
of the authority and authorized representatives.
(2) Show Cause Order. An order which directs the user to appear before the city to explain its
noncompliance and show cause why more severe enforcement actions against the user should not be
levied. Typically used after informal contacts or NOV's have failed to resolve noncompliance;
however, it can be used at anytime.
(3) Compliance Order. An order which directs the industrial user to achieve or restore compliance
by a date specified in the order. Terms need not be discussed with the industrial user in advance.
Typically used when noncompliance cannot be resolved without construction, repair, or process
changes, or to require development of management practices, spill prevention programs, and other
pretreatment program requirements.
(d) Right of Appeal of Administrative Ruling. Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to
request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the authority on any matter covered by this article and shall be
entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event that such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of
performance or compliance with this article or deals with a permit issued pursuant hereto for which enforcement
activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a discharger's request shall stay all enforcement
proceedings pending receipt of the aforesaid written reply; provided, however, the authority may take any action
it deems necessary to protect its wastewater collection and treatment system or to comply with its TPDES permit
or to comply with any contract the authority has for the treatment of wastewater.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/562
(e) Judicial Proceedings. The authority, with respect to the conduct of any discharger contrary to the
provisions of this article, may authorize its attorney to commence any legal action in a court of competent
jurisdiction for equitable and/or legal relief.
(1) Injunctive Relief. When the authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may petition, pursuant to Chapter 54 [of the
Texas Local Government Code], a district court or other court of proper jurisdiction of the county
through its attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The authority may also seek such other
action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to
conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(2) Civil Penalties. The authority may also seek to recover civil penalties of up to $5,000.00 per
day pursuant to Section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(3) Criminal Proceedings. Notwithstanding any notice provisions contained in this article, any
person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this article commits an offense. The person shall be fined not
more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense per day.
(f) Emergency Suspension of Service and Discharge Permits.
(1) The authority, may, for good cause shown, suspend water or wastewater service to the
discharger's facility when it appears to the authority that an actual or threatened discharge presents or
may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, substantial danger
to the environment, interfere with the operation of a POTW, violate any pretreatment limits imposed
by this article or any permit issued pursuant to this article. Any discharger notified of the suspension
of the authority's water or wastewater service and/or the discharger's permit, shall within a reasonable
period of time, as determined by the authority, cease all discharges. In the event of the failure of the
discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the authority
may commence judicial proceedings to compel the discharger's compliance with such order or may
immediately disconnect such discharger's service line from the city water and sanitary sewer system.
In the case of emergency disconnection of service, the director shall make a reasonable attempt to
notify the owner or discharger before disconnecting the service line. The party whose service has
been disconnected shall have an opportunity for a hearing on the issue of the illegal discharge and the
disconnection as soon as possible after such disconnection has taken place.
(2) The authority may reinstate the permit and/or the wastewater or water service upon proof by
the discharger of the cessation of the noncomplying discharge or elimination of conditions creating
the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above. The water and/or wastewater service
shall be reconnected at the discharger's expense.
(g) Affirmative Defenses.
(1) Affirmative defense to discharge violations for action in municipal or state court. In an action
brought in municipal or state court, if a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a
violation of this article or a permit issued under this article was caused solely by an act of God, war,
strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of this article or the permit. In an
enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an act of God, war, strike,
riot, or other catastrophe shall have the burden of proof. In the event that an act of God, war, strike,
riot, or other catastrophe has been established the user shall control production of all discharges to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/562
extent possible until such time as the reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility is restored or
an alternative method of treatment is provided.
(2) Affirmative defense to upset. In an action brought in federal court, it is an affirmative defense
to an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards that the
noncompliance was caused by upset, if the user demonstrates, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(A) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; the facility was at
the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with
applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(B) Any discharger who experiences an upset in operations which places the discharger in a
temporary state of noncompliance with this article shall inform the authority within 24 hours of
first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, the
authority may at its discretion require the discharger to file a written report within five working
days. The report shall specify:
(i) Description of the upset, its cause and the upset's impact on a discharger's
compliance status.
(ii) Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and
if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to
occur.
(iii) All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such
an upset or other conditions of noncompliance.
(3) Affirmative defense to specific prohibited discharge standards. It is an affirmative defense in
federal court to an enforcement action brought against a user for noncompliance with the general
prohibitions of section 13.603(b)(3) or a specific prohibition of section 13.603(d)(1), (5), (6), (17) or
(21), that the user did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
(A) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with
each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or
(B) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or
constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its
NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.
(4) An operating upset which was not the result of negligence on the part of the discharger, and
which has been documented and verified in the manner stated above shall be an affirmative defense
to any enforcement action brought by the authority against a discharger for any noncompliance with
the article which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset.
(h) Recovery of Costs Incurred by the Authority. Any discharger who discharges or causes a discharge
producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the authority's wastewater system, shall be
liable to the authority for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The authority shall
bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the authority for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by
the violation or discharge. Failure to pay such bill may result in the termination of water or wastewater service.
(i) Falsifying Information. Any person who makes any false statement, representation or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/562
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in subsection (e)(3).
(j) POTW Pretreatment Requirements. All POTW's shall be able to seek injunctive relief for noncompliance
by industrial users with pretreatment standards and requirements. All POTWs shall also have authority to seek or
assess civil or criminal penalties in at least the amount of $1,000.00 a day for each violation by industrial users
of pretreatment standards and requirements. POTW's whose approved pretreatment programs require
modification to conform to the requirements of this subsection shall submit a request for approval of a program
modification in accordance with 40 CFR 403.18, unless the state would be required to enact or amend a statutory
provision, in which case the POTW shall submit such a request.
Sec. 13.607 Miscellaneous
(a) Net/Gross Calculations. The authority may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15.
(b) Preservation of Records. All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve and make available
for inspection and copying, for no less than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring activities, sampling and chemical
analyses made by or on behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge and required by this article, and
any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements including documentation associated with best management practices
established under section 13.603(e)(4). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed
the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. All records which
pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation
activities brought by the authority pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all
enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have
expired.
(c) Costs of Administering Program. The authority may make such charges, known as monitoring and
pretreatment charges, as are reasonable for services rendered in administering the programs outlined in this
article. Such charges may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Permitting industrial facilities;
(2) Inspection;
(3) Sample analysis;
(4) Monitoring; and
(5) Enforcement.
(d) Right of Revision. The authority reserves the right to amend this article to provide for more or less
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the sanitary sewer or POTW where deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives set forth in section 13.602.
(e) Publication of List of Significant Violators.
(1) A user shall be determined by the authority to be in a state of significant noncompliance if a
user's violation meets one or more criteria listed in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii). The authority shall
annually publish, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within
the jurisdictions served by the city, a list of users that have significantly violated federal pretreatment
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/562
requirements during the previous twelve (12) months. The director, shall be responsible for
calculating the users who have committed significant violations.
(2) Significant industrial users are subject to the SNC criteria listed in (A) through (H) below.
Group II nonsignificant industrial users that have been issued a permit shall be subject to SNC
criteria listed in subsection (C) through (H) below. Group VI nonsignificant categorical industrial
users shall be subject to SNC criteria listed in subsection (C) through (H) below. All other industrial
users are subject to the SNC criteria listed in (C), (D) and (H) of this subsection. Significant violation
noncompliance (SNC) shall mean any of the following:
(A) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixtysix
percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six (6) month period
exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any
amount;
(B) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three
percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a
six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily numeric pretreatment standard
or requirement including instantaneous limits multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(C) Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40
CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, longterm average, instantaneous limit or a narrative standard)
that the authority believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;
(D) Any discharge of pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in the authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
(E) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a
wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
(F) Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports,
including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(G) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(H) Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, that
the authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
Sec. 13.608 Enforcement Response Plan and Fee Schedule
The city's enforcement response plan (“ERP”) is attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 979 and is incorporated by
reference into this article and is approved and adopted. An industrial waste schedule of fees is attached as exhibit
B to Ordinance 979 and is incorporated by reference into this article and is approved and adopted.
Sec. 13.609 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/562
Notwithstanding any notice provisions contained in this article, any person, firm, or corporation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this article shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally the city may seek injunctive relief
pursuant to Section 54.016, Texas Local Government Code and civil penalties of up to five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) per day pursuant to Section 54.017, Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance 979 adopted 12/13/11)
ARTICLE 13.700 TRENCH EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 13.701 Compliance Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to excavate and cause to be used any trench which
exceeds a depth of five (5) feet except in compliance with this article. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10,
Section 7A)
Sec. 13.702 Permit Required
Any person who excavates a trench which exceeds a depth of five (5) feet within the city or within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction and requires a trench safety system under this article shall obtain a trench excavation
permit from the building official of this city. A trench safety system shall be provided in any excavation which
exceeds a depth of five (5) feet if any person is required or allowed to enter said excavation for any reason or
may otherwise be exposed to cave-ins. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 7B)
Sec. 13.703 Definitions
Angle of Response. The maximum angle with the horizontal plane at which a mass of soil material, as in a cut or
embankment, will lie without sliding.
Engineer. A registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas.
Excavation. A manmade cavity in the earth's surface formed by earth removal, except an excavation regulated
by Articles 6053-1, 6053-2, Revised Statutes of Texas.
OSHA. Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor.
OSHA Standard. The requirements and specifications of Subpart P, Table P-2, of the OSHA construction
standards, as from time to time may be amended and adopted by reference as if fully set out herein.
Trench. An excavation of fifteen (15) feet or less in width in which, in general, the length is greater than the
width, except a trench regulated by Articles 6053-1, 6053-2, Revised Statutes of Texas.
Trench Safety System. Organized or established procedures and physical actions planned and prepared by an
engineer to facilitate the occupational and worker safety of trench excavations. A trench safety system may
include shoring, bracing, sloping of trench sides, trench safety shields or any procedure, policy or mechanical
device to insure safety that meets OSHA standards.
Trench Shield. A shoring system composed of steel plates and braces rigidly fastened together to support the
walls of a trench and which can be moved along the trench as work progresses.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 7C)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/562
Sec. 13.704 Permit Requirement
(a) To obtain a trench excavation permit, the applicant shall furnish two (2) copies of engineering plans and
specifications prepared and sealed by an engineer. Plans and specifications shall be of sufficient clarity to
indicate the scope, extent and details of all work proposed, including:
(1) Description of all work to be performed, along with an accurate, detailed schedule of
construction;
(2) Description of the land on which the work is to be performed by legal description, street
address or similar description that shall readily identify the project location;
(3) Details of the route, width and depth of the trench, description and analysis of types of soils
and locations of adjacent structures and installations both above and below ground;
(4) Engineering details of the trench excavation including but not limited to plan and profile
sheets, soil analysis, design computations and excavated material storage;
(5) Details of the trench safety system, including methods and equipment for excavation,
construction, installation and worker safety;
(6) For excavations having sloped trenched side, soil testing laboratory reports determining the
maximum angle of response. For testing purposes, core samples are required no less than each seven
hundred (700) linear feet of trench length; and
(7) Any other OSHA standards pertinent to proper completion of said project.
(b) Plans, specifications and reports submitted for permit shall bear the name, seal and registration number of
an engineer and contain the following certificate:
“I hereby certify that these plans and accompanying specifications or these engineering works
were prepared by me, or under my direct supervision, in accordance with OSHA and city's trench
excavation and safety standards and requirements.”
Signature and Registration Number
(c) Fees for each trench excavation permit as set out in Section 13.708.
(d) The bid documents and the contract authorizing the work for which a trench excavation permit is required
shall include, in addition to the plans and specifications for the trench safety system, a separate pay item for the
trench safety system.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 7D)
Sec. 13.705 Materials
(a) Materials used for sheeting, sheet piling, cribbing, bracing, shoring, and underpinning shall be in good,
serviceable condition and free of defects. Defective materials or equipment may not be used and shall be
immediately removed from the job site.
(b) Steel trench shields shall be constructed of steel plate welded or bolted to a rigid steel framework and
include the following minimum protective measures:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/562
(1) Trench shields shall be constructed in a manner that provides protection at a minimum equal to
sheeting or shoring required for trench safety construction;
(2) Adjustable jacks that meet or exceed the rigidity requirements of OSHA standards and this
article may be used;
(3) An access ladder shall be provided at the midpoint or center of the trench shield for ingressegress;
(4) Runners or wheels may be installed or incorporated under the trench shield side walls for ease
of movement;
(5) Lifting eyes shall be welded to the trench shield to provide ease of lifting;
(6) When the side walls of a trench extend above the sides and top of the trench shield, a reinforced
steel roof with access doors or hatches shall be installed; and
(7) Continuous forced, fresh air ventilation shall be mandatory for fully-enclosed trench shields.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 7E)
Sec. 13.706 Special Requirements
(a) Construction requiring trenching shall meet or exceed the minimum OSHA standards and requirements of
this article as may from time to time be amended and which are incorporated by reference as if fully set out
herein;
(b) A trench safety system shall be installed in a true or level horizontal position, shall be bottomed in the
trench, shall be properly spaced vertically and shall be secured to prevent sliding, falling or kick-outs;
(c) Any evidence of a change in soil conditions shall be corrected immediately;
(d) Water shall not be allowed to accumulate within a trench and shall be diverted prior to entry or removed
immediately after entry;
(e) Trench excavations shall have an exit every twenty-five (25) linear feet, at minimum, which is anchored in
place to withstand the combination weight of individuals working in the trench;
(f) Excavated soil material shall be removed not less than two (2) feet from the edge or side walls of the
trench;
(g) A trench excavated within or adjacent to previously disturbed soil shall be classified as unstable and shall
require special safety precautions to be analyzed and established by the engineer. Said precautions shall be
included as part of the plans and specifications submitted for the trench excavation permit; and
(h) Heavy equipment shall not operate in the area between a new trench and adjacent previously disturbed soil
when individuals are in said trench or otherwise exposed to cave-ins.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 7F)
Sec. 13.707 Permit Holder/Contractor Requirements
(a) Compliance with OSHA standards and requirements of this article shall be the responsibility of the permit
holder or contractor, or both, who shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/562
(1) Inspect and maintain for soundness and adequacy on a regular basis, the trench safety system
and its associated materials, equipment and environment;
(2) Inspect the trench excavation on each working day for evidence of changing soil condition or
instability;
(3) Document each inspection and maintenance procedure in writing with said record kept for
immediate review on the job site. Each recorded entry shall include the date, time, person's name
performing the task and results of said inspection or maintenance action performed.
(b) The city may require the permit holder or contractor, or both, to remove, replace or repair any portion of
the trench safety system which it determines to be unsafe, but such requirement in no way relieves the permit
holder or contractor, or both, of responsibility for trench safety.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 7G)
Sec. 13.708 Permit Fees
Permit fees shall be as follows:
Trench Length Fee
250 linear feet or less $50.00 + 0.05 per linear foot
251 to 1,000 linear feet $100.00 + 0.05 per linear foot
1,001 linear feet or longer $250.00 + 0.05 per linear foot
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 7H)
ARTICLE 13.800 WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS
Sec. 13.801 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish responsibilities for the extension of water and sewer mains and other
public utility improvements into the various drainage basins located within the city limits of the city and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, to provide a procedure for acquiring necessary easements and rights-of-way,
establish responsibilities for paying for the cost of constructing the water and sewer improvements, preparing the
engineering and survey work necessary to design and install the public utility improvements and defraying the
cost of inspecting any and all construction undertaken pursuant to this article. This section is designed to be used
in conjunction with the subdivision ordinance to ensure an orderly development plan for the growth of the
community, and to ensure the creation and effective operation of a utility infrastructure appropriate in size and
character to support reasonable levels of development within the community. (1987 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Section 8A)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/562
Sec. 13.802 Definitions
(a) General Rules. The following rules shall be applied in construction, interpreting or otherwise defining the
terms and provisions of this article:
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the singular number
shall include the plural number and words used in the plural number shall include the singular
number.
(2) The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
(3) The phrases “used for” shall include the phrases, “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,”
and “occupied for,” and shall apply exclusively to physical use.
(b) Definitions. Words and terms used in this article, but not defined in this section shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in the subdivision regulations. Words and terms defined in both ordinances shall be read in
harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict in which case the definition contained in this article shall
control:
City. The City of Lake Worth, Texas.
Developer. The owner of land proposed to be developed, or the person or entity filing an application for
development of land, or their representatives.
Development. Any activity that requires the submission of a subdivision plat, development plan or the securing
of a building permit.
Escrow. Money placed in the possession of the city to accomplish the purposes set out in this article, including,
but not limited to, the following: purchase of right-of-way and the design and construction of public utilities.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 8B)
Sec. 13.803 Policy
The city intends to extend public utility service to all areas within its corporate limits and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction at some point in the future. Utility system extensions will be made in conformance with the city's
adopted capital improvement program and are projected to occur over many years based upon the fiscal
capability of the city and the growth characteristics of each area of the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
10, Section 8C)
Sec. 13.804 Extension of Utilities
(a) In the event that a development proposal is submitted which will require the use of a public water and/or
sewer system, and no such public system has yet been extended into the area where the proposed development is
located, it will be the responsibility of the developer to comply with the terms and conditions of this article in
order to ensure the immediate availability of service.
(1) Public Utility System Plan. The city will develop and maintain a public utility system plan
designed to facilitate the development of an overall utility infrastructure to support the growth and
development of the community. The Plan will be developed and maintained by the city engineer.
(A) Sanitary Sewer Plan. That portion of the public utility system plan dealing with sanitary
sewer systems will be configured in such manner as to divide the city into natural drainage
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/562
basins corresponding with the topographic features of the community and in accordance with
good engineering standards for system planning. The sanitary sewer collection plan of the city
will reflect a system under which one or more major sanitary sewer interceptors are extended
into each identified drainage basin of the community. These individual interceptors serving
specific basins will merge into system wide interceptor collectors, or collectors designed to
remove wastewater from the community to regional or subregional treatment facilities.
(B) Water Plan. That portion of the public utility system plan dealing with water systems will
be configured in such a manner as to divide the city into service areas which are designed to be
serviced by separate water mains. These individual water mains serving specific service areas
will merge into system wide mains serving all developed areas of the city and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
(b) It is, and shall remain, the responsibility of each individual developer to undertake those construction
activities necessary to tie his or her development project into the water or sewer main serving that specific
drainage basin or service area.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 8D)
Sec. 13.805 Determination of System Availability
(a) When a developer plans to undertake a specific development project within the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction and the development will require service through a public water and/or sewer system, it will be the
responsibility of the developer to contact the city manager or his/her designee to determine system availability.
The developer will advise the city manager or his/her designee in writing of the specific location of his
development, the total size of the development in acreage, living units and/or square feet of commercial or
industrial space, the type of development and land use to occur within the subdivision and the approximate time
that public utilities will be required. The information may be incorporated into a preliminary plat or development
site plan application submitted to the city manager or his/her designee in that form.
(b) The city manager or his/her designee or his designated representative shall review the city's public utility
system plan and determine whether service is currently available to the development. If service is available
through an existing main, the city manager or his/her designee shall identify the point on that main where the
development will be permitted to tie into the system and will advise the developer in writing of the location
where a tie-in will be permitted. The city manager or his/her designee shall support such written notice with such
map exhibits as are necessary to clearly delineate the point of tie-in.
(c) In the event that a connection to an existing utility main is possible, the city manager or his/her designee
will determine if the utility main has been installed by the city as a portion of its capital improvement program
or whether it was installed by a prior developer under the approach main extension policies of this article. In the
event that the utility main was installed by the city as a portion of its capital improvement program, the
developer will be advised that there will be no pro rata reimbursement charge to tie into the utility main. The
developer will be responsible for the entire cost of the approach main or service line connecting his development
to the utility main.
(d) If the utility main or a portion of the utility system serving the development was installed by a prior
developer under the approach main extension policy outlined in this article, the city manager or his/her designee
will advise the developer of his pro rata share of costs for connection to this line. The developer shall pay the pro
rata charge into the pro rata escrow fund of the city prior to making a tie-in to the system.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 8E; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 13.806 Construction of Approach Mains
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/562
Non-Availability of Basin Interceptor. If the city manager or his/her designee should determine that utility
service to a proposed development is not available at the present time, the developer will be so advised in
writing. In this situation, the developer must select among the following alternatives:
(1) Discontinue his proposed development until such time as a utility system has been installed
within the drainage basin or service area;
(2) Petition the city council to expedite the construction of a utility system capable of serving the
proposed development under its regular capital improvement program; or
(3) Install the necessary utilities to the point necessary to serve the development. The developer
will be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of necessary utilities, including but
not limited to engineering, attorneys fees, surveying, testing, easement preparation, easement
acquisition, construction and inspection. The public utilities will be designed and constructed to city
standards and specifications as the city engineer determines to be applicable. The developer may
install the public utilities himself or may contract with the city to secure construction of the line by
the city. All financial arrangements, including any necessary bonding, shall be completed prior to the
execution of a developer's agreement. In the event that a developer elects to pursue this alternative,
he will be eligible to receive a pro rata reimbursement, for a period of twelve (12) years, from the
developers who tie into these specific utilities.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 8F; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 13.807 Pro Rata Cost Allocation Where Public Utilities are Financed by Initial Developers
(a) If a public utility system is installed within a drainage basin or service area by a developer prior to action
under the city's capital improvement program, each subsequent development within the drainage basin or service
area which ties into the public utility system shall pay a pro rata cost of the cost of the utility system installed by
the initial developer. The pro rata fee shall be paid prior to connection to the utility system. The pro rata costs for
each subsequent development seeking service shall be determined on a cost per acre basis by calculating the
proportional area of the new development to the total area within the drainage basin or service area served by the
public utility system, multiplied by the total cost of the public utility system installed by the initial developer.
Total cost of the utilities shall include construction, engineering, attorneys fees, surveying, testing, easement
preparation, easement acquisition, and inspection costs.
(b) Each initial developer shall be entitled to a rebate of the pro rata charge against subsequent developers for
a period of twelve (12) years following completion and acceptance of the utilities. At the expiration of the
seventh year, the developer will no longer be entitled to receive any reimbursement.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 8G)
Sec. 13.808 Management of Reimbursement Funds
(a) The city shall establish an escrow fund for the deposit of all pro rata payments made by subsequent
developers. A separate escrow fund shall be established for each public utility system constructed by an initial
developer. All monies received from subsequent developments or subdivisions in that drainage basin or service
area shall be deposited in that specific escrow fund.
(b) Twice each year, on January 30 and on July 31, the city manager or his/her designee shall inventory each
escrow account to determine what percentage of those monies is allocable to reimbursable oversizing costs owed
by the city as determined under Section 13.809 below. This allocation shall be determined in the same
proportion that the cost of the oversized line bears to the cost of an eight (8) inch line. Upon completion of such
inventory, the city manager or his/her designee shall transmit all escrow funds due and owing to the initial
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/562
developer. Upon payment of these funds, the city will receive a credit for the amount of money allocable toward
its reimbursable oversizing requirements as set forth in Section 13.809 below.
(c) The developer shall be responsible for providing to the city, and maintaining with the city, an accurate
current address. When escrowed funds are available for disbursement, the city shall notify the developer at the
address on file with the city. If the developer fails to withdraw the funds within six (6) months, the funds shall be
forfeited to the city's water and sewer fund.
(d) At no time shall the developer be entitled to receive reimbursement for a sum greater than the initial cost
of the public utilities less the pro rata share of capacity of that utility system that would have been attributable to
the initial developer for his proportionate share of capacity in the system.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 8H; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 13.809 Oversizing
In order to provide appropriate capacity for reasonably anticipated development in a drainage basin or service
area, the city manager or his/her designee may require a developer to install a utility line or system improvement
larger than necessary to support the developer's specific development. In the event that the city manager or
his/her designee requires the installation of a utility line larger than required to serve the development, the
developer installing the line will be reimbursed by the city for the difference in cost between the size of the line
required by the city manager or his/her designee and an eight (8) inch line or the size of the line required to serve
the development, whichever is greater. The city will have five (5) years to pay the developer for the difference in
cost for the oversizing requirement. The city may compensate the developer for the difference in cost mandated
by oversizing through the process of allowing the developer credits of up to fifty (50) percent of all development
fees charged against any portion or phase of the development requiring construction of the utility lines. Upon
written request of the developer, credit for development fees may be transferred from the current development
project to subsequent development projects, subdivisions or phases undertaken by the developer. Any balance
remaining due and owing from the city to the developer for oversizing at the end of five years will be paid in full
at the time by the city. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Section 8I; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 13.900 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 13.1000 BACKFLOW PREVENTION*
Sec. 13.1001 Purpose
Pursuant to Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 290.44, it is the responsibility of the city to protect its
drinking water supply by instituting and enforcing a cross-connection program. The purpose of this article,
therefore, is to comply with the above-cited regulatory requirements and to protect the water supply of the city
from contamination or pollution due to any cross-connections.
Sec. 13.1002 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated. If a word or term in this article is not contained in the following list, it shall
have the definition provided for such word or term in the latest edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection
Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of
Southern California.
Air Gap. The vertical physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of the potable water supply
line and the overflow rim of the receiving vessel. The separation must be at least twice the inside diameter of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/562
supply line, but never less than one inch. When located near walls, the air gap separation must be increased.
Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly or Backflow Assembly or Assembly. An assembly to counteract
backpressures or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued
by USC Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.
Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker (AVB). A device, which contains a flat check (poppet), a check seat, and an air
inlet vent. When water pressure is reduced to a gauge pressure of zero (0) or below, air enters the device,
preventing backsiphonage. It is designed to protect against backsiphonage only.
Auxiliary Supply. Any water source or system other than the public water system that may be available in the
building or on the property.
(1) Approved means an auxiliary water supply which has been investigated and approved by the
health authority, meets water quality regulations, and is accepted by the water purveyor.
(2) Unapproved means an auxiliary water supply, which is not approved by the health authority
Backflow. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases,
or substances into the eater [sic] system of the city's water.
Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester. A person who has met all of the requirements of TCEQ to be recognized
as a certified tester in the state and is registered with the city. Only a certified tester who is employed by the
state-approved fireline contractor shall test fireline assemblies.
Boresight (or Boresight to Daylight). Providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed
in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drainage.
Combination Protection. There is an assembly installed for point-of-use isolation in addition to a premises
isolation assembly.
Contamination Protection. The entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance that may
be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
Cross-connection. Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly
(actual or potential), with any other nonpotable water system, used water system or auxiliary water supply,
sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers, air-conditioner units,
fire protection system, or any other assembly which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or
other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water
system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel, or change
over assemblies, or other temporary or permanent through which, or because of which, backflow may occur are
considered to be cross-connections.
Customer Service Inspector (CSI). A individual who has fulfilled the requirements set out in TCEQ Rules and
Regulations for Public Water Systems, paragraph 290.46(j)(1), or as amended.
Degree of Hazard. The low or high hazard classification that shall be to all actual or potential cross-connections.
Designated Lateral. The piping, which takes water from the main service line for a stipulated purpose. For
example, but not limited to, irrigation systems, fire systems, etc.
Director. The director of public works of the city.
Double Check Detector Assembly (DCDA). An approved assembly consisting of two approved double check
valve assemblies, set in parallel, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/562
leakage or use. This unit must by purchased as a complete assembly. The assembly may be allowed on fire line
water services in place of an approved double check valve assembly upon approval by the local water authority.
Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention or Double Check Assembly or Double Check or DC Assembly or DC.
An assembly, which consists of two (2) independently operating check valves, which are spring-loaded or
weighted. The assembly comes complete with a gate valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to
test the checks for tightness.
Health Hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable
water system of the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health.
High Hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a
substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply.
Inspector. Person that is a cross-connection inspector recognized by the city.
Lake Worth. The City of Lake Worth
Low Hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a
substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to backflow into the potable water supply.
Main Lateral. The piping, which takes water from the main service line to the premises for potable use.
Mobile Units. Units connection to the water system through a hydrant, hose bib, or other appurtenance of a
permanent nature that is part of the city water system or a permanent water service to a premises. Examples can
include but are not limited to the following: water trucks, pesticides applicator vehicles, chemical mixing units
or tanks, waste or septage haulers' trucks or units or tanks, waste or seepage haulers' trucks or units, sewer
cleaning equipment, carpet or steam cleaning equipment other that homeowner use, rock quarry or
asphalt/concrete batch plants, or any other mobile equipment or vessel. Uses that are excluded from this
definition are recreational vehicles at assigned sites or parked in accordance with other ordinances pertaining to
recreational vehicles, and homeowner devices that are used by the property owner in accordance with other
provisions of this, or other, city ordinances pertaining to provision of water service to a premises.
Person. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability
company, joint venture stock company or association, and other such entity.
Plumbing Hazard. An internal or plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that may
be either pollution or a contamination-type hazard
Point-of-Use Isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at
which the actual or potential cross-connection exists.
Pollution Hazard. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of
the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as
defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded
under this definition would cause a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause minor damage to
the system or its appurtenances.
Potable Water Supply. Any water that has been tested as required by the state regulations for drinking water
supplies and is considered safe for human consumption.
Premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and
structures located on it.
Premises Isolation or Containment. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the
public water system and the water user.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/562
Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly. An approved assembly consisting of a spring-loaded check valve loaded to
the closed position and an independently operating air inlet valve loaded to the open position and installed as a
unit with and between two (2) resilient seated shutoff valves and with suitable connections for testing. It is
designed to protect against backsiphonage only.
Public Water System or System. Any public or privately owned water system, which supplies water for public
domestic use. The system must meet all the health requirements set forth by TCEQ. The system will include all
services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing, or
convoying water for public consumption.
Reduced Pressure Detector Assembly or RPDA. An approved assembly consisting of two approved reduced
pressure backflow assemblies, set in parallel, equipment with a meter on the bypass line to monitor small
amounts of water leakage or use. This unit must be purchased as a complete assembly. The assembly may be
allowed on fire line water services in place of an approved reduced pressure backflow assembly, upon approval
by the local water purveyor.
Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly or Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly or RP
Assembly or RP. An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a
hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check calve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks
and tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly.
Residential Use. Includes single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex housing, and apartments where the
individual units are each on a separate meter; or, in cases where two (2) or more units are served by one (1)
meter, the units are full-time dwellings. Nonresidential use shall include, but is not limited to, all uses not
specifically included in residential uses defined above.
Service Connection. The point-of-delivery at which the public water system ends and is connected to the private
supply line or lateral.
Spill Resistant Vacuum Breaker. An assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded check
valve, and an independently operating, loaded air-inlet valve, located on the discharge side of the check valve.
The assembly is to be equipped with a properly located, resilient, seated test cock; a properly located bleed/vent
valve, and a tightly closing, resilient, seated shutoff valve attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is
designed to protect against a nonhealth hazard (i.e., pollutant) or health hazard (i.e., contaminant) under a
backsiphonage condition only.
System Hazard. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or
consumer's potable water supply, or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
Thermal Expansion. The pressure created in piping when water is heated.
TCEQ. State commission on environmental quality.
Used Water. Water supplies by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the
service connection.
Sec. 13.1003 Backflow Prevention Assembly Requirements
A cross-connection inspector or customer service inspector, employed by or contracted with the city, shall
determine the type of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city. All assemblies shall
be installed at the service connection unless it is determined by the inspector to install the assembly at the point
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/562
of use. An assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but the inspector is in no way
limited to the following circumstances:
(1) When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection
with any activity at a premises, or material stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the
potable water supply.
(2) When a premises has one or more cross-connections as that term is defined in Section 13.1002
Definitions.
(3) When internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable.
(4) When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether
cross-connection exist.
(5) When a premises has a repeated history of cross-connection being established or reestablished.
(6) When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result.
(7) When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed necessary to
accomplish the purpose of these regulations.
(8) When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the director.
(9) Any used water-return system that has received approval from the director.
(10) If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as stipulated in this article, the
installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection.
(11) If an inspector determines that additions or rearrangements have been made to the plumbing
system, without the proper permits as required by the plumbing code, premises isolation shall be
required.
(12) All multistory buildings or any buildings with booster pump or elevated storage tank.
(13) When entry to the premises is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be
made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross-connections do not exist.
(14) On properties which have auxiliary water supplies.
(15) In all new nonresidential construction there shall be installed an approved backflow assembly
at the service connection. The type of the assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard
as determined by the inspector.
Sec. 13.1004 Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RP)
(a) RPs may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to the public health
if introduced into the potable water system. An RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical.
An RP is effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure.
(b) RPs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served.
Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data.
(c) Premises where interruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two assemblies installed in
parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/562
while the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
(d) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipefittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be
installed.
(e) (1) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and shall be located
in an area where water damage to buildings or furnishings will not occur from relief valve discharge.
An approved air gap funnel assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the
assembly; this assembly will not control flow in a continuous relief situation. Drain lines to
accommodate full relief valve discharge flow should be considered.
(2) RPs are typically installed above grade in well-drained areas. But may be installed belowgrade
if an adequate drain to daylight is provided.
(3) Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances
established below. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies.
Daylight drain ports shall be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly.
(4) All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches on the
back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least
twelve (12) inches plus nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level.
Headroom of six (6) feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access
opening of twenty-four (24) inches square is required on all vault lids.
(5) Assemblies installed more than five (5) feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for
use by testing or maintenance personnel.
(f) The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(g) Vertical installation is prohibited.
(h) Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required
ahead of the assembly.
(i) The property owner assumes all responsibility for leaks and damage. The owner shall also see that the vault
is kept reasonably free of silt and debris.
(j) All RP assemblies shall be tested in accordance with this article. Any premises that have RP assemblies
that are point-of-use protection without high hazard premises isolation protection shall be tested every six
months. Any premises that have an RP assembly as premises isolation without high hazard point-of-use
protection assembly shall be tested every six months. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The
owner shall notify the director upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly.
(k) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations shall be
prohibited without prior written approval of the director.
Sec. 13.1005 Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly (DC)
(a) Double check valves may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable
but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
(b) DCs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served.
Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/562
(c) Premises where interruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two assemblies installed in
parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements
while the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
(d) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipefittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be
installed.
(e) (1) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance.
DCs may be installed belowgrade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults
shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum
clearances established below.
(2) Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a three-inch clearance below and on both
sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than
twenty-four (24) inches belowgrade. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum
clearance of twelve (12) inches on the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and
twelve (12) inches below the assembly. Headroom of six (6) feet is required in vaults without a fully
removable top. A minimum access opening of twenty-four (24) inches square is required on all vault
lids.
(3) Assemblies installed more than five (5) feet above floor level shall have a suitable platform for
use by testing or maintenance personnel.
(f) Vertical installations are permitted on sizes up to and including four (4) inches that meet all of the
following requirements:
(1) Internally spring-loaded check valves;
(2) Flow is upward through assembly;
(3) Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical positions; and
(4) Approved by the director.
(g) The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(h) Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required
ahead of assembly.
(i) The property owner assumes all responsibility for foundation or basement wall penetration, leaks, and
damage. The owner shall also see that the vault is kept reasonably free of silt and debris.
(j) All DCs shall be tested accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The
owner shall notify the director upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly.
(k) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. No deviations shall be
permitted without prior written approval of the director.
Sec. 13.1006 Double Detector Check Assembly (DDC)
Double detector check valve assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve
assembly and detector metering. DDCs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double
check valve assemblies (DCs).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/562
Sec. 13.1007 Pressure Vacuum Breaker (PVB)
(a) PVBs may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be
objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against
backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure.
(b) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest use outlet or overflow
level downstream from the assembly.
(c) PVBs shall be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water discharge.
(d) The assembly shall be protected from freezing.
(e) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of twelve
(12) inches all around the assembly.
(f) PVBs shall be located between twelve (12) inches and sixty (60) inches above ground level.
(g) A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly.
(h) All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner.
The owner shall notify the director upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly.
(i) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. No deviations shall be
permitted without prior written approval of the director.
Sec. 13.1008 Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker (AVB)
(a) AVBs provide minimal protection and are approved for very low hazard application only. AVBs protect
against backsiphonage only and are prohibited where there is potential for backpressure.
(b) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of six (6) inches above the highest use outlet or overflow level
downstream from the assembly.
(c) Shutoff valves downstream from the assembly are prohibited.
(d) AVBs shall be allowed only for those applications where there is less than twelve (12) hours per day
continuous use.
(e) AVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage may occur from water
discharge.
(f) AVBs shall be allowed for point-of-use protection only in accordance with the plumbing code. AVB's are
not recognized as adequate protection by the director, so additional protection may be required.
Sec. 13.1009 Air Gap Separation
(a) Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and may be utilized at premises
where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
(b) An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above
the top rim of the receiving vessel – in no case less than one (1) inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/562
may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45° angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom
of the angle. Hoses shall not be allowed.
(c) Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the director, and shall be
available for inspection at all reasonable times.
(d) Sidewalls, ribs, or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the
spout opening a distance greater that three times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or a distance
greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls.
(e) In cases where there are three or more sidewalls, ribs, or similar obstructions extending from the water
surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening other than as specified in subsection (d) above, the
air gap shall be measured from the top of the wall.
(f) The effective opening shall be the minimum cross-sectional area at the seat of the control valve or the
supply pipe or tubing which feeds the assembly or outlet. If two or more lines supply one outlet, the effective
opening shall be the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the individual supply lines or the area of the single
outlet, whichever is smaller.
Sec. 13.1010 Irrigation Systems
(a) All irrigation systems, which are on a designated lateral, shall install an approved double check assembly
at the connection. This assembly must be tested upon installation.
(b) All irrigation systems, which “T” off of the main lateral and currently have no backflow protection, or
systems installed after the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted March 14, 2006), shall be required to
meet all specifications pertaining to irrigation systems as stipulated by the Texas Administrative Code, Sections
290.44 and 290.46, or as amended. In the event that there is a conflict between these codes and regulations, the
more restrictive shall apply.
(c) All irrigation systems which do not currently meet the specifications, as stipulated in this section, will be
required to meet these specifications within one (1) year of the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted
March 14, 2006).
(d) In the event an assembly is removed, it must be tested immediately upon reinstallation.
(e) Any addition or new construction of any irrigation system shall meet the requirements of this article.
(f) All assemblies on irrigation systems regardless of installation point must meet the requirements of this
article.
(g) All irrigation system backflow devices shall be tested upon installation and no less than annually
thereafter.
Sec. 13.1011 Fire Systems
(a) An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or approved equivalent shall
be the minimum protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for
potable water use, and/or that does not provide for periodic flow through during each twenty-four-hour period. A
reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly (RPDA) must be installed if any solution
other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. If the inspector determines a chemical
loop system can be isolated by installing an RP assembly at the point of the chemical injection, this, in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/562
conjunction with the proper installation of the DCDA in accordance with this article, will be adequate
protection.
(b) Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Where improper maintenance has occurred;
(2) On all high hazard systems; and
(3) Wherever an inspector deems necessary.
(c) All fireline assemblies will be tested by certified testers employed by a state-approved fireline contractor.
(d) All fireline systems, which are on a designated lateral the assembly on the lateral at the point of
connection. The assembly must be installed on accordance with this article.
Sec. 13.1012 Temporary Meters
Backflow protection required on temporary meters will be determined on a case-by-case basis. The type of
assembly, which will be required, will be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
Sec. 13.1013 Mobile Units
(a) A person who owns or operates any mobile unit that uses water from the city's public water system shall
abide by the conditions of this article.
(b) The failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to comply with this article shall be grounds for the city
to revoke any permit or license, required under this article to operate the vehicle, or the business for which such
vehicle is used.
(c) If there is a conflict between this section and any other provision of the city's Code of Ordinances, the
more restrictive provision will apply.
Sec. 13.1014 Multiple Service Connections
If premises with multiple service connections require premises isolation, a backflow assembly shall be installed
at each service connection. The assemblies shall be commensurate with the degree of the highest potential
hazard.
Sec. 13.1015 Plumbing Code
As a condition of the water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing
systems in accordance with the most recent adopted plumbing code, or as amended. If there is a conflict between
this article and the plumbing code, the more restrictive provision shall apply, or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly will be required to be installed at the service connection.
Sec. 13.1016 Thermal Expansion
If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly, it is the responsibility of the
property owner to eliminate the potential adverse effects of thermal expansion.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/562
Sec. 13.1017 Pressure Loss
Any water pressure loss caused by the installation of a backflow assembly and the correction of a pressure loss
condition shall not be the responsibility of the city.
Sec. 13.1018 Residential Service Connections
Any residential property, which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross-connection and/or has
violated the plumbing code or this article in any way, shall be required to install an approved backflow
prevention assembly in accordance with this article.
Sec. 13.1019 Retrofitting
Approved backflow prevention assemblies, commensurate with the degree of hazard, shall be installed in
accordance with this article on all actual or potential cross-connections, regardless of the date the potential
hazard was created.
Sec. 13.1020 Wholesale Customer
Every wholesale customer and other water districts that have a contract for water services with the city shall
have an active, ongoing cross-connection program, approved by the director. The city reserves the right to
require a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, or an air gap, at the interconnect.
Sec. 13.1021 Customer Service Inspection
(a) Pursuant to TCEQ Water System Regulations, a customer service inspection for cross-connection control
shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following
circumstances:
(1) To a newly constructed facility, or previously existing premises, which is requesting water
service;
(2) Where any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises has occurred;
(3) After any material improvement to buildings(s) or premises; and
(4) Whenever the administrative authority (the city) deems it necessary.
(b) Permanent water service shall not be supplies to a new construction facility(s) until the customer service
inspection is complete.
(c) Customer service inspections will be carried out only by a certified customer service inspector, or a
plumbing inspector employed by the city, or approved by the director.
Sec. 13.1022 Cross-Connection Inspectors
Inspectors performing cross-connection control duties within the city must be employed by or are an
independent contractor for the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/562
Sec. 13.1023 Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers
(a) All backflow assembly testers operating within the city shall be certified in accordance with all applicable
regulations of TCEQ. No person shall operate as a backflow prevention assembly tester within the city without
first being annually registered with the director.
(b) At the time of registration, reregistration, recertification and upon the director's request each person
certified as a backflow prevention assembly tester shall furnish evidence to show that he/she is insured and
bonded to perform services on private property, and has all required current licenses as required by the state and
the city to perform the contemplated services.
(c) Persons, certified as backflow prevention assembly testers, shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Hold a TCEQ-approved backflow prevention assembly certification;
(2) Maintain general commercial liability insurance and automobile liability insurance with the
following minimum limits: two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per person, five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident for bodily injury, and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) per accident for property damage or five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) if combined;
(3) Successfully completed and has a confined-space entry course certification;
(4) Agree to abide by all requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA); and
(5) Attend an update class every three (3) years.
Sec. 13.1024 Certified Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester Responsibilities
(a) No certified backflow assembly tester shall operate within the city, without first registering with the
director and paying all appropriate fees per the city's adopted fee scheduled and as amended.
(b) A registration shall remain in effect, provided:
(1) The tester maintains eligibility for registration and certification as defines in this article;
(2) The tester attends and successfully completes a recertification training course approved by the
director every three (3) years; and
(3) The backflow prevention assembly tester's registration is not revoked by the director.
(c) A backflow prevention assembly tester shall renew his/her registration with the director every year. If a
TCEQ certification expires for a period of one (1) year or more, the backflow prevention assembly tester may
reestablish registration eligibility by showing proof that he/she has retaken the TCEQ-approved backflow
prevention tester certification course.
(d) Each applicant for registration shall:
(1) Provide evidence to the director to establish that the applicant has available the necessary tools
and equipment to test backflow prevention assemblies;
(2) Provide evidence to the director that the applicant has successfully completed permit confinedspace
entry training as specified by OSHA in 29 CFR 1910.146, or as amended; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/562
(3) Identify all test gauges the applicant will use in testing backflow prevention assemblies.
(e) A registered backflow prevention assembly tester shall:
(1) File the serial number of each of their test gauges with the director;
(2) Annually, have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated by a company or
individual approved by the director to maintain a two (2) percent accuracy factor;
(3) Perform a competent and accurate test on each backflow prevention assembly, as established by
the TCEQ regulations;
(4) Submit completed test forms to the director with ten (10) days after the test is completed;
(5) List registered serial numbers of test gauges on tests and maintenance reports prior to
submitting the reports to the director; and
(6) Not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly.
(f) The director may revoke a registration if he/she determines that the tester:
(1) Has made false, incomplete, or inaccurate assembly testing reports;
(2) Has used inaccurate gauges;
(3) Has used improper testing procedures;
(4) Has expired insurance;
(5) Is not in compliance with safety regulations;
(6) Has failed to register the serial number of his/her test kits, or fails to calibrate gauges annually
as required by this article;
(7) Has failed to maintain a current certification from TCEQ; or
(8) Has violated any other provision of this article.
Sec. 13.1025 Cost of Compliance
The cost and expense of complying with this article shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner, their
lessees and/or agents. These costs and expenses include, but are not limited to, purchasing, installation, testing,
and/or repair of the assembly. These costs and expenses shall also include, but are not limited to, point-of-use
and premises isolation assemblies. The property owner, their lessees, and/or agent shall reimburse the city for
any and all costs and expenses incurred by the city in enforcing this article (the reimbursement costs). The
reimbursement costs shall be assessed in the property owner's and/or lessee's current water bill.
Sec. 13.1026 Assembly Requirements
(a) Testing of Assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested in accordance with the
requirements set out in the most recent edition on the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/562
(b) Maintenance of Assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in accordance with the
requirements set out in the most recent edition on the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California.
(c) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements to ensure
their proper operation and accessibility.
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code and
this article. The assembly installer shall obtain the required plumbing permits prior to installation and
shall have the assembly inspected by a certified cross-connection inspector and as required by the
plumbing code.
(2) No part of a reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in water or
installed in a location subject to flooding. If a double check valve assembly is installed in a vault,
brass plugs shall be maintained in the test ports at all times and adequate drainage shall be provided.
(3) Assemblies shall be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, before any branch in
the line, and on private property located just inside the boundary of the city's right-of-way. An
inspector may specify other areas for installation of the assembly.
(4) The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(5) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the director.
(6) All vertical installations shall be approved in writing by the director prior to installation.
(7) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance and testing.
Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least a six (6) inch clearance on all sides of the
assembly. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12)
inches on the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, twelve (12) inches below the
assembly and thirty-six (36) inches above the assembly. “Y” pattern double check valve assemblies
shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the cocks face upward.
(8) If the director grants written permission to install the backflow assembly inside of a building,
the assembly shall be readily accessible between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(9) If an assembly is installed pursuant to subsection (a)(8) above, and is four (4) inched or larger
and is installed five (5) feet or higher above the floor, it shall be equipped with a rigidly and
permanently installed scaffolding acceptable to the director. This installation shall also meet all
applicable requirements set out by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the
state occupational safety and health laws.
(10) RP assemblies may be installed in a vault only if relief valve discharge can be drained to
daylight through a boresight type drain. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated
flow of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends.
(11) An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. This air gap
shall be at least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically above
the top rim of the drain and in no case less than one (1) inch.
(12) Upon completion of installation, the property owner shall notify the director to inspect the
assemblies. The property owner shall register all backflow assemblies with the director. Registration
shall consist of date of installation, manufacturer, model, serial, number of the backflow prevention
assembly, and initial test report.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/562
(d) A person commits an offense if the person installs a backflow prevention assemblies assembly in violation
of this section.
(e) A person commits an offense of the person fails to notify the director to inspect a backflow prevention
assembly after its installation as required by this section.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person fails to register a backflow prevention assembly as required by
this section.
Sec. 13.1027 Responsibility of Property Owners and/or Lessees
(a) It is the responsibility of all property owners, their agents and/or lessees to abide by the conditions of this
article.
(b) The owner of leased premises is responsible for the installation testing and repair of all backflow
assemblies on the premises. When the lessee changes, the owner shall immediately notify the city.
Sec. 13.1028 Access to Premises
(a) Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall permit the director to enter their
premises and buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is
used to determine compliance with this article.
(b) If access is denied to premises for inspection by the director, a reduced pressure principle assembly will be
required at the service connection to the premises.
(c) Any temporary, or permanent, obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises for the purpose of this
article shall be promptly removed. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the property owner, their
lessees, and/or agent.
(d) Any and all costs associated with premises isolation or containment protection shall be the sole
responsibility of the property owner, lessee, and/or agent.
Sec. 13.1029 Right-of-Way Encroachment
(a) No person shall install or maintain a backflow preventions assembly upon a right-of-way belonging to the
city except as provided by this section
(b) A backflow prevention assembly required by this article may be installed upon or within any city right-ofway
only if the owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and
installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities. The city retains the right to review and
approve the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation.
(c) Any assembly or portion of an assembly that extends aboveground shall be located no closer than twentyfour
(24) inches to the back of the curb.
(d) A property owner shall, at the owner's sole expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly, which
encroached upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction or
repairs or for purposes of public safety.
Sec. 13.1030 Enforcement and Penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/562
(a) The city and their attorney, and each of them, are hereby authorized to enforce the provision of this article
by any one or more of the enforcement mechanisms set forth in this article.
(b) The inspectors, agents, or representatives of the city charged with enforcement of this article, shall be
deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public, and neither the city, the
director, nor the individual inspector, agent, or representative of the city engaged in inspection, or endorsement
activities under this article, when acting in good faith and without malice, shall ever be held liable for any loss or
damage, whether real or asserted, caused, or alleged to have been caused, as a result of the performance of such
governmental function.
(c) Failure on the part of any persons to discontinue the use of all cross-connections, and to physically
separate cross-connections, is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to the
premises.
(d) Failure to comply with this article is a fine up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day, with each day
being a separate offense.
Sec. 13.1031 Emergency Suspension of Utility Service
(a) The director may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any premises when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or potential cross-connection which:
(1) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or
welfare of persons; or
(2) Presents, or may present, imminent and substantial danger to the city's public water supply.
(b) As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the director shall notify the owner or person in
charge of the premises of the suspension in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall order
such person to correct the actual or potential cross-connection which could allow the backflow to occur. When
time permits, and if the owner or person in charge is readily available, the director will give notice about the
immediate suspension of services.
(c) If the person fails to comply with an order issued under this article, the director may take such steps, as
deemed necessary, to prevent, or minimize, damage to the public water supply, or to minimize danger to persons.
(d) The director shall not reinstate suspended services until the person:
(1) Presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the actual or potential cross-connection has
been eliminated, and its cause determined and corrected;
(2) Pays the city for all costs incurred by the city, in responding to the backflow or threatened
backflow; and
(3) Pays the city for all costs incurred in reinstating service.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to premises suspended pursuant to this,
section without the prior approval of the director.
(f) The city may obtain a lien against the property to recover its response, abatement, and remediation costs.
(g) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise
of this remedy shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/562
Sec. 13.1032 Nonemergency Termination of Water Supply
(a) The director may suspend, with twenty-four (24) hours' notice, the water supply to any premises where the
following conditions have been violated:
(1) Refusing the director's reasonable access to the premises for the purpose of inspection;
(2) Hindering or denying the director's access to backflow prevention assemblies;
(3) Failing to immediately eliminate, or protect against, an actual or potential cross-connection;
(4) Failing to install and maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article;
or
(5) Failing to install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with
the plumbing code.
(b) The director will notify a water user of the proposed termination of its water supply. The water user may
petition the director in writing for reconsideration.
(c) Exercise of this enforcement option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the water user.
(d) The director shall not reinstate suspended services until:
(1) The premises has been inspected by the city cross-connection inspector or a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly is installed and tested at the service connection;
(2) The person presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the cross-connection has been
eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and
(3) The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service.
(Ordinance 822 adopted 3/14/06)
ARTICLE 13.1100 RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 13.1101 Purpose and Administration
(a) Responsibility. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the director to administer, implement and enforce
the provisions of this article.
(b) Scope of Article.
(1) This article governs the location, placement, installation, repair, maintenance and removal of all
utility facilities within all rights-of-way of the city.
(2) A utility provider with a valid unexpired franchise agreement or other authorization from the
city to use the rights-of-way of the city may continue to operate under and comply with that
agreement until the agreement expires or is terminated.
(3) To the extent the provisions of this article conflict with an unexpired franchise agreement or
other authorization from the city to use the right-of-way, the provisions of the franchise shall prevail
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/562
during the term of the franchise. To the extent that the provisions of this article can be reconciled,
both the franchise and this article shall be given effect.
(c) Findings and Purpose. The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on, or over the rights-of-way of the city in
order to provide for the orderly maintenance of such rights-of-way, avoid costly interruption of utility
service to the citizens, minimize congestion, inconvenience, unsightly visual impact and other
adverse effects of utility service, and minimize the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement
of facilities within the rights-of-way;
(2) Govern the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way;
(3) Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare;
(4) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the rights-of-way held in public trust by the city;
(5) Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways;
(6) Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians;
(7) Prevent interference between the different entities using the rights-of-way;
(8) Protect the safety, security, appearance and condition of the rights-of-way; and
(9) Comply with the requirements of applicable federal and state laws.
(d) Right-of-Way Occupancy. Except as otherwise exempted by law, any person prior to constructing facilities
in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must first obtain separate municipal authorization. A registration
obtained pursuant to this article does not constitute such municipal authorization.
Sec. 13.1102 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning subscribed herein:
City. The City of Lake Worth, Texas or the designated agent of the city.
City Council. The city council of the city of Lake Worth, Texas.
Construction. Any work above the surface, on the surface or beneath the surface of a public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, installing, servicing, repairing or modifying any facility(ies) in, above or under the
surface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way.
Director. The director of public works of the city or his or her designee.
Emergency. A condition that the city or director determines; (1) poses a clear and immediate danger to life or
health, or an immediate and significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
Excavation. Any digging, hollowing, directional drilling or boring more than six (6) inches below the surface of
the ground.
Facility or Facilities. The plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to lines, poles, mains, pipes,
pipelines, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, splice boxes, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults, and other appurtenances or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/562
tangible things located, or are proposed to be located, under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
rights-of-way of the city.
Municipal Authorization. An individual grant to use the public rights-of-way issued by the city and accepted by
a utility owner in accordance with the ordinances of the city, a franchise agreement, a license agreement, or
under operation of state law which provides a specific grant of authority to use the rights-of-way.
Permit or Permit to Construct. A permit to perform construction granted in accordance with the city's
ordinances.
Person. A natural person, corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint
venture, joint stock company or association, public or private agency, sole proprietorship, a utility or any other
legal entity; including a successor or assign of any of the foregoing. The term shall also mean a political
subdivision, other than the city.
Registration. The document confirming the city's approval only of a particular proposed location within specific
right(s)-of-way of specifically identified proposed utility facilities. Registration does not constitute consent by
the city for utility facilities to be placed in the right-of-way, which consent must also be obtained unless
otherwise provided by law or other agreement.
Restore or Restoration. The process by which a right-of-way is returned following completion of construction to
a condition that is equal to or better than the condition that existed prior to commencement of construction.
Right-of-Way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway,
or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above the right-ofway
with regard to wireless telecommunications, or a public right-of-way owned, regulated and maintained by a
political subdivision other than the city.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). Prepared by a licensed professional engineer in the state
according to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) regulations.
Utility Construction Permit. That document giving consent to construct, install, repair, relocate or remove
facilities within the right-of-way. A utility construction permit only allows the holder to construct those specific
facilities described in such permit, and in that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
Utility Owner. Any person who owns any facility or facilities that are or are proposed to be installed or
maintained in the rights-of-way. Included within this definition is the owner's contractor, subcontractor, agent or
authorized representative.
Utility Provider. A business that offers a public utility service including, but not limited to, gas, electricity, cable
or telecommunications services, and that owns, rents, or has an agreement which authorizes it to utilize facilities
within the right-of-way. Utility provider includes the utility provider's contractor, subcontractor, agent or
authorized representative.
Sec. 13.1103 Registration Required
(a) In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all utility owners shall register with the city on a
form provided by the director, and comply with the requirements therefore.
(b) The utility owner applying for registration shall furnish the city the following information, which shall be
subscribed and sworn to before a notary public:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the utility owner;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/562
(2) Any trade names under which the utility owner does or proposes to do business;
(3) The name, address, telephone number, fax number, and email address of the person(s) who will
be the contact person(s) for the utility owner;
(4) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of any contractor or subcontractor, if known, who
will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the utility owner;
(5) The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available twenty-four
(24) hours a day to respond to emergencies; and
(6) Proof of insurance and bonds, as follows:
(A) Except as otherwise specified, the utility owner and a contractor of any tier will be
required at their own expense to maintain in effect at all times during the performance of the
work insurance coverage's with limits not less than those set forth below with insurers and
under forms of policies satisfactory to the city. It shall be the responsibility of the utility owner
to insure utility owner and a contractor of any tier are adequately insured at all times. The
existence of such insurance shall not relieve the utility owner or a contractor of any tier of any
legal responsibility or obligation, whether in contract or tort.
(B) The utility owner shall submit to the director certificates of insurance for each policy,
required by this subsection, prior to the commencement of any work and during each year of
the registration term, as evidence that utility owner and a contractor of any tier have the policies
providing the required coverages and limits of insurance which are in full force and effect. The
certificates of insurance or insurance policies shall provide that any company issuing an
insurance policy required by this subsection shall provide not less than thirty (30) days advance
written notice of any cancellation. Additionally, the utility owner shall immediately provide
written notice to the director upon receipt of any notice of cancellation of an insurance policy or
a decision to terminate or alter any insurance policy required by this subsection.
(C) All policies, other than those for worker's compensation, shall be written on an
occurrence basis and not on a claims-made basis, and shall name the city, its officers and
employees as additional insureds.
(D) All insurance policies required by this subsection shall contain an endorsement requiring
the insurer to provide the director with at least thirty (30) days prior written notice of any
intention not to renew or to cancel such policy, such notice to be given by certified or registered
mail.
(E) All insurance shall be provided through valid and enforceable policies, insured by
insurers licensed to do business in the state. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall
be rated A- or better by A.M. Best Company. Insurance policies must provide that the issuing
company waives all right to recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with
damage covered by the policy.
(F) The utility owner, and thereafter, for renewal purposes, the registration holder, shall pay
all insurance premiums and assessments required to maintain such insurance. A company which
issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or
assessment.
(G) The city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the state or letters written by
the utility owner, in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, provided that the
utility owner demonstrates by written information to the city that it has adequate financial
resources to be a self-insured entity satisfying the requirements of this section for insurance and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/562
bonds. Certificates of self-insurance and letters written by the utility owner shall provide the
same coverage as required herein.
(H) The utility owner and a contractor of any tier shall maintain workers' compensation and
employers' liability insurance in accordance with the laws of the state or, in those instances
where the state does not issue such letters, and provided that the utility owner demonstrates by
written information to the city that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity
after the date of passage of this article, satisfies the requirements of this subsection for
insurance and bonds, letters written by the utility owner which provide the same coverage as
required herein.
(I) The utility owner and a contractor of any tier shall also maintain commercial general
liability insurance with minimum limit of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) as the combined
single limit for each occurrence of bodily injury, sickness, disease or death of any person, other
than the policy holder's employees, or damage to property of the city or any other person arising
out of an act or omission of the policy holder, policy holder's subcontractor, agents or
employees. This policy shall also include protection against claims insured by usual personal
injury liability coverage as well as coverage for completed operations, products liability,
contractual liability premises/operations, and independent contractors, as well as coverage that
does not contain an XCU coverage exclusion.
(J) The utility owner and the utility owner's contractor shall also maintain automobile
liability insurance covering the policy holder, its employees and agents, subcontractors and the
additional insured's against all claims for injuries to members of the public and damage to
property of others arising from the use of motor vehicles, and shall cover operation on-site and
off-site of all motor vehicles whether they are owned, nonowned or hired. The liability shall not
be less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) as the combined single limit for each
occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
(K) The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a combination of underlying and
umbrella policies, so long as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated.
(L) The utility owner, and thereafter, the registration holder, without cost to the city, shall file
performance and maintenance surety bonds for any construction to occur in the right-of-way.
The surety bonds shall be issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state.
The maintenance bond shall be for a period not less than two (2) full years after the completion
of the construction, and both bonds shall be in the amount of the estimated amount of the cost
to restore the right-of-way given the work to be done, to protect the city in the event the
registration holder leaves a jobsite in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete or unsafe.
(M) A utility provider with a franchise in effect on the date of this article satisfies the
requirements of this subsection if the city determines that the provider's franchise adequately
provides for insurance and bonds; otherwise the utility provider shall comply with the
requirements of this subsection.
(N) Failure of the city to verify compliance with the requirements of this section shall not
waive any such requirements.
(7) Such other information as the director may determine is reasonably necessary for proper
consideration of the application.
Sec. 13.1104 Registration Issuance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/562
(a) The director shall issue a registration to the utility owner if after review of the application the director
determines that the utility owner:
(1) Has complied with all requirements for issuance of the registration;
(2) Has not made a false or inaccurate statement as to a material matter on the application for
registration; and
(3) Has not failed to pay any fees owed the city as a result of work performed in the right-of-way.
(b) A person who has in effect an existing franchise or license agreement with the city to use the right-of-way
at the time of this article shall still comply with the provisions of this article, except to the extent the terms of the
franchise or license agreement conflict with this article, after which the director shall issue a registration.
Sec. 13.1105 Term of Registration and Fee
(a) A registration shall be valid for a period of five (5) years. A person may renew a registration by making
application as provided by Section 13.1103. A registration is not transferrable.
(b) Each registration holder shall pay to the city a fee for the use of the right-of-way in an amount established
by the city council, except to the extent an existing franchise or license agreement or applicable state or federal
law provides otherwise.
Sec. 13.1106 Revocation of Registration
The director shall revoke a registration if the director determines that the registration holder has:
(1) Given false or inaccurate information on the application for registration or in a hearing
concerning the registration;
(2) Violated any provision of this article; or
(3) Violated the terms of its franchise, license, or other agreement, if the registration holder has a
franchise, license, or other agreement with the city.
Sec. 13.1107 Appeal from Denial or Revocation of Registration
If the director denies or revokes a right-of-way registration, the city shall give written notice to the utility owner
or registration holder by one of the following methods: (1) personal service; (2) certified mail, return receipt
requested; or (3) electronic mail with delivery and receipt confirmed by return e-mail. The utility owner or
registration holder may appeal the decision to deny or revoke a right-of-way registration by filing written notice
of such appeal with the city secretary within five (5) business days after receipt of the notice. The city secretary
shall give written notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing to the person appealing by one of the
following methods: (1) personal service; (2) certified mail, return receipt requested; or (3) electronic mail with
delivery and receipt confirmed by return e-mail. The city manager shall conduct a meeting and shall make a
decision based on a preponderance of the evidence at the hearing. The burden of proof shall be on the utility
owner or registration holder. Compliance with formal rules of evidence shall not be required. The decision of the
city manager may be appealed to the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final.
Sec. 13.1108 As-Built Plans
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/562
(a) A utility provider which has facilities in the right-of-way existing as of the effective date of adoption of
this article and has not provided the city “as-built plans” shall provide such information to the director no later
than one (1) year after the effective date of this article in the format specified by the director and with sufficient
detail to convey the type, size and location (within two feet (2') horizontally and vertically), including depth, of
its facilities. The utility owner shall submit “as-built plans” in digital PDF format as required by the director. If
the utility owner does not submit “as-built plans” as required by this section, it waives all claims against the city
for any damage caused to such utility owner's facilities by any future construction or utility installation
activities, regardless of who performs such work.
(b) For facilities constructed after the effective date of this article, a utility owner shall provide the director
with “as-build plans” within ninety (90) days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way. The plans shall be
provided in digital PDF format as required by the director in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a)
above.
(c) The director, for good cause, may waive all, or portions, of the requirements of subsections (a) and (b)
above. Determination of good cause shall include an assessment of the following: (1) the utility owner's ability
to feasibly and economically remove customer specific, proprietary or confidential information from its plans,
and (2) the utility owner's standard business practice relative to the preparation of construction and “as-built
plans.” The director may impose conditions on any waiver granted under this subsection. The director may
reassess a waiver granted under this subsection, from time to time, to determine whether the utility owner's
ability to provide “as-build plans” has changed.
(d) Nothing contained in this article shall create, expand or enlarge the liability of the city for damage to any
utility facilities of any utility owner, or create any duty of the city to any utility owner or other third party, except
as expressly provided in this article.
Sec. 13.1109 Tree Trimming or Removal; Temporary Removal of Facilities
(a) A utility owner or its contractor may trim trees in or over the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable
operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming in rights-of-way and easements shall be
performed in accordance with guidelines established by the National Arborist Association and the requirements
of the city's tree preservation article. The registration holder shall trim the trees in such a manner to preserve as
much vegetation and natural shape of trees as reasonably possible, and still accomplish a safe and effective tree
trimming program. The utility owner shall make reasonable efforts to contact affected property owners prior to
necessary tree trimming operations.
(b) Should the utility owner or its contractor fail to remove the trimmings within 24 hours of trimming, unless
a longer period is required for extraordinary conditions and conditions beyond the control of the registration
holder, the city may remove the trimmings. Should the city remove the trimmings, the utility owner shall
reimburse the city for all costs incurred within 30 days of receipt of an invoice from the city.
(c) A utility owner shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses
or other bulky structures, if the city first gives written notice of no less than five days. Should the utility owner
or its contractor contact the city prior to the expiration of the five-day period and provide information indicating
that the movement of the aerial facilities will require additional time, the director may authorize an alternate
schedule. The expense of the temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party requesting and benefiting
from the temporary rearrangement. The utility owner may require prepayment or the posting of a bond from the
party requesting the temporary rearrangement.
Sec. 13.1110 Utility Construction Permit Required; Exceptions
(a) A utility owner shall obtain a utility construction permit prior to performing any excavation, construction,
relocation, removal, installation, repair or maintenance of facilities within the right-of-way, except as expressly
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/562
provided otherwise herein. A utility construction permit is required for new construction and replacement or
upgrading of a utility provider's network in the right-of-way, whether located above the surface, on the surface,
or underground. A utility construction permit application shall be signed by an authorized representative.
(b) The following work undertaken by a utility owner does not require a utility construction permit:
(1) Work to existing facilities required by emergency conditions, provided that the utility owner
complies with subsection (c) below;
(2) Work that does not require any excavation or construction, and which obstructs vehicular or
pedestrian traffic on a street, alley or sidewalk for less than two (2) hours and which does not occur
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on weekdays, provided the
utility owner has complied with the following requirements:
(A) The utility owner has submitted a traffic-control plan prepared in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices and in a form approved by the director;
(B) The director has approved the traffic-control plan;
(C) The work is performed in compliance with the traffic-control plan; and
(D) Unless the work is performed under emergency conditions, the person has given the
director four (4) hours written notice of the proposed work.
(c) When performing work required by emergency conditions, the utility owner shall notify the director as
soon as practical, but in no event more than seventy-two (72) hours after commencing such work, and shall
submit to the city director within seventy-two (72) hours after commencing such work a reasonably detailed
description of the work performed in the right-of-way. An updated “as-build plans” of facilities relocated during
emergency work shall be provided to the director within ninety (90) days of completion of the work.
(d) A utility owner applying for a utility construction permit shall pay to the city a utility construction permit
fee in an amount established by the city council except to the extent an existing franchise or license agreement or
applicable state or federal law provides otherwise.
Sec. 13.1111 Utility Construction Permit Application
(a) An applicant shall submit an application for a utility construction permit at least ten (10) working days
before the commencement of work proposed in the application. Such application shall be signed by the applicant
or the applicant's authorized agent or representative. Upon request of the utility owner, the director may approve
a shorter time period for submittal of an application.
(b) Except as otherwise permitted by this article, prior to the commencement of any work, the person
requesting a utility construction permit will provide the director with three (3) sets of engineering plans in the
format specified by the director showing the following information:
(1) The proposed location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the utility
owner's plan for right-of-way construction;
(2) Description of the proposed facilities on a scale of one inch (1") equals fifty feet (50'), unless
otherwise approved by the director;
(3) Description of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements that the utility owner plans
to use for such construction or installation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/562
(4) Description of all existing city and, to the extent known, other utility facilities which intersect,
are impacted by, or in close proximity (ten feet) to the utility owner's proposed facilities and/or work;
(5) Description of the facilities the utility owner proposes to install, including but not limited to:
pipe size, number and size of ducts, number and size of valves, location and size of stub outs;
(6) The typical details of manholes and/or handholes the utility owner plans to use or access;
(7) A complete legend; and
(8) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) in accordance with city ordinances and other
applicable laws and regulations.
(c) The applicant shall also submit documentation showing the following:
(1) The name, address and phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the
actual construction, including the name and telephone number of a representative of the contractor
who may be reached twenty-four (24) hours a day during construction;
(2) The methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities
within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of which
(methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the director, which approval will not be
unreasonably withheld;
(3) A statement that the proof of insurance, bond or other financial information, as required by this
article, are current and on file with the city;
(4) A copy of any permit or approval issued by any federal or state authorities for work in federal
or state right-of-way located in the city;
(5) Verification that the applicant has a valid right-of-way registration from the city;
(6) Evidence that all of the utility providers in the area have been given notice of the construction.
(Notice to utilities subject to chapter 251 of the Texas Utilities Code may be accomplished by
providing the city with the reference number assigned by the notification center established pursuant
to chapter 251 of the Texas Utilities Code. If this reference number is not known at the time of
application, the reference number shall be provided at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to
commencement of construction); and
(7) A copy of the applicant's traffic-control plan and policy for work performed in the right-of-way.
(d) The director may require a preconstruction meeting with the utility owner and its contractor.
Sec. 13.1112 Utility Construction Permit Issuance
(a) The director shall process and administratively complete the utility construction permit application and
shall issue a utility construction permit, provided that the utility owner is in compliance with the provisions of
this article.
(b) The utility construction permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, identification of facilities
to be installed, repaired or upgraded or maintained, dates and times of work that is to take place, and any other
condition set out by the director.
(c) The permit holder shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/562
(1) Maintain a copy of the utility construction permit and approved engineering plans at the
construction site, which shall be made available for inspection by the director at all times when
construction or installation work is occurring;
(2) Complete all construction work authorized by the utility construction permit in the time
specified, unless the permit holder has obtained an extension from the director;
(3) Provide the director access to the worksite, and such further information that may reasonably
be required by the director to ensure compliance with the utility construction permit; and
(4) Immediately notify the director of any conflicts discovered with existing facilities, damage to
any existing facilities, or other circumstances that reasonably require the city to take corrective
action.
(d) The utility construction permit shall expire if the work authorized by the permit does not commence within
one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of issuance of the permit or work is suspended or abandoned for a
period of 90 days at any time after work is commenced. The director may authorize renewal of the permit for
two additional sixty (60) day periods without resubmission of an application, provided that the scope of work set
forth in the original application is not changed.
Sec. 13.1113 Revocation of Utility Construction Permit
The director shall revoke a utility construction permit if the director determines that the permit holder has:
(1) Given false or inaccurate information on the application for a utility construction permit or in a
hearing concerning the utility construction permit; or
(2) Has violated any provisions of this article.
Sec. 13.1114 Appeal from Denial or Revocation of Utility Construction Permit
If the director denies or revokes a utility construction permit, the director shall give notice to the utility owner or
registration holder by one of the following methods: (1) personal service; (2) certified mail, return receipt
requested; or (3) electronic mail with delivery confirmed by return e-mail. The utility owner or registration
holder may appeal the decision to deny or revoke the utility construction permit by filing written notice with the
city secretary within five (5) business days after receipt of notice. The city secretary shall give written notice of
the time and place of the hearing to the person appealing by one of the following methods: (1) personal service;
(2) certified mail, return receipt requested; or (3) electronic mail with delivery confirmed by return e-mail. The
city manager shall conduct a hearing and shall make a decision based on a preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The burden of proof shall be on the utility owner or registration holder. Compliance
with formal rules of evidence shall not be required. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city
council. The decision of the city council shall be final.
Sec. 13.1115 Placement of Facilities
(a) All facilities constructed within the right-of-way after the effective date of this article shall:
(1) Conform to the city's design standards (standard details of construction), which provide design
standards for use and occupancy of the right-of-way and all codes and ordinances in effect at the time
of submittal of the application;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/562
(2) Be installed in accordance with plans and at the specific location within the right-of-way
approved by the city; and
(3) Be installed or constructed so as not to unreasonably interfere with:
(A) Traffic over city streets; and
(B) The health, safety or welfare of the owners of property adjoining the right-of-way; or
(C) The operation of other facilities or equipment situated within the right-of-way, whether
owned or maintained by the city or other utility providers; and
(D) Be located and situated so as to minimize the space used and maximize the space
available for other utility facilities.
(b) To the extent permitted by law, the director may require the location of facilities underground.
(c) Any utility owner doing work in the right-of-way shall properly install, repair, and maintain its facilities so
as to preserve the integrity of the right-of-way.
(d) Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if:
(1) The installation, repair, upgrade or maintenance endangers people or property;
(2) The facilities do not meet the applicable city codes;
(3) The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; or
(4) The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with
the plans approved by the director.
(e) Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other
public works projects, (e.g., install or improve storm drains, water lines, sewer lines, etc.) it shall be deemed
necessary by the city council to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities
of a utility owner to another part of the right-of-way, such alterations shall be made by the utility owner of the
facilities at their expense (unless provided otherwise by applicable state or federal law, or a valid franchise, a
license or other municipal authorization) within the time limits set by the director working in conjunction with
the utility owner, or if no time frame can be agreed upon, within ninety (90) days from the day the notice was
sent to make the alterations. Facilities not moved after ninety (90) days or within the approved schedule, if such
exists, as same may be extended from time to time, shall be deemed abandoned, and, after thirty (30) days
written notice, the city may remove the facilities itself or have the facilities removed by a qualified contractor
and the utility owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city to perform such work and shall submit
payment for said costs within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city's invoice.
(f) The city shall have the right to, and may at any time, order and require a utility owner to remove and abate
any facility that the director determines is necessary to address a public health or safety emergency. If, after
written notice, the utility owner or registration holder fails or refuses to act within the time limits set by the
director working in conjunction with the utility owner, or if no time frame can be agreed upon, within ninety
(90) days from the day the notice was sent, the city may remove the facilities itself or have the facilities removed
by a qualified contractor. The utility owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city under this
section and shall submit payment for said costs within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city's
invoice.
Sec. 13.1116 Notification
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/562
(a) An applicant for a utility construction permit or its contractor shall notify a notification center established
pursuant to chapter 251 of the Texas Utility Code, prior to conducting any work in the right-of-way such as
excavating, drilling, underground boring, jacking, or open cutting.
(b) A permit holder shall provide the director with the following information at least forty-eight (48) hours
before beginning work under the utility construction permit:
(1) The reference number received from the notification center;
(2) The exact dates and time work will be performed under the utility construction permit; and
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity who will perform the work,
including a representative who will be available at all times during construction, and who may be
contacted twenty-four (24) hours a day.
(c) The notice of work to the director must be in writing and may be sent by personal service, facsimile
transmission or certified mail, return receipt requested. If notice is by certified mail, it shall be sent no later than
four (4) business days before work is to commence work.
(d) The utility owner shall coordinate and communicate with private property owners whenever access to
private property is restricted.
Sec. 13.1117 Worksite Regulations
(a) The utility owner or the utility owner's contractor shall notify the director at least twenty-four (24) hours in
advance that construction is ready to commence.
(b) All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state and federal laws.
(c) Three-by-three foot (3' x 3') informational signs stating the identity of the person doing the work,
telephone number and utility owner's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where
construction is to occur forty-eight (48) hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall
continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. An informational sign stating
the construction work is underway shall be posted on public right-of-way one hundred (100) feet before the
construction location commences unless other posting arrangements are approved or required by the director.
(d) Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to between 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. unless the
director grants prior approval for more extensive closures. Arrow boards will be required for lane closures on all
major thoroughfares and collectors, and with all safety devices and procedures required by the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
(e) Utility owners are responsible for the workmanship of, and any damages caused by, the utility owner's
contractors or subcontractors. An authorized representative of the utility owner shall be available to the director
at all times during construction.
(f) The utility owner or contractor or subcontractor will notify the director immediately of any damage to any
other utilities, including city utilities.
(g) It is the city's policy not to cut streets or sidewalks unless reasonably necessary; therefore, when a street or
sidewalk cut is required, prior approval must be obtained from the director and all requirements of the city shall
be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals must be made to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and
pedestrian traffic, and shall be in accordance with all applicable city specifications and details for restoration
within public rights-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/562
(h) Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities, including gravity dependent facilities.
Facilities shall not be located over, or within two feet, horizontally or vertically, of any water or sanitary sewer
mains, unless approved in advance by the director in writing.
(i) All directional boring shall have a locator place bore marks and depths while the bore is in progress.
Locator shall place mark at each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem.
(j) The working hours in the rights-of-way are 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Work that
needs to be performed after 4:30 p.m. or on Sunday must be approved in advance by the director. No work will
be done, except for emergencies, on official city holidays.
(k) Persons working in the right-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities or
others with facilities in the right-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of a geographic information system or
reference to the “as-build plans” does not satisfy this requirement.
(l) When required by the director, the utility owner shall verify locations of existing facilities by potholing,
hand-digging or other method approved by the director prior to any mechanical excavation or boring.
(m) Placement of all manholes and/or handholes must be approved in advance by the director. Handholes or
manholes will not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the director.
(n) Locate flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed.
(o) When construction requires pumping of water or mud, the water or mud shall be contained in accordance
with the SWPPP.
(p) A utility owner shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in
accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use boring and other trenchless
technology whenever feasible and commercially reasonable. The city shall waive the requirement for trenchless
technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the
city. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize
interference with the use of public and private property. A utility owner shall follow all reasonable construction
directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference.
(q) Backfilling of all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be completed daily, unless other
safety requirements are approved by the director. Holes with only vertical walls shall be covered and secured to
prevent entry. Bore pits, trenches or other holes shall be left open for continuation of work overnight only if
approved by the director, and shall be fenced and barricaded according to industry best practices.
Sec. 13.1118 Traffic and Streets
(a) Except in an emergency, all street closures or detours that will exceed twenty-four (24) hours shall be
posted by a sign at least two (2) days prior to the closure or detour. If a cut or opening in a street is left open after
4:30 p.m., safety measures shall be taken by the utility construction permit holder, including but not limited to:
(1) Covering the cut with steel plates;
(2) A barricade or temporary fencing must be placed on both sides of the cut; and
(3) Flares or red or amber flashing lights shall be placed in front of each barricade.
(b) Any construction abutting a school must be coordinated with the director so as to minimize traffic conflicts
and street closures during school days.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/562
Sec. 13.1119 Restoration of the Right-of-Way and Private Property
(a) The utility owner shall be responsible for any damage caused by construction, whether to public or private
property, and shall immediately repair or replace said property.
(b) The utility owner shall restore the property affected by construction to a condition that is equal to or better
than existed prior to construction, and in accordance with applicable city specifications, unless otherwise
approved by the director. The restoration shall, at a minimum, include the following:
(1) Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work to a condition
equal to or better either by sodding or seeding, or as directed by the director;
(2) Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required;
(3) Backfilling of all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes, unless other safety
requirements are approved by the director;
(4) Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines;
(5) Restoration of excavation site;
(6) Restoration of all hardscape, paving and driveways;
(7) Restoration of all landscaping, ground cover and sprinkler systems; and
(8) Removal of all locate-flags during the clean-up process.
(c) Restoration work must be commenced within five (5) working days of completion of construction, and
completed no later than thirty (30) days after the completion of all construction, unless otherwise approved by
the director in writing. Access to private property shall be given priority during construction.
(d) If restoration work does not meet the quality approved by the director or is not performed timely, the
director shall give written notice to the utility owner by one of the following methods: (1) personal service; (2)
certified mail; or (3) electronic mail with delivery and receipt confirmation by return e-mail. If after notice the
deficiencies are not remedied within ten (10) business days, the director may issue a stop-work order and place a
hold on all future permits. Stop-work orders and holds placed on future permits shall remain in effect until
restoration work is completed to the quality approved by the director.
(e) Upon failure of a utility owner to perform such restoration, and after written notice has been given to the
utility owner by the director as provided above, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as
may have been disturbed by the utility owner, its contractors or agents, and invoice the utility owner for all costs
incurred. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the utility owner will reimburse the city for the costs so
incurred within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice.
(f) Should the city reasonably determine, within one year (1) from the date of the completion of construction,
that the restoration work, including, but not limited to, the surface, base, irrigation system and landscape
treatment requires additional restoration work to meet existing city standards, the utility owner shall perform
such additional restoration work to meet pre-construction conditions or existing standards of the city.
(g) This section is intended to provide the general minimum requirements for restoration following
construction activities in the right-of-way, but other ordinances, laws and regulations may contain additional or
more specific provisions. Therefore, nothing contained in this section shall relieve the utility owner from the
requirements of any other city ordinance, or other applicable law or regulation.
Sec. 13.1120 Failure to Complete Work
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/562
If the utility owner, the utility owner's contractor or the utility owner's subcontractor fails to diligently perform
any construction permitted under a utility construction permit, abandons the job or for other reasons does not
complete the construction within a timely manner, or fails to restore the right-of-way or other property as
required by this article, the city, after written notice to the utility owner by one of following methods: (1)
personal service; (2) certified mail; or (3) electronic mail with delivery and receipt confirmation by return e-mail
shall have the authority to take any action necessary to restore right-of-way to a good and safe condition, in
accordance with applicable city specifications. If the failure to complete construction causes a safety hazard, the
city may commence restoration immediately and shall notify the utility owner. The utility owner shall be
responsible for all costs incurred by the city under this section and shall submit payment for said costs within
thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city's invoice. If the utility owner fails to do so, the director may
issue a stop-work order and place a hold on all future permits. Stop-work orders and holds placed on future
permits shall remain in effect until all amounts owed are repaid.
Sec. 13.1121 Indemnity
(a) Unless otherwise provided by law, each utility owner placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall
agree, and by requesting use of the rights-of-way does agree, to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city
harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses for the repair, replacement, or restoration of
city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be
defective as a result of the utility owner's acts or omissions, and from and against any and all claims, demands,
suits, causes of action, and judgments for:
(1) Damage to or loss of the property of the utility owner, any other utility owners, owners of other property,
their contractors and subcontractors, the city's agents, officers, and employees, and other third parties; and/or
(2) Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person
arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of
the utility owner, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities
pursuant to this article.
(b) This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its
officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors.
(c) The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city and not intended to create or grant
any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other property or utility owner or other entity.
(d) A utility owner shall immediately advise the director and the city of actual or potential litigation that may
develop or may affect the utility owner's obligation to defend and indemnify the city.
Sec. 13.1122 Enforcement and Penalties
(a) A person commits an offense if the person attempts to place, places, attempts to cause to be placed or
causes to be placed any facilities within the right-of-way in any manner other than the manner provided by this
article.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates facilities within the right-of-way without first
having obtained a registration from the city, except as expressly permitted otherwise in this article.
(c) Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article that
relates to:
(1) The preservation of public safety relating to the methods or procedures for construction of any
utility facility or improvement; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/562
(2) The preservation of public health or safety; the city may petition the state district court or the
county court at law, through the city attorney, for either the injunctive relief in this section, and may
obtain against the utility owner, or the utility owner's contractor or subcontractor, or any other person
regulated by this article, a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
(A) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article; or
(B) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with
any provision of this article.
(d) Any person who has violated any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, shall be strictly
liable for such violation, and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with Section 1.109, the
general penalty provision of the city code.
(Ordinance 1071 adopted 12/13/16)
Sec. 13.1123 Network nodes in public right-of-way
(a) Generally. This section shall be construed in accordance with chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government
Code to the extent not in conflict with the constitution and laws of the United States or of the state. To extent of
any conflict between this section and the remainder of this article, this section controls.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in the city's design manual for the
installation of network nodes and node support poles are hereby incorporated into this section and shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. In addition, the definitions from section
284.002 of the Texas Local Government Code are specifically incorporated into this section by reference. In
addition, in this section:
Applicable codes.
(1) The city's uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a
recognized national code organization; and
(2) Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with chapter 284.
City. The City of Lake Worth, Texas.
City council. The governing body of the City of Lake Worth, Texas.
Chapter 284. Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Design manual. The city's design manual for the installation of network nodes and node support poles.
Easement. Any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for
public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. “Easement” shall include a private easement used for
the provision of utilities.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The federal administrative agency, or lawful successor,
authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level.
Street. Only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of
the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for
vehicular travel where there is no curb. A “street” is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the
entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A “street” does not
include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/562
Wireless facilities. “Micro network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles” as those terms are
defined in chapter 284.
(c) Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way. Pursuant to this section and subject to the design manual and
chapter 284, a wireless network provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way
in the city for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of
wireless facilities. The terms of this section shall apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in
whole or part, in the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the
effective date of annexation or the date the city provides the company written notice, whichever date occurs
later.
(d) Compliance with this article, the design manual, applicable codes, and chapter 284. All wireless network
providers shall comply with the terms of this section and the remainder of this article, and are hereby included in
the definition of a “utility owner” for the purposes of this article. All wireless network providers shall also
comply with applicable codes, the terms and conditions of the city's design manual, and chapter 284.
(e) Permit applications.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in chapter 284, a network provider shall obtain a permit or
permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in a public
right-of-way.
(2) As required by chapter 284, the city shall not require a network provider to perform services for
the city for which the permit is sought.
(3) A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the
municipal limits of the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not
more than 30 network nodes, and upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits
for the installation or collocation of those network nodes.
(4) The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications:
(A) Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the
applicant will comply with this article, the city's design manual, chapter 284, and applicable
codes;
(B) Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public
rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the design manual and this section;
(C) A certificate that the network nodes comply with applicable regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network nodes will be placed
into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60th day after
the date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed.
(5) Exception. As provided in section 284.157 of chapter 284, a network provider is not required to
apply, obtain a permit, or pay a rate to the city for:
(A) Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or
vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way;
(B) Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is
substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of
sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or
(C) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network
nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/562
the National Electrical Safety Code.
(D) The network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least 24 hours in advance
of work described in this subsection (5).
(f) Installation in historic districts or design districts. A network provider must obtain advance written consent
from the city council before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of
the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district or as a design district if the district has
decorative poles. The network provider shall be required to comply with the requirements described in the city's
design manual. The city has the authority to designate new historic districts and design districts in the future.
(g) Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. A network provider may not install a new node
support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written
consent if the public right-of way:
(1) Is in a municipal park; or
(2) Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
(A) Not more than 50 feet wide; and
(B) Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped
land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
(C) In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node or node support
pole in a public right-of-way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private
restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities.
(D) The network provider shall be further required to comply with guidelines set out in the
city's design manual.
(h) Municipal review process by the city.
(1) Determination of application completeness. The city shall determine whether the permit
application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination:
(A) For network nodes and node support poles, no later than 30 days after the date the city
receives the permit application; and
(B) For a transport facility, no later than 10 days after the date the city receives the permit
application.
(2) Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after
the date it is submitted to the city:
(A) For network nodes, no later than 60 days after the date the city receives the complete
application;
(B) For network support poles, no later than 150 days after the date the city receives the
complete application; and
(C) For transport facilities, no later than 21 days after the city receives the complete
application.
(3) Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the
basis for the denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/562
regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent
by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the city denies the application.
(4) Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the
denial application.
(A) The applicant has 30 days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure
the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application
fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city.
(B) The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later
than the 90th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review
shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation.
(i) Time of installation. A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than
six months after final approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city
manager may in his or her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network
provider.
(j) Applicable fees and rental rates to the city.
(1) As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way, the
network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth
below, which shall be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use,
construction, street cut or inspection fee; or other right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged
to the network provider or its contractor(s) within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes,
special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance with state law and equally applicable to all
general businesses in the city.
(2) Network nodes.
(A) The application fee shall be $100.00 for each network node for up to but not more than
30 network nodes.
(B) The annual public right-of-way rate shall be $250.00 per network node installed in the
city public rights-of-way.
(C) As provided in section 284.054 of chapter 284, the city may adjust the amount of the
annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal to one-half the
annual change, if any, in the consumer price index (CPI). The city shall provide written notice
to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the
city on or after the 60th day following the written notice.
(3) Node support poles. The application fee for each network support pole shall be $100.00.
(4) Transfer facilities.
(A) The application fee for each transfer facility shall be $100.00.
(B) The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be $28.00 monthly for each network node site
located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already
paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for
access lines under chapter 283 of the Texas Local Government Code or cable franchise fees
under chapter 66 of the Texas Utilities Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/562
(5) Micro network nodes. No application fee is required for a micro network node if the
installation is attached on lines between poles or node support poles.
(6) Collocation of network nodes on service poles. Subject to the city's license agreement, the
collocation of network nodes on city service poles shall be at a rate of $20.00 per year per service
pole.
(7) City-owned municipal utility poles. A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment
rate for the collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based
upon the pole attachment rate consistent with section 54.024 of the Texas Utilities Code, applied on a
per-foot basis.
(k) Indemnity. As provided in section 284.302 of chapter 284, a network provider shall indemnify, defend,
and hold the city harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable
attorney's fees, arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of
the network provider. The city shall promptly notify the network provider of any claims, demands, or actions
(“claims”) covered by this indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network
provider shall have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the
claims. The foregoing indemnity obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of city;
however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider
and the city; provided that in such cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to
indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any
defenses of the parties under state law.
(l) Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers. Nothing in this section shall govern attachment
of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric
cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers.
(m) License agreement. The city manager is authorized to require and enter into a license agreement
governing a network provider's use of the public rights-of-way for any purpose authorized by chapter 284 of the
Texas Local Government Code and in conformance with this article to the extent said article is not in conflict
with chapter 284 of the Local Government Code, and the design manual.
(Ordinance 1095 adopted 9/12/17)
ARTICLE 13.1200 LAWN AND LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION
Sec. 13.1201 Restrictions
(a) Lawns and landscaping may be watered on any day, at any time, by handheld hose, drip irrigation, a soaker
hose or tree bubbler. (The intent of this measure is to allow for the protection of structural foundations, trees, and
other high value landscape materials.)
Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person may only irrigate, water, or cause
or permit the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape, inclusive of structural foundations, trees, and other
high value landscape materials, located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person (i) on a day
designated as an outdoor water use day for the property's address as shown below; and (ii) between the hours of
12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. on such day.
(1) Residential addresses ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8) may water on Wednesdays and
Saturdays.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/562
(2) Residential addresses ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) may water on Thursdays and
Sundays.
(3) All nonresidential locations (apartment complexes, businesses, industries, parks, street and/or
roadway medians, etc.) may water on Tuesdays and Fridays.
(b) Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that
person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on
premises owned, leased, or managed by that person between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(c) Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that
person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on
premises owned, leased, or managed by that person on a day that is not designated as an outdoor water use for
that property address as shown in subsection (a) above.
(d) A person commits an offense if a person knowingly or recklessly irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the
irrigation or watering of a lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased or managed by the person in a
manner that causes:
(1) A substantial amount of water to fall upon impervious areas instead of a lawn or landscape,
such that a constant stream of water overflows from the lawn or landscape onto a street or other
drainage area; or
(2) An irrigation system or other lawn or landscape watering device to operate during any form of
precipitation.
(e) A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, a person operates
a lawn or landscape irrigation system or device that:
(1) Has any broken or missing sprinkler head; or
(2) Has not been properly maintained in a manner that prevents the waste of water.
(f) Affirmative Defenses.
(1) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense in subsection (a) above that at the
time such person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or
landscape, such activity was for the purpose of:
(A) Dust control of a sports field; or
(B) The maintenance, repair, or testing of an irrigation system.
(2) The activity described in subsection (f)(1)(A) and (B) may only occur within a period of two
(2) days no more than once every thirty (30) days. Any such activity requiring a longer period or
greater frequency shall require a variance as provided by subsection (g).
(g) Variances.
(1) The director of public works or official designee may grant variances to the twice per week
watering and irrigation restrictions and schedule, if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(A) Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting
health, sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the person requesting the variance;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/562
(B) Compliance with the watering and irrigation restrictions and/or schedule cannot be
accomplished due to technical or other limitations; or
(C) Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use can be
implemented.
(2) The director of public works or official designee may grant variances to allow for
establishment of hydromulch, grass sod, or grass seed for new lawns.
(3) Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the water department director or
official designee. All petitions for variances shall be in writing and shall include the following:
(A) Name and address of the petitioner(s);
(B) Purpose of the water use;
(C) Specific provisions from which relief is requested;
(D) Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from which relief is requested;
(E) Description of the relief requested;
(F) Period of time for which the variance is sought;
(G) Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use; and
(H) Other pertinent information requested.
(h) A person who irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering by use of an alternative
water source such as a well, reclaimed or reused water, or water from the Trinity River is exempt from
prosecution if that person has:
(1) Registered such alternative water source with the city;
(2) Provided sufficient proof to the water department director that the alternative water source is
from a well, reclaimed or reused water or from the Trinity River and has allowed inspection by the
water department director if deemed necessary; and
(3) Complied with the city's backflow and cross-connection control program and sections 13.1001
through 13.1032 of this code.
(Ordinance 1023 adopted 4/14/14)
Sec. 13.1202 Variances
(a) The director of public works may grant variances from the provisions of Section 13.1201(a) to persons
demonstrating extreme hardship and need as determined by the director of public works and only under the
following conditions:
(1) The applicant must sign a compliance agreement on forms provided by the director of public
works, agreeing to irrigate or water a lawn or landscape only in the amount and manner permitted by
the variance;
(2) Granting of a variance must not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water
supply;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/562
(3) The extreme hardship or need requiring the variance must relate to the health, safety, or welfare
of the person requesting it; and
(4) The health, safety or welfare or other persons must not be adversely affected by granting the
variance.
(b) The director of public works may revoke a variance granted when the director determines that:
(1) The conditions of subsection (a) above are not being met or are no longer applicable;
(2) The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or
(3) The health, safety or welfare of other persons requires revocation.
(c) No variance shall be permitted for an action or purpose that violates those rules promulgated by the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, contained in Chapter 344, Subchapter A, Section 344.1, Subchapter C,
Sections 344.30-344.38, Subchapter D, Sections 344.40-344.43 and Subchapters E and F, Sections 344.50-
344.65 Texas Administrative Code (effective January 1, 2009), and as adopted by reference by the City of Lake
Worth as Section 315 of the International Plumbing Code, 2003 edition, and Section P2609 of the International
Residential Code, 2003 edition and in Section 13.1201(a), above.
(Ordinance 909, sec. 2, adopted 4/14/09)
ARTICLE 13.1300 STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL
Sec. 13.1301 Purposes
The purposes and objectives of this article are as follows:
(1) To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the City of Lake
Worth, the North Central Texas Region, and the State of Texas.
(2) To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial,
residential, and new development or redevelopment construction sites into the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) and natural waters within the city.
(3) To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous
substances, petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from
construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers and
natural waters of the city.
(4) To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer
products.
(5) To facilitate compliance with state and federal water quality standards, limitations, and permits
by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the city.
(6) To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to
stormwater discharges.
Sec. 13.1302 Administration
The director of public works shall implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed in this article upon the director of public works may be delegated by him/her to other city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/562
personnel.
Sec. 13.1303 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations when used in this article shall have the designated meanings:
BMP Best management practices
BODS Five-day biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of federal regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
HHW Household hazardous waste
mg/l Milligrams per liter
MS4 Municipal separate storm sewer system
NOI Notice of intent
NOT Notice of termination
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Ph Measure of acidity or alkalinity
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
PST Petroleum storage tank
PE Licensed professional engineer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/562
SWPPP Stormwater pollution prevention plan
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
Sec. 13.1304 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated.
Agricultural Stormwater Runoff. Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands,
and other non-point source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding
operations as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production
facilities as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.24.
Article. A major subdivision of the Code of Ordinances of the city.
Best Management Practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures,
and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
City. The City of Lake Worth, Texas, or the city council of Lake Worth.
Coal Pile Runoff. The rainfall runoff from or through any coal storage pile.
Commencement of Construction. The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, excavating,
landfilling, and other construction activities.
Commercial. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit.
Common Plan of Development. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities
may be taking place at different times on different schedules under one plan.
Construction. Any human activity that involves clearing, grading, excavation, landfilling, or other placement,
movement, removal, or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials.
Contaminated. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Director. The director of public works for the city, or his/her duly authorized representative.
Discharged. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into
the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States.
Discharger. Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including,
without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/562
Domestic Sewage. Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing,
and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from
the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and
institutions, that is free from industrial waste.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional
office thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and
any duly authorized official of EPA or such successor agency.
Facility. Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a
pollutant.
Fertilizer. A solid or non-solid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form
available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or
stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers. The term
does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of
essential plant nutrients is made.
Final Stabilization. The status when all soil disturbing activities at a site have been completed, and a uniform
perennial vegetative cover with a density of 85% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of
riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
Fire Department. The fire department of the city, or any duly authorized representative thereof.
Fire Protection Water. Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other
than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire.
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or
consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of
produce and other food products.
Harmful Quantity. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state.
Hazardous Substance. Any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302.
Hazardous Waste Treatment, Disposal, and Recovery Facility. All contiguous land, structures, other
appurtenances and improvements on the land used for the treatment, disposal, or recovery of hazardous waste.
Hazardous Waste. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part
261.
Herbicide. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth.
Household Hazardous Waste (HHW). Any material generated in a household (including single and multiple
residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and
day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR Section 261.4(b)
(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
Industrial Waste. Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry,
manufacturing, mining, production, trade, or business.
Landfilling. The deposition of soil and other inert materials on the land to raise its grade and/or smooth its
features.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/562
Licensed Professional Engineer (PE). A person who has been duly licensed and registered by the state board of
registration for professional engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas.
Motor Vehicle Fluid. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant,
gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
Municipal Landfill. An area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid waste is placed for permanent
disposal, and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well, or a pile (as these
terms are defined in regulations promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality).
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). The system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for
collecting or conveying sewage.
Municipal Solid Waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial,
institutional, or recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
Nonpoint Source. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a “point source.”
Notice of Intent (NOI). The notice of intent that is required by either the baseline industrial general permit, the
construction general permit or the multi-sector general permit.
Notice of Termination (NOT). The notice of termination that is required by either the baseline industrial general
permit, the construction general permit or the multi-sector general permit.
NPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity or Baseline Industrial
General Permit. The most recent baseline industrial general permit issued by EPA published in Volume 65 of the
Federal Register at page 64746 on October 30, 2000, and any subsequent modifications or amendments thereto.
NPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Sites or Construction General Permit.
The most recent construction general permit issued by EPA published in Volume 68 of the Federal Register at
page 39087 on July 1, 2003, and any subsequent modifications or amendments thereto.
NPDES Permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC Section
1342 (b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
NPDES Stormwater Multi-Sector General Permit for Industrial Activities or Multi-Sector General Permit. The
multi-sector general permit for stormwater discharges associated with specified industrial activities published by
EPA in Volume 60 of the Federal Register at page 51109 on September 29, 1995, and any subsequent
modifications or amendments thereto.
Oil. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, or crude oil, or any fraction
thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, or sludge, oil refuse, or oil mixed
with waste.
Operator. The person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet either of the following two
criteria:
(1) They have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make
modifications in specifications); or
(2) They have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to
ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/562
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint-stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pesticide. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any
substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant (as these terms
are defined in Section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code).
Petroleum Product. A product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of
being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline, gasohol, other
alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel.
Petroleum Storage Tank (PST). Any one or combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks that
contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes.
Point Source. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch,
channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and
industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term “pollutant” does not include tail
water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated range land, pasture land,
and farm land.
Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any
water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or
property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the
water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Public Works Construction Project. Any construction performed or funded in whole or part, separately or
collectively, by the federal, state, county, or local government, including the city.
Qualified Personnel. Persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills, and ability (as demonstrated by
sufficient education, training, experience, and/or, when applicable, any required certification or licensing) to
perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the applicable regulatory
requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity. Operator is responsible for providing
qualifications to the director and the director has the authority to approve or deny the qualifications of personnel.
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching,
dumping, or disposing, directly or indirectly, into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or the
waters of the United States.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid wastes that consist of:
(1) Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber,
plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and
(2) Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal
furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800
degrees Fahrenheit)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/562
Sanitary Sewer (or Sewer). The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste
and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities,
and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the sewage treatment plant utilized by the city (and to which
stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted).
Septic Tank Waste. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
and septic tanks.
Service Station. Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is
dispensed from stationary storage tanks.
Sewage or Sanitary Sewage. The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city
sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the sewage treatment plant utilized by the
city for treatment.
Site. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent
land used in connection with the facility or activity.
Solid Waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or
air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from
community and institutional activities.
State. The State of Texas.
Stormwater Discharge Associated with Industrial Activity. The discharge from any conveyance which is used for
collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw
materials storage areas at an industrial plant which is within one of the categories of facilities listed in 40 CFR
part 122, and which is not excluded from EPA's definition of the same term.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). A plan required by either the construction general permit, the
baseline industrial general permit, or the multi-sector general permit and which describes and ensures the
implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with
construction or other industrial activity at the facility.
Stormwater. Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Uncontaminated. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Used Oil or Used Motor Oil. Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil that, as a result of
use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of
original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal
law.
Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
Water in the State. Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs,
springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the territorial limits
of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or
non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly
or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state.
Water Quality Standard. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses
and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in
Chapter 307 of Title 31 of the Texas Administrative Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/562
Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to
use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters [that] the use, degradation, or destruction of
which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise
defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition;
all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of
“waters of the United States” at 40 CFR Section 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment
ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Yard Waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping
maintenance and land-clearing operations.
Sec. 13.1305 General Prohibition; Exceptions
(a) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a), above, upon
presentation of evidence by the discharger, that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the
following categories of discharges:
(1) A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES permit (other than the
NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4);
(2) A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the fire department;
(3) A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances or
materials that the fire code in Chapter 5 of this code requires to be contained and treated prior to
discharge, in which case treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have
occurred prior to discharge;
(4) Agricultural stormwater runoff;
(5) A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line
disinfection by superchlorination or other means unless it contains no harmful quantity of chlorine or
any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(6) A discharge or flow from lawn watering, landscape irrigation, or other irrigation water;
(7) A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
(8) A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater;
(9) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined in 40 CFR Section 35.2005(20)) to the
MS4;
(10) Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, or footing
drain;
(11) A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or
material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/562
(12) A discharge or flow from individual residential carwashing (external surfaces only);
(13) A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
(14) A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance, and the
temperature of which has not been elevated by induced heating;
(c) No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b), above, if the discharge or flow in question
has been determined by the director to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States
or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger, and the discharge has
occurred more than 15 calendar days beyond such notice. The correctness of the director's determination that a
discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement
proceeding.
(d) The burden of proof that a discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the categories in subsection
(b), above, and that it was not a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the
MS4 is upon the person or entity responsible for the discharge.
Sec. 13.1306 Specific Prohibitions and Requirements
(a) The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited
by the general prohibition in Section 13.1305.
(b) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes
to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge
permit for discharges from its MS4.
(c) No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise
introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4:
(1) Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
(2) Any industrial waste;
(3) Any hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste;
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste;
(5) Any garbage, rubbish, yard waste, or other floatable material;
(6) Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or
maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop,
repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business
or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment;
(7) Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, deicing, or other maintenance of aircraft;
(8) Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other
harmful cleaning substance, or that is at a temperature that has been elevated by induced heating
unless performed in compliance with the best management practices adopted by the city public works
department;
(9) Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/562
(10) Any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful
quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning
substance, or that is at a temperature that has been elevated by induced heating; or any wastewater
from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil,
motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of
such released material have been previously removed;
(11) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions
filter, or the blowdown from a boiler;
(12) Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch material,
or any wastewater or substance from the cleaning of any vehicle or equipment containing, or used in
transporting or applying such material;
(13) Any runoff or washdown water from any animal pen, kennel, or foul or livestock containment
area;
(14) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool;
(15) Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means if it contains
any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(16) Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code
in Chapter 5 of this code requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment
adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge. This prohibition does not apply to discharges
or flow from firefighting by the fire department;
(17) Any wastewater from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(18) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard or any other facility classified as
Standard Industrial Classification 5015 or 5093;
(19) Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4;
(20) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil
contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from
the remediation of any such PST release.
(d) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt,
earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation, landfilling, or other construction
activities (including any placement, movement, removal, or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials) in
excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the
maximum extent practicable.
(e) No person shall connect an interior floor drain or any other source of wastewater, domestic or industrial, to
the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue.
(f) Regulation of Pesticides, Herbicides and Fertilizers.
(1) No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide or herbicide contrary to any directions for
use on any labeling required by state or federal statute or regulation.
(2) No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer in any manner that
the person knows, or reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of
the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/562
(3) No person shall dispose of, discard, store, or transport a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer, or a
pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer container, in a manner that the person knows, or reasonably should
know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to
enter the MS4 or waters of the United States.
(4) If provided with a display notice containing the provisions of this subsection (f), pertaining to
the regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers (or a reasonable description thereof), and the
information that any user of the product may obtain further information from the director, any person
selling pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers at retail or wholesale shall post the notice prominently
where it may be read by purchasers of the product.
(g) Used Oil Regulation.
(1) No person shall:
(A) Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water,
groundwater, or watercourse;
(B) Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a
landfill or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill;
(C) Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar
use that introduces used oil into the environment.
(2) All businesses that change motor oil for the public, municipal waste landfills, and fire stations
are encouraged to serve as public used oil collection centers as provided by state statute in Section
371.024 of the Texas Health & Safety Code.
(3) A retail dealer who annually sells directly to the public more than 500 gallons of oil in
containers for use of premises shall post in a prominent place a sign provided by the city or by the
state informing the public that improper disposal of used oil is prohibited by law. The sign shall
prominently display the toll-free telephone number of the state used oil information center. If a sign is
provided by the city, it shall also prominently display the city telephone number where information
concerning the proper disposal of used oil may be obtained.
(h) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sanitary sewer system any discharge of
stormwater, polluted or unpolluted, or any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a
water quality standard, its agreements associated with the regional sewage treatment plants or any state-issued
permit.
Sec. 13.1307 Goal for Erosion and Sediment Control at Construction Sites
Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design
criteria set forth in the most recent version of the city's subdivision and development regulations ordinance and
shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the city. Unless
otherwise specified by the subdivision and development regulations, the goal for erosion and sediment control at
sites over one acre disturbed by construction is achievement of at least the minimum site rating of 0.70 using the
site rating system as presented in Section 3 of the Stormwater Quality Best Management Practices for
Construction Activities - North Central Texas, Second Edition North Central Texas Council of Governments,
Arlington, Texas, as may be amended from time to time.
Sec. 13.1308 Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activities–General Requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/562
(a) All operators of construction sites shall use best management practices to control and reduce the discharge,
to the MS4 and to waters of the United States, of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other material associated with
clearing, grading, excavation, landfilling, and other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable.
Any best management practices capable of installation and/or implementation prior to commencement of
construction (for example, structural measures) shall be installed anchor implemented prior to commencement of
construction at the site or in compliance with a schedule for installation and/or implementation in an applicable
SWPPP. The best management practices used at construction sites may include, but not be limited to, the
following measures:
(1) Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible and that disturbed portions of the
site are stabilized as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have
temporarily or permanently ceased;
(2) Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit
runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site to the extent feasible;
(3) Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles, the generation of dust, and the
escape of other windblown waste from the site;
(4) Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, asphalt and
mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United States;
(5) Measures to prevent and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other
hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to assure proper cleanup and
disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal, and local requirements;
(6) Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including
covering waste materials, minimizing ground contact with hazardous chemicals and trash, and
installing and maintaining covered receptacles for rubbish and garbage to assure that such waste
materials are not blown or carried by rainfall runoff from the site;
(7) Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other best
management practices to maintain them in good and effective operating condition; and
(8) Installation of structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in
stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed. Structural
measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed structural measures
may include, but not be limited to, the following: stem water detention structures (including wet
ponds); stormwater retention structures; flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and
natural depressions; other velocity dissipation devices; infiltration of runoff on site; and sequential
systems which combine several practices. Operators of construction sites are only responsible for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater management measures prior to final stabilization of the
site, and are not responsible for maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with construction
activity have terminated.
(b) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any
construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to
precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or exit the site, at least once every
seven calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of a storm that is 0.5 inches or greater. All erosion and
sediment control measures and other identified best management practices shall be observed in order to ensure
that they are operating correctly and are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the
MS4. Based on the results of the inspection, best management practices shall be modified as appropriate, and as
soon as is practicable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/562
(c) Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and individually
responsible for compliance with the requirements in this section.
(d) Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who
is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract, for implementing a best management practices control
measure, is jointly and individually responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/her part to adequately
implement that control measure.
Sec. 13.1309 Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity–Management Plan Submittal and
Review
(a) Unless within one or more of the exceptions specified in subsection (f), below, all operators of sites of
construction activity, including clearing, grading, excavation, and landfilling activities, shall prepare and submit
the following documents to the building department at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the
commencement of construction activities (unless, pursuant to subsection (b), below, the director expressly
allows construction to be commenced within a shorter period of time following the document submittal).
(1) An identifying notice containing the following information:
(A) The name, address, and telephone number of each operator of the construction activity;
(B) The name, address, and telephone number of each owner of the construction site;
(C) The location of the construction site, by street address and legal description; and
(D) A description of the nature of the construction project.
(2) Plans and specifications illustrating and describing the best management practices required by
Section 13.1308(a), above, that will be implemented at the construction site. Such plans and
specifications shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, except in
instances of land clearing or landfilling disturbing less than 12,000 square feet of land without any
existing plans or present intention of erecting a building or other structure on the site.
(b) The director may allow construction to be commenced within fewer than fifteen (15) calendar days
following submittal of the documents required by subsection (a), above, if he/she expressly determines that:
(1) The required identifying notice and management plans and specifications are complete and
satisfactory;
(2) The director has been afforded adequate time and opportunity to review the management plans
and specifications; and
(3) The management practices described in the plans and observed upon any site inspection
conducted are adequate to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other
materials associated with construction activities to the maximum extent practicable.
(c) If, upon the director's review of the management plans and specifications required by subsection (a), above
(or any modified plans required by subsection (e), below) and any site inspection that the director may conduct,
the director determines that the management practices described in the plans or observed upon the site inspection
are not adequate to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated
with construction activities to the maximum extent practicable, the director may issue an order prohibiting the
commencement, or the continuation, of any construction activity at the site. Any order issued by the director
under the authority of this subsection may be in the form of a compliance order under Section 13.1318, an
emergency cease and desist order under Section 13.1320, or a stop work order under Section 13.1321.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/562
(d) The City may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary
to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the management practices
described in the plans or observed upon a site inspection by the director are determined not to control and reduce
the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with construction activities to the
maximum extent practicable.
(e) Whenever the management practices at a construction site are modified (as a result of change in the
construction project, in order to implement more effective management practices, in response to an order or
request from the city, or for any other reason), a written description of such modifications of the management
practices, signed and sealed by a professional engineer, shall be submitted to the director as soon as possible, but
in no case later than seven (7) calendar days following the change in the management practices.
(f) The requirements of this section shall not apply to any of the following activities:
(1) Any construction activity that results in the disturbance of one or more acres of total land area,
or that is part of a common plan of development or sale within which one or more acres of total land
area are disturbed, and any other construction activity for which an NPDES permit is required for
stormwater discharges associated with that construction activity. (In such circumstances, the
requirements of Section 13.1310 apply in lieu of this section.)
(2) Any public works construction project that is administered, performed, contracted, or funded
(in whole or in part) by the city.
(3) Any construction activity, not a part of a larger plan of development of one acres or more,
related to the construction, alteration, or addition to a single-family, duplex or four-plex residential
structure, or an accessory use to any such structure, where one (1) primary structure is constructed
per legal block and the construction activity does not result in the disturbance of more than 12,000
square feet of total land area.
(4) Any construction incident to repair or maintenance of a utility line (such as for
telecommunications, electricity, water, sewer, and natural gas). (Construction incident to the laying of
new utility lines or replacement of existing lines is not exempted from this section by this
subsection.)
(5) Interior alteration of an existing building when the alteration does not increase the square
footage, area, or height of the building.
(6) Construction of a fence, but no exemption is granted by this subsection for construction of a
retaining wall or a fence that may significantly obstruct or change the direction of flow of water.
(7) Any construction activity that the director expressly finds not to cause, or threaten to cause, any
discharge of any harmful quantity of any material associated with construction activity into the MS4
or to any other waters of the United States.
Sec. 13.1310 Five-Acre Disturbances from Construction Activity
All operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading, excavation, and landfilling activities,
that result in the disturbance of five or more acres of total land area, or that are part of a common plan of
development or sale within which five or more acres of total land area are disturbed, or who are required to
obtain an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity, shall comply with the
following requirements (in addition to those in Section 13.1308).
(1) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharges from a construction site
under the NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites (the “construction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/562
general permit”) shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) to the director of public
works, and to the building department, at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the commencement
of construction activities. If the construction activity is already underway upon the effective date of
this article, the NOI shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days after the effective date of this
article. For stormwater discharges from construction sites where the operator changes, an NOI shall
be submitted at least two (2) calendar days prior to when the new operator commences work at the
site.
(2) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented prior to
the beginning of construction activities in accordance with the requirements of the construction
general permit or any individual NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the
construction site, and with any additional requirement imposed by or under this article and any other
city ordinance.
(3) The SWPPP shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed professional engineer. The
signature and seal of the licensed professional engineer shall constitute his/her attestation that the
SWPPP fully complies with the requirements of the construction general permit, or with any
applicable individual NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, and
with any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. The SWPPP shall contain the name,
title, and business address of the licensed professional engineer signing it, and the date that he/she did
so.
(4) The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the construction
general permit and this article. Any update or modification to the SWPPP shall be prepared, signed,
and sealed by a licensed professional engineer.
(5) The SWPPP shall be prepared and submitted to the building department at least fifteen (15)
calendar days prior to the commencement of construction activities. If the construction activity is
already underway upon the effective date of this article, the SWPPP shall be submitted within thirty
(30) calendar days after the effective date of this article.
(6) A copy of any SWPPP that is required by subsection (2), above, shall be submitted to the city
in conjunction with any application for a building permit, grading permit, site development plan
approval, and any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction at the site.
(7) If, upon the director's review of the SWPPP (or any modification to the SWPPP) and any site
inspection that the director may conduct, the director determines that the SWPPP does not comply
with the requirements of the construction general permit, any individual NPDES permit issued for
stormwater discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under
this article, the director may issue an order prohibiting the commencement, or the continuation, of
any construction activity at the site. Also, if at any time the director determines that the SWPPP is not
being fully implemented, the director may similarly issue an order prohibiting the continuation of any
construction activity at the site. Any order issued by the director under the authority of this
subsection may be in the form of a compliance order under Section 13.1318, an emergency cease and
desist order under Section 13.1320, or a stop work order under Section 13.1321.
(8) Upon review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that is conducted, the city may deny
approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence
or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the SWPPP does not comply
with the requirements of the construction general permit, any individual or group NPDES permit
issued for stormwater discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by
or under this article. Also, if at any time the city determines that the SWPPP is not being fully
implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any
other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, at the
site.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/562
(9) All contractors and subcontractors identified in an SWPPP shall sign a copy of the following
certification statement before conducting any professional service identified in the SWPPP:
“I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit that authorizes the stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity from the construction site identified as part of this
certification.”
The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature; the name,
address, and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description)
of the site; and the date the certification is made.
(10) The SWPPP, with the licensed professional engineer's signature, seal, and date affixed, and the
certifications of contractors and subcontractors required by subsection (9), above, and with any
modifications attached, shall be retained at the construction site from the date of commencement of
construction through the date of final stabilization.
(11) The operator shall make a copy of the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the
director and any other authorized city inspector at the construction site upon request (as well as to
EPA and state inspectors).
(12) The director may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the
requirements of the construction general permit, any applicable individual NPDES permit issued for
stormwater discharges from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under
this article. Such notification shall identify those provisions of the permit or ordinance which are not
being met by the SWPPP, and identify which provisions of the SWPPP require modifications in order
to meet such requirements. Within seven (7) calendar days of such notification from the director (or
as otherwise provided by the director), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP
and shall submit to the director a written certification that the requested modifications have been
made.
(13) The operator shall modify the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of
pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, and which has not otherwise been
addressed in the SWPPP, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or significantly
minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective of controlling pollutants in
stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. In addition, the SWPPP shall be
modified to identify any new contractor and/or subcontractor that will implement a measure in the
SWPPP. All modifications to the SWPPP signed and sealed by a professional engineer shall be
submitted to the director within seven (7) calendar days of a change, determination of ineffectiveness
(self or city inspection), or effective date of changes in contractor and/or subcontractor.
(14) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed
areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials
that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or
exit the site, at least once every seven (7) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end
of the storm that is 0.5 inches or greater. Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that
are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering
the drainage system. Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWPPP shall be
observed to ensure that they are operating correctly. Where discharge locations or points are
accessible, they shall be inspected to ascertain whether erosion control measures are effective in
preventing significant impacts to receiving waters or the MS4. Locations where vehicles enter or exit
the site shall be inspected for evidence of off-site sediment tracking.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/562
(15) Based on the results of the inspections required by subsection (14), above, the site description
and/or the pollution prevention measures identified in the SWPPP shall be modified as appropriate,
but in no case later than seven (7) calendar days following the inspection. Such modifications shall
provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within seven (7) calendar days
following the inspection. All modifications to the SWPPP shall be submitted to the director within
seven (7) calendar days of the date of inspection.
(16) A report summarizing the scope of any inspection required by subsection (14), above, and the
name(s) and qualifications of personnel making the inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, major
observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP, and actions taken in accordance with
subsection (15), above, shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least three years from
the date that the site is finally stabilized. Such report shall identify any incidence of noncompliance.
Where a report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the report shall contain a
certification that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the facility's NPDES permit, and this
article. The report shall be certified and signed by the person responsible for making it.
(17) The operator shall retain copies of any SWPPP and all reports required by this article or by the
NPDES permit for the site, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, for a period of at least
three years from the date that the site is finally stabilized.
(18) Where a site has been finally stabilized and all stormwater discharges from construction
activities that are authorized by this article and by the NPDES permit for those construction activities
are eliminated, or where the operator of all stormwater discharges at a facility changes, the operator
of the construction site shall submit to the director of public works, and to any other responsible
personnel, a notice of termination (NOT) that includes the information required for notices of
termination by the construction general permit.
(19) Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or the duly authorized
representative thereof) shall submit to the responsible personnel written certification by a licensed
professional engineer that the site has been finally stabilized. (See definition of final stabilization in
this article.) The city may withhold an occupancy or use permit for any premises constructed on the
site until such certification of final stabilization has been filed and the responsible personnel has
determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and
that any required permanent structural controls have been completed.
Sec. 13.1311 Stormwater Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity
(a) All operators of:
(1) Municipal landfills;
(2) Hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and recovery facilities;
(3) Industrial facilities that are subject to Section 313 of Title III of the Superfund Amendments
and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) 42, USC Section 11023; and
(4) Industrial facilities that the director determines are contributing a substantial pollutant loading
to the MS4, which are sources of stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, shall
comply with the following requirements:
(A) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharge associated with
industrial activity under the NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity (the baseline industrial general permit) or the NPDES stormwater multisector
general permit for industrial activities (the multi-sector general permit) shall submit a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/562
signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) to the director at least 2 calendar days prior to the
commencement of the industrial activity at the facility. If industrial activity requiring an
NPDES stormwater permit is already underway upon the effective date of this article, a copy of
the permit assignment notice or the NOI shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days.
Where the operator of a facility with a stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity
which is covered by an NPDES general permit changes, the new operator of the facility shall
submit an NOI at least two (2) calendar days prior to the change. (Note: Reference within this
section to an NPDES general permit or to the appropriate NPDES general permit shall be
deemed to refer to either the baseline industrial general permit or the multi-sector general
permit.)
(B) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in
accordance with the requirements of the appropriate NPDES general permit or any individual
NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, and with any
additional requirement imposed by or under this article, and any other city ordinance.
(C) The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the NOI to the director and, for a
new industrial operation, prior to the commencement of the industrial activity at the facility.
The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the appropriate
NPDES general permit and this article.
(D) A copy of any NOI that is required by subsection (a)(4)(A), above, shall be submitted to
the city in conjunction with any application for a permit or any other city approval necessary to
commence or continue operation of the industrial facility.
(E) The director may require any operator who is required by subsection (a)(4)(B), above, to
prepare a SWPPP to submit the SWPPP, and any modifications thereto, to the director for
review. Such submittal and review of the SWPPP may be required by the director prior to
commencement of or during industrial activity at the facility.
(F) Upon the director's review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that he/she may
conduct, the city may deny approval of any application for a permit or any other city approval
necessary to commence or continue operation of the facility, on the grounds that the SWPPP
does not comply with the requirements of the appropriate NPDES general permit or any
individual NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, or any
additional requirement imposed by or under this article or other city ordinances. Also, if at any
time the director determines that the SWPPP is not being fully implemented, the city may
similarly deny approval of any application for a permit or other city approval necessary to
commence or continue operation of the industrial facility.
(G) The SWPPP, with any modifications attached, shall be retained at the industrial facility
from the date of commencement of operations until all stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity at the facility are eliminated and the required notice of termination (NOT) has
been submitted in accordance with the appropriate NPDES general permit.
(H) The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the
director upon request (as well as to EPA and state inspectors).
(I) The director may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the
requirements of the appropriate NPDES general permit, any applicable individual NPDES
permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, or any additional
requirement imposed by or under this article or other city ordinances. Such notification shall
identify those provisions of the permit or ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP, and
identify which provisions of the SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such
requirements. Within thirty (30) calendar days of such notification from the director (or as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/562
otherwise provided by the director), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP
and shall submit to the director a written certification that the requested changes have been
made.
(J) The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of
pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, or if the SWPPP proves to be
ineffective in eliminating or significantly minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the
general objective of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with industrial
activity,
(K) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator) shall inspect equipment and areas of the
facility specified in the SWPPP at appropriate intervals. A set of tracking or follow-up
procedures shall be used to ensure that appropriate actions are taken in response to the
inspections. Records of inspection shall be maintained and made available to the director upon
request.
(L) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator) shall conduct comprehensive site
compliance evaluations as required by the appropriate NPDES general permit at intervals of no
less than once per year. Based on the results of the compliance evaluation, the description of
potential pollutant sources and the pollution prevention measures and controls that are
identified in the SWPPP shall be revised as appropriate within two weeks of such evaluation
and shall provide for implementation of any changes to the SWPPP in a timely manner, but in
no case more than twelve weeks after the compliance evaluation.
(M) A report summarizing the scope of the comprehensive site compliance evaluation
required by the appropriate NPDES general permit, personnel making the compliance
inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, major observations relating to the implementation of
the SWPPP, and actions taken in accordance with necessary and appropriate plan revisions shall
be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least one year after all stormwater discharges
from the facility are eliminated and the required NOT has been submitted. The report shall
identify any incidence of noncompliance; or, if the report does not identify any incidence of
noncompliance, the report shall contain a certification that the facility is in compliance with the
SWPPP, the applicable NPDES permit, and this article. The report shall be signed by the
individual responsible for the comprehensive site compliance evaluation, and it shall be
submitted to the director within ten calendar days of its completion.
(N) If the industrial facility is required by the appropriate NPDES general permit to conduct
monitoring, records of the monitoring results shall be retained at the facility and made available
to the director upon request.
(O) By written notice, the director may require any industrial facility identified in accordance
with this section to implement a monitoring program at its expense that includes the submission
of quantitative data on the following constituents:
(i) Any pollutants limited in effluent guidelines subcategories;
(ii) Any pollutant listed in an existing NPDES permit for the facility;
(iii) Oil and grease, COD, pH, 30D5, TSS, total phosphorus, total Kjeldahl nitrogen,
nitrate plus nitrite nitrogen; and
(iv) Information on discharges required under 40 CFR 122.21(g)(7)(iii) and (iv).
The director may require written reports of any such monitoring to be submitted to him/her.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/562
(P) By written notice, the director may require any industrial facility identified in this section
to conduct semi-annual or annual monitoring of stormwater discharges, or the director may
specify an alternative monitoring frequency and/or specify additional parameters to be
analyzed. The director may require written reports of any such additional monitoring to be
submitted to him/her.
(Q) The operator shall retain the SWPPP until at least one year after stormwater discharges
associated with industrial activity at the facility are eliminated, or that operator is no longer
operating the facility, and a notice of termination (NOT) in compliance with the appropriate
NPDES general permit has been submitted. The operator shall retain all records of all
monitoring information, copies of all required reports, and records of all data used to complete
the NOI, until at least one year after all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity
at the facility are eliminated, or the operator ceases to operate that facility, and the required
notice of termination (NOT) has been submitted,
(R) For discharges subject to monitoring requirements of the appropriate NPDES general
permit, in addition to the records-retention requirements of subsection (Q), above, operators
shall retain records of all monitoring information collected for the period of time required by
the appropriate NPDES general permit. Operators must submit such monitoring results, and/or a
summary thereof, to the director upon his/her request.
(S) Upon the effective date of this article, any discharge composed of coal pile runoff shall
comply with the following limitations:
(i) No discharge shall exceed a maximum concentration for any time of 50 mg/l total
suspended solids, nor shall such runoff be diluted with stormwater or other flows in order
to meet this limitation;
(ii) The pH of such discharges shall be within the range of 6.0–9.0.
Any untreated overflow from facilities designed, constructed, and operated to treat the
volume of coal pile runoff which is associated with a ten-year, 24-hour rainfall event shall not
be subject to the 50 mg/l limitation for total suspended solids.
(T) Upon the effective date of this article, no discharge shall contain any of the following
hazardous metals in a concentration exceeding the maximum concentrations (in mg/l) of each
of the hazardous metals listed below:
Metal Average Daily
Composite
Grab Sample
Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3
Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0
Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/562
Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0
Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0
Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5
Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0
Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01
Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0
Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2
Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0
(U) Where all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity that are authorized by
this article, and by the NPDES permit for those discharges from industrial activities, are
eliminated, or where the operator of stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at
a facility changes, the operator of the facility shall submit to the director a notice of termination
(NOT) that includes the information required for notices of termination by the appropriate
NPDES general permit.
(b) Any owner of a facility with a stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity to which subsection
(a), above, applies, whether or not he/she is an operator of the facility, is jointly and severally responsible for
compliance with the best management practices (BMP) measures required in the SWPPP for the facility.
(c) Upon request by the director, all owners and operators of any facility that experience a problem complying
with the requirements of this article, the industrial general permit, or any applicable individual or group NPDES
permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, shall consult with the director, any other
representative of the city, and any third party designated by the city in an attempt to achieve compliance as soon
as practicable. If compliance is not achieved to the city's satisfaction, the city may, in its discretion, report the
noncompliance to EPA and/or the state, and/or the city may itself undertake any enforcement action authorized
by Sections 13.1315 through 13.1321, and 13.1324 through 13.1330 of this article. Exercise of the city's option
for consultation under this subsection shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement
action against any owner or operator of the facility.
Sec. 13.1312 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/562
(a) The director, or his/her authorized representative, shall have the right to enter the premises of any person
discharging stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United States to
determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article, and with any state or federal
discharge permit, limitation, or requirement. Dischargers shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of
any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the director, upon request, any SWPPP's,
modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and
any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this article and with any state or
federal discharge permit.
(b) Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the director or his authorized representative(s) will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities.
(c) The director shall have the right to set up on the dischargers property, or require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations.
(d) The director may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified
sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency
and parameters of any such required monitoring.
(e) The director may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's
expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(f) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or
sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger.
(g) Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of this
article.
Sec. 13.1313 Search Warrants
If the director, or his/her authorized representative, has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction. For purposes of this section, the city manager, director of public works, the city engineer, and the
duly authorized representatives of these city departmental directors are declared to be health officers, as that
term is used in the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 18.05.
Sec. 13.1314 Reports of Violations
(a) All citizens are encouraged to report any spills, releases, illicit connections, other instances of anyone
discharging pollutants into the MS4 or waters of the United States, and any other violation of this article of
which they become aware, to the director, his/her delegate, or any person designated by the city manager to
receive such citizen reports.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/562
(b) Such citizen reports may be made by telephone, in writing, or in person. A written record of each citizen
report to the city will be prepared and kept on file for a period of three (3) years, and a copy of the city's record
of the report will be furnished to the reporting citizen upon request. Also upon request, the city engineer or other
responsible city official will inform the reporting citizen of any action undertaken by the city in response to the
citizen's report,
(c) The operator and the owner of any commercial or industrial activity shall report any spills, releases, illicit
connections, or other instances where pollutants are discharged into the MS4 or waters of the United States and
any other violation of this article for which they are responsible to the director, his/her delegate, or any person
designated by the city manager to receive such reports.
(d) The operator and the owner of any commercial or industrial activity shall report all incidents enumerated
in subsection (c), above, in accordance with the following:
(1) A hazardous and/or toxic material spill or release shall be immediately reported to the city fire
department.
(2) Other instances where pollutants are discharged into the MS4 or waters of the United States by
spill, release, illicit connections or other means shall be reported to the environmental specialist
within the department of public works.
(e) Both the operator and the owner of any commercial or industrial activity which has resulted in a spill or
release of hazardous/toxic materials or a substance of a polluting nature is responsible for proper notification of
the incident to the appropriate county, state, and federal agency. The reporting of a spill/release to the city does
not release the owner or operator from reporting to appropriate county, state and federal officials.
(f) Thus, dependent on the type of release and the nature of the emergency caused thereby (i.e., life
threatening or not), the following agencies, in addition to the environmental specialist within the department of
public works, are specified to be notified:
(1) City fire department;
(2) City police department;
(3) Public works department;
(4) Texas Commission on Environmental Quality; and
(5) U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Sec. 13.1315 Warning Notice
When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any
order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the
particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the
matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of
the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
warning notice.
Sec. 13.1316 Notification of Violation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/562
When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any
order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon that person a written notice of violation. Within ten (10)
calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the
alleged violator to the director. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no
corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to
the director within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no
way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency
action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. The director may enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any person responsible for noncompliance with any provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such
documents may include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative
orders issued pursuant to Sections 13.1318, 13.1319, and 13.1320 of this article and shall be judicially
enforceable.
Sec. 13.1317 Show Cause Hearing
The director may order any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any
order issued hereunder, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the alleged violator specifying the time and place for the hearing, the
proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the alleged violator show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any authorized representative of the alleged violator. The hearing shall be conducted
pursuant to the rights and procedures specified in Section 13.1322(g) of this article. A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the alleged violator.
Sec. 13.1318 Compliance Orders
When the director finds that any person has violated, continues to violate, or threatens to violate, any provision
of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may issue an order to the violator directing that the
violator come into compliance within a specified time limit, prior to commencement or continuance of
operation, or immediately. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the
amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 and waters of the United States. A compliance order may not extend
the deadline for compliance established by a state or federal standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the person of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
Sec. 13.1319 Remediation, Abatement, and Restoration Orders
When the director finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any
order issued hereunder, and that such violation has adversely affected the MS4, or the waters of the United
States, the director may issue an order to the violator directing him/her to undertake and implement any
appropriate action to remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4, or the waters of
the United Stares, and/or to restore any part of the MS4, or the waters of the United States. Such remedial,
abatement, and restoration action may include, but not be limited to monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of
the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action;
confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/562
contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the
environment that may result from the violation; restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources
damaged by the violation. The order may direct that the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration be
accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be completed within a specified period of time. An
order issued under this section does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of an order under this section shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against any responsible party.
Sec. 13.1320 Emergency Cease and Desist Orders
(a) When the director finds that any person has violated, continues to violate, or threatens to violate, any
provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and
that the person's violation(s), or threatened violation(s), have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the director may issue an
order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements of this article; and
(2) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(b) Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this section shall immediately comply and
stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, including immediate termination of a facility's water
supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The director may allow the person to commence or
recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this
article. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment
shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken
to prevent any future occurrence, to the director within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the emergency cease
and desist order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the violator.
Sec. 13.1321 Stop Work Orders
Whenever the director finds that any operator of a construction site has violated, threatens to violate, or
continues to violate, any provision of Sections 13.1307 through 13.1320 of this article, or any order issued
hereunder, the director may issue a stop work order to the operator, and require that a copy of the stop work
order be posted at the construction site and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions
affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception is made by the director, the stop work order shall
prohibit any further construction activity, or any commencement of construction activity, at the site and shall bar
any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, or any other city
approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. Issuance of a stop
work order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
Sec. 13.1322 Reconsideration and Hearing
(a) Any person subject to a compliance order under Section 13.1318, a remediation, abatement, or restoration
order under Section 13.1319, an emergency cease and desist order under Section 13.1320, or a stop work order
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/562
under Section 13.1321 of this article may petition the director to reconsider the basis for his/her order within
fifteen (15) calendar days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order.
(b) Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any
further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order.
(c) In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the reasons for the
objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any
alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the petitioning party requests a
hearing on its petition.
(d) The effect of any compliance order under Section 13.1318, remediation, abatement, or restoration order
under Section 13.1319, and any stop work order under Section 13.1321 shall be stayed pending the director's
reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the director expressly makes a written
determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist order under Section 13.1320
shall not be stayed pending the director's reconsideration, or any hearing thereon, unless the director expressly
and in writing stays his/her emergency order.
(e) Within thirty (30) calendar days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the director shall either:
(1) Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly;
(2) Deny the petition without a hearing, if no material issue of fact is raised; or
(3) If a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the
petition.
(f) Written notice of any hearing set by the director pursuant to subsection (e), above, shall be served on the
petitioning party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) calendar
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the petitioning party.
(g) The director may himself/herself conduct the hearing and take evidence, or he/she may designate any
employee of the city or any specially designated attorney or engineer to:
(1) Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
(2) Take evidence;
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the director for action thereon.
(h) At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. Any party
is entitled to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence and to conduct such crossexamination
as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A transcript will be made available to
any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(i) After the director has reviewed the evidence, he/she shall either: (1) grant the petition; (2) deny the
petition; or (3) grant the petition in part and deny it in part. The director may modify his/her order as is
appropriate based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and his/her action on the petition.
Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
Sec. 13.1323 Appeal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/562
Any person who remains adversely affected by the director's order after petitioning for reconsideration pursuant
to Section 13.1322, or who is subject to an order of the director issued following a show cause hearing under
Section 13.1317, may challenge the final action of the director in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 13.1324 Civil Remedies
(a) Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article that
relates to:
(1) The preservation of public safety relating to the materials or methods used in construction of
any structure or improvement of real property;
(2) The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a building or other structure or
improvement;
(3) The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or construction of buildings, including street
design;
(4) Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements;
(5) Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding
and living places for insects and rodents; or
(6) Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a nonpoint
source, into the MS4;
the city may invoke Sections 54.012–54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code and petition the state district
court or the county court at law of Tarrant County, through the city attorney, for either the injunctive relief
specified in subsection (b) or the civil penalties specified in subsection (c) below, or both the specified injunctive
relief and civil penalties.
(b) Pursuant to Section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may obtain against the owner or
the operator of a facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
(1) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to any matter
specified in subsections (a)(1)–(6), above; or
(2) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any
provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsections (a)(1)–(6), above.
(c) Pursuant to Section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may recover a civil penalty of
not more than $1,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of this article that relates to any matter
specified in subsections (a)(1)–(5) above, and a civil penalty of not more than $5,000.00 per day for each
violation of any provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a)(6) above, if the city
proves that:
(1) The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this article; and
(2) After the defendant received notice of this article's provisions, the defendant committed acts in
violation of this article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this article.
Sec. 13.1325 Criminal Penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/562
(a) Any person who has violated any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, shall be strictly
liable for such violation, regardless of the presence or absence of a culpable mental state, and shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day.
(b) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than $2,000.00 per violation, per day.
(c) In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator,
the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator,
and any other factor as justice requires.
Sec. 13.1326 Civil Suit Under the Texas Water Code
Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any provision of Section 26.121 of the Texas Water
Code, or any rule, permit, or order of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, has occurred or is
occurring within the jurisdiction of the city, exclusive of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same
manner as the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, may have a suit instituted in a state district court
through its city attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or both authorized in Sections 7.031 and 7.032
of the Texas Water Code, against the person who committed or is committing or threatening to commit the
violation. This power is exercised pursuant to Section 7.351 of the Texas Water Code. In any suit brought by the
city under this section, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality is a necessary and indispensable party.
Sec. 13.1327 Remedies Nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under
state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator. These
actions may be taken concurrently.
Sec. 13.1328 Performance and Maintenance Bonds
The director may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated
with construction or industrial activity to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a
value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this article, any order
issued hereunder, any required best management practice, and/or any SWPPP provision, and/or to achieve final
stabilization of the site. The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site
development plan, or any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or any
industrial activity at the site, or to assume occupancy, until such a performance or maintenance bond has been
filed.
Sec. 13.1329 Liability Insurance
The director may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated
with construction or industrial activity to submit proof that it has obtained liability insurance, or other financial
assurance, in an amount greater than or equal to a value determined by the director, that is sufficient to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/562
remediate, restore, and abate any damage to the MS4, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the
environment that is caused by the discharge.
Sec. 13.1330 Nuisance
A violation of any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance
and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 8 of this code.
(Ordinance 877 adopted 2/12/08)
ARTICLE 13.1400 WATER CONSERVATION, DROUGHT AND WATER EMERGENCY
Sec. 13.1401 Generally
(a) Purpose and Scope. This section outlines the city's water conservation and emergency water demand
management efforts. These efforts consist of two plans: (1) a water conservation plan; and (2) a drought
contingency and emergency water management plan. The city will revise these plans as needed to meet
objectives requested by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (“TCEQ”) via sections 288.1 to
288.30 of title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code (“TAC”), regional water planning groups, the City of Fort
Worth and to meet the goals stated in each plan. Each plan shall be administered by the city manager or his/her
official designee (“city manager”).
(b) Required Submittals. The water conservation and the drought and water emergency plans must be
submitted to the executive director of TCEQ no later than May 1, 2009, and every five years after that date to
coincide with the regional water planning group. Any revised plans must be submitted to the executive director
of TCEQ within 90 days of adoption. The revised plans must include the implementation reports.
(1) The list of dates and descriptions of the conservation measures implemented.
(2) Data about whether or not targets in the plans are being met.
(3) The actual amount of water saved.
(4) If the targets are not being met, an explanation as to why any of the targets are not being met,
including any progress on that particular target.
(Ordinance 909, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/09)
Sec. 13.1402 Water Conservation Plan
(a) Water Conservation Plan. The city has adopted a water conservation plan which is on file and available for
inspection at the city secretary's office. (Ordinance 1144 adopted 6/11/19)
(b) Periodic Review and Annual Reporting. The city will review the water conservation plan, prepare annual
reports, and update the plan as appropriate. (Ordinance 909, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/09)
Sec. 13.1403 Drought Contingency and Emergency Water Management Plan
(a) Drought Contingency and Emergency Water Management Plan. The city has adopted a drought
contingency and emergency water management plan which is on file and available for inspection at the city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/562
secretary's office. (Ordinance 1144 adopted 6/11/19)
(b) Emergency Authority. This section applies in the event of water shortages or delivery limitations in the
city's water supply. The city manager or his/her official designee (city manager) is authorized to implement
measures prescribed when required by this section and by the drought contingency and emergency water
management plan. The city manager is authorized to enforce the measures implemented and to promulgate
regulations not in conflict with this section or state and federal laws, in aid of enforcement. The following water
restrictions shall be enforced in case of drought or emergency conditions and are applicable to:
(1) All persons and premises within the city using water from the water system;
(2) All retail customers who live in unincorporated areas within the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction and are served by the water system; and
(3) All wholesale service customers outside the city to the extent provided in subsection (k).
(c) Initiation of Plan Stages. The city manager may order that the appropriate stage of the drought contingency
and emergency water management plan be initiated upon determination that drought conditions or a water
emergency exists. To be effective, the order must be:
(1) Made by public announcement to local media; and
(2) Published on the city's website.
(d) Notification of TCEQ. The director of public works shall notify the executive director of TCEQ within
five (5) business days of the implementation of any mandatory provisions of the drought contingency and
emergency water management plan.
(e) Duration of Stage; Change. A stage will remain in effect until the conditions that triggered initiation of the
stage have been eliminated. If the stage is initiated because of excessive demands, all initiated actions will
remain in effect through September 30 of the year in which they are triggered unless the city manager
determines that conditions exist that will allow termination of the stage before September 30. When conditions
change, the city manager may terminate, upgrade or downgrade the stage. Any such change must be made in the
same manner prescribed in subsection (c).
(f) Violation of Section. A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes, causes or permits a use of water
contrary to the mandatory water use restrictions implemented by the city manager as prescribed in the drought
contingency and emergency water management plan. For purposes of this subsection, it is presumed that a
person has knowingly made, caused or permitted a use of water contrary to the mandatory water use restrictions
implemented if the mandatory restrictions have been formally ordered consistent with the terms of subsection (e)
and:
(1) The manner of use has been prohibited by the drought contingency and emergency water
management plan;
(2) The amount of water used exceeds that allowed by the drought contingency and emergency
water management plan; or
(3) The manner or amount used violates the terms and conditions of a compliance agreement made
pursuant to a variance granted by the city manager.
(g) Penalties/Enforcement of Violations. Any person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with a mandatory water use restriction implemented in accordance with this
section or the drought contingency and emergency water management plan will be given a written warning that
he has violated a mandatory water use restriction as a first offense. For each subsequent offense, any person who
is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with a mandatory water use
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/562
restriction implemented in accordance with this section and the drought contingency and emergency water
management plan may be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). In addition, the following
penalties shall apply:
(1) A person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply
with a mandatory water use restriction implemented in accordance with this section and stage 1 of the
drought contingency and emergency water management plan as a second offense, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(2) A person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply
with a mandatory water use restriction implemented in accordance with this section and stage 2 of the
drought contingency and emergency water management plan as a second offense shall be fined not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(3) A person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply
with a mandatory water use restriction implemented in accordance with this section and stage 3 of the
drought contingency and emergency water management plan as a second offense shall be fined not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(4) If a person is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply
with a mandatory water use restriction implemented in accordance with this section and the drought
contingency and emergency water management plan as a third offense, the city manager may either:
(A) Install a flow restrictor in the water line to the premises where the violations occurred to
limit the amount of water that may pass through the meter in a twenty-four-hour period or a
lockout device to a backflow assembly; or
(B) Discontinue water service to the premises where the violation occurred.
(h) Variances. During the times the emergency order is operative, the city manager may grant variances only
under the following circumstances and conditions:
(1) The applicant signs a compliance agreement on a form provided by the city manager, and
approved by the city attorney, agreeing to use the water only in the amount and manner permitted by
the variance;
(2) Granting of the variance would not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water
supply;
(3) Failure to approve the variance would result in an extreme hardship or need relating to the
health, safety or welfare of the applicant; and
(4) Granting the variance would not adversely affect the premises at which the violation occurred.
(i) Revocation of Variances. The city manager may revoke a variance when he or she determines that:
(1) The conditions of subsection (h) are not being met or are no longer applicable;
(2) The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or
(3) Revocation is advisable to protect the health, safety or welfare of other persons.
(j) Appeal. All appeals of the denial or revocation of a variance shall come to the city manager unless the city
manager has issued the decision, then they shall come to the city council. Appeals shall be filed by written notice
with the city manager within ten (10) days after issuance of the decision. The appellate decision shall be final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/562
(k) Wholesale Service to Customers Outside the City. The city manager shall advise customers receiving
wholesale water service from the city of actions taken under the drought contingency and emergency water
management plan. The city manager may restrict service to customers outside the city as permitted under the
contract and state law.
(l) Authority Under Other Laws. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the mayor,
the city council or the city manager to seek emergency relief under the provisions of any state or federal disaster
relief act.
(Ordinance 909, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/09)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.100 INTENT, PURPOSE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS*
Sec. 14.101 Interpretation Purpose and Conflict
In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, or general welfare. It is not
intended by these regulations to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties, provided, however, that where these regulations impose a greater restriction upon
the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or require larger open spaces than are imposed
or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of
these regulations shall govern. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 1A)
Sec. 14.102 Boundaries of Districts
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the official zoning
map accompanying and made a part of this article, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Streets and Alleys. The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown,
and where the districts designated on the official zoning map are bounded approximately by street or
alley lines, said street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
(2) Lot Lines. Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the property has
been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be
lot lines, and where the districts designated on the official zoning map are bounded approximately by
lot lines, said lot line shall be construed to be the boundary of such districts unless said boundaries
are otherwise indicated on the map.
(3) Unsubdivided Property. In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the official
zoning map shall be determined by use of the scale contained on such map, unless dimensions are
shown.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 1B)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/562
ARTICLE 14.200 DEFINITIONS
Sec. 14.201 General
For the purpose of these regulations certain terms and words are herewith defined as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; and words in
the plural number include the singular; the word “building” includes the word “structure;” the word “shall” is
mandatory, and not directory.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 2A)
Sec. 14.202 Definition of Words and Terms
Accessory Building or Use. A subordinate building on the same lot, or a portion of the main building the use of
which is clearly incidental to that of the main building; or a use customarily incidental to the main use of the
property.
Alley. A way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Antique Store. An establishment offering for sale, within a building articles such as glass, china, furniture or
similar furnishings and decorations which have values and significance as a result of age, design, or sentiment.
Apartment. A room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house arranged, intended, or designed for a place of
residence of a single-family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Apartment House. See Dwelling, Multiple.
Apartment Hotel. An apartment house which furnishes for the use of its tenants services ordinarily furnished by
hotels, but the privileges of which are not primarily available to the public.
Automobile Sales Area. An open area or lot used for the display or sale of automobiles, where no repair work is
done except minor reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises, and no dismantling of
cars or sale or keeping of used car parts or junk is permitted on the premises.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 2B)
Amusement Machine. Any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin, metal slug, token, or check that
dispenses, or is used or is capable of being used to dispense or afford, amusement, skill, or pleasure or is
operated for any purpose, other than for dispensing only merchandise, music, or service. The term includes a
marble machine, marble table machine, marble shooting machine, miniature racetrack machine, miniature
football machine, miniature golf machine, miniature bowling machine, billiard or pool game, or machine or
device that dispenses merchandise or commodities or plays music in connection with or in addition to dispensing
skill or pleasure; the term does not include any amusement machine designed exclusively for a child or
otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (An “amusement machine” pursuant to this definition is the same as a “skill
or pleasure coin-operated machine” pursuant to Texas Occupations Code Section 2153.002(9), as amended.)
Amusement Machine Establishment. For purposes of this zoning ordinance, any structure or part of a structure
where amusement machines are present and maintained as the primary use. For the purpose of this definition,
“primary use” means 51% or more of the gross floor area of the portion of the structure being used (not to
include any area of a structure being used as restroom facilities, storage, or for other purposes not open to the
public or customers).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/562
(Ordinance 692 adopted 7/9/02)
Basement. A story below the first story as hereinafter defined. See Story.
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases
where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the director of public works shall determine the outline of the
block.
Board of Adjustment. The board, as established in Article 14.700, Administration and Enforcement.
Boarding House or Lodging House. A building other than a hotel, occupied as a single housekeeping unit, where
lodging or meals are provided for five (5) or more persons for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements,
but not for the public or transients.
Hobby. An accessory use carried on by the occupant of the premises in a shop, studio or other work room, purely
for personal enjoyment, amusement or recreation; provided, that the articles produced or constructed in said
shop, studio, or work room are not sold either on or off the premises, and provided that such use will not be
obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or fumes.
Home Occupation. Any occupation which is customarily incidental to the main use of the premises as a dwelling
place, and is conducted by a member of a family residing in the dwelling, and in connection with which there is
kept no stock in trade nor commodity to be sold upon the premises; provided that no person is employed other
than a member of the immediate family, residing on the premises; provided further that no mechanical
equipment shall be used which will be obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibrations, noise, odor, dust, smoke,
or fumes. Home occupations may include an office of a physician, surgeon, dentist, artist, etc. The operation of
beauty culture schools, beauty parlors, barbershops, or dancing schools shall not be considered home
occupations.
Hospital, General. An institution providing in-patient medical or surgical care for the acutely sick or injured,
who are generally confined for relatively short periods of time. Included as an integral part of the institution are
such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, educational facilities, food services, and staff
offices.
Hospital, Long Term. An institution providing in-patient medical treatment of an intensive and specialized nature
for the chronically ill, who are generally confined for periods of time exceeding thirty (30) days. Long term
hospitals include homes for alcoholic, narcotic, or psychiatric patients and institutions for patients with a
contagious disease, such as tuberculosis sanitariums.
Hotel. A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or
without meals and in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping rooms usually occupied singly and no
provision is made for cooking in any individual room or apartment.
HUD-Code Manufactured Home. A structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which,
in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Industrialized Housing (Modular Homes). A residential structure that is designed for the use and occupancy of
one (1) or more families, that is constructed in one (1) or more modules or constructed using one (1) or more
modular components built at a location other than the permanent residential site, and that is designed to be used
as a permanent residential structure when the modules or modular components are transported to the permanent
residential site, and are erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include any residential structures that are in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/562
excess of three (3) stories or forty-nine (49) feet in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the
building entrance to the peak of the roof. The term shall not mean or apply to: (1) housing constructed of
sectional or panelized systems not utilizing modular components; or (2) and any ready-built home which is
constructed so the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the
purpose of selling it and moving it to another location.
Junk. Scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead or scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and their
alloys, and bones, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used rope, used tinfoil, used bottles, old cotton or used
machinery, used tools, used appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used boxes or crates, used pipe or pipe
fittings, used automobile or airplane tires, and other manufactured goods that are so worn, deteriorated or
obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition, subject to being dismantled for junk.
Kennel. Any building, lot or premises on or in which four (4) or more dogs or cats [at least eight (8) weeks of
age] are kept, or any building, lot, or premises where dogs or cats are housed or accepted for boarding, for which
remuneration is received.
Kindergarten. A school other than a public school for children of pre-public school age in which constructive
endeavors, object lessons and helpful games are prominent features of the curriculum.
Landscaping. Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees and palms,
and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand,
walls, or fences, but excluding paving.
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces
as are required under these regulations, and having its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved
place.
Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more streets. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on the
street on which it has its smallest dimensions, or as otherwise designated by the city plan commission.
Lot, Interior. A lot, the side line of which does not abut on any street.
Lot, Depth. The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line.
Lot Lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a map of which has been recorded in the office of the County
Clerk of Tarrant County.
Lot, Through. An interior lot having frontages on two (2) streets. Such through lot shall provide a front yard on
each street.
Lot Width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lines measured at right angles to the depth.
Manufactured Housing. Manufactured housing shall contain both mobile homes and HUD-code manufactured
homes as defined herein.
Masonry Materials. Consist of brick, stone, or if approved, concrete block, either precast or reinforced concrete
material, tile, or materials of equal characteristics.
Mini Warehouse Storage Facility (Indoor Storage Only). A commercial facility consisting of a building or group
of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual,
compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of a customer's goods or wares.
The rented space shall be for private use only.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/562
Mini Warehouse Storage Facility (with outdoor storage). An industrial facility consisting of a building or group
of buildings and outdoor paved parking surfaces for outdoor storage in a controlled access and fenced
compound. The buildings may contain varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access
stalls or lockers for the dead storage of a customer's goods or wares. The outdoor paved parking surfaces may be
utilized for the storage of recreational vehicles, cars, boats and other items typically stored outdoors. The rented
space shall be for private use only.
Mobile Home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which, in the traveling abode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Motel. A building or group of buildings, not more than two (2) stories in height, containing individual sleeping
or living units, specially designed for the convenience of transient motorists, and arranged so that the autos are
parked adjacent to the individual rooms by the guests themselves.
Nonconforming Use, Building, or Yard. A use, building or yard existing legally at the time of the passage of this
article, or future amendment, which does not by reason of design, use, or dimensions conform to the regulations
of the district in which it is situated. A use, building or yard established after the passage of this article, or future
amendment, which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated shall be considered
an illegal use, building or yard.
Nursing and Care Home. An institution providing meals and resident care and services for persons who are
generally admitted for periods of time exceeding thirty (30) days. Such service includes custodial or attendant
care, but may or may not provide for routine and regular medical and nursing services. Nursing and care home
include homes for the aged, and convalescent and rest homes.
Off-Street. Off the right-of-way of a public street or place.
Parking Area, Public. An open area other than a street, alley or place, used for the temporary parking of more
than four (4) self-propelled vehicles and available for public use whether free, for compensation or as an
accommodation for clients or customers.
Parking Area, Semi-Public. An open area other than a street, alley, or place, for temporary parking of more than
four (4) self-propelled vehicles as an accessory use to semi-public institutions, schools, churches, hospitals, and
noncommercial clubs.
Parking Space. A minimum off-street parking space for passenger automobiles shall be considered to be nine (9)
feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length, not including maneuvering space.
Philanthropic or Eleemosynary Institutions. An organized body or society for promoting a charitable;
benevolent, or educational objective, and the buildings for carrying on the work of such an organization. This
shall include a community center (public), welfare or health center.
Place. An open unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of
access to abutting property.
Planned Development. Development of land which is under unified control and is planned and developed as a
whole single development operation or programmed series of development, and is developed with special zoning
standards that are unique to a particular site and which usually vary from those standards required by this article
for other zoning districts.
Planning and Zoning Commission. The agency created by ordinance of the city council as an advisory body on
zoning platting and other matters over which it is given authority pursuant to the state law, city charter and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/562
ordinance.
Private Club. An association of persons meeting regularly for their mutual benefit or for the promotion of some
common purpose, supported jointly through payment of membership dues, all members having the right to vote
on club policies and business.
Servants' Quarters. An accessory building located on the same lot or grounds with the main building, and used
as living quarters for servants employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate domicile.
Utility services to servants quarters shall be supplied through meters serving the main building.
Site Plan. A detailed line drawing clearly describing a project and showing sufficient information to determine
the nature of the proposed development and providing adequate information to determine compliance with
applicable codes and ordinances.
Stable, Private. An accessory building for the keeping of horses, or mules owned by the occupants of the
premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
Stable, Public. A stable, other than a private or riding stable.
Stable, Riding. A structure in which horses or mules used for pleasure riding or driving are housed, boarded, or
kept for hire, including a riding track.
Story. That part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above,
or if there be no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. A
top story attic is a half story when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of
such story. The first story is the highest story having its interior floor surface not more than four (4) feet above
the curb level, or the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building where it is set back
from the street.
Street, Private. A private thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
Street, Public. A public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something
having a location on the ground; including but not limited to advertising signs, billboards and poster panels; but
exclusive of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls, sidewalks and curbs.
Structural Alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
Terminal; Motor Freight. The use of property or buildings for the temporary parking of motor freight vehicles or
trucks of common carriers, during loading and unloading and between trips, including necessary warehouse
space for storage of transitory freight.
Used Automobile Junk Area. An open area other than a street, alley or place, used to the dismantling or wrecking
of used automobiles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked automobiles or their parts.
Yard. An open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring to determine the width of a side yard, the
depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main
building shall be used.
Yard, Front. A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front
street line of the lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/562
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and
rear line of the main building, except that area included in the side yard as defined below.
Yard, Side. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the
required minimum rear yard.
Zoning Administrator. The official, or his designee, appointed by the city manager or his/her designee to enforce
and administer the terms of this article. The individual whose decisions and interpretations are appealed to the
board of adjustment.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 2B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 14.300 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Sec. 14.301 District Classifications
In order to regulate and redistrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings erected,
reconstructed, altered or enlarged for specified uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged; to regulate and determine the area of yards and other open
spaces and to regulate and limit the density of population, the city is hereby divided into districts of which there
shall be nine (9), known as:
(1) One-Family District, or District “SF-1”
(2) Moderate Density District, or Districts “MD”
(3) Planned Multi-family District, or District “P-MF”
(4) Manufactured Housing District, or District “MH”
(5) Commercial District, or District “C”
(6) Planned Commercial District, or District “P-C”
(7) Industrial District, or District “I”
(8) Planned Industrial District, or District “PI”
(9) Mixed Planned Development District or District “M-PD”
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 3A)
Sec. 14.302 Comparable Zoning District Classifications:
(a) District Comparison. Zoning districts established by the immediate prior zoning ordinance have been
either replaced with or amended as the following zoning districts. As listed, the new districts shall be considered
as being comparable to the immediate prior district. The purpose, designation, and area requirements shall be
deemed to be unchanged unless otherwise revised by this article.
Prior Zoning
District
New Zoning District
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/562
“A,” One Family
District
“SF-1,” Single-Family District
None “MD,” Moderate Density District
None “MH” Manufactured Housing
District
“C,” Commercial
District
“C,” Commercial District
“I,” Industrial
District
“I,” Industrial District
“B,” Planned Multi-
Family District
“P-MF,” Planned Multi-Family
District
“C-P,” Planned
Commercial District
“P-C,” Planned Commercial
District
“I-P,” Planned
Industrial District
“P-I,” Planned Industrial District
None “M-PD,” Mixed Planned
Development District
(b) All land areas designated as being “A,” One family district, on the zoning map shall now be known as SF-
1, Single-family District.
(c) All land areas designated as being “B,” Planned Multi-Family District, on the zoning map shall now be
known as “P-MF,” Planned Multi-family District
(d) All land areas designated as being “C-P,” Planned Commercial district, on the zoning map shall now be
known as “P-C,” Planned Commercial District
(e) All land areas designated as being “I-P,” Planned Industrial district, on the zoning map shall now be known
as “P-I,” Planned Industrial District.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 3B)
Sec. 14.303 General Provisions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/562
Except as hereinafter provided:
(1) Land Use. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or maintained nor
shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which such
building or land is located.
(2) Height and Bulk of Buildings. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or
maintained to exceed the height, size, or bulk limit herein established for the district in which such
building is located.
(3) Yards. No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other spaces shall be
smaller than prescribed by these regulations, nor shall the density of population be increased in any
manner except in conformity with the area regulations herein established.
(4) Plat Requirements. No building permit shall be issued by the city for the construction or
placing of, and no person shall construct or place, any building on any lot, tract or parcel of land
unless the lot, tract or parcel of land upon which each such structure is to be located, is a lot of record
provided that these regulations shall not prohibit the issuance of a building permit for the
construction or placing of any dwelling, located on any tract of land set apart, delineated or defined
by a metes and bounds description and recorded in the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas, prior to
the effective date of this article, and shown on a plat, giving an accurate location of such tract relative
to any existing recorded addition or subdivision, when the only structure (with its permitted
appurtenances) which is located, or to be located thereon, faces or fronts upon a public thoroughfare.
(5) Building Permit Denial. No building permit shall be issued by the city for the erection or
placing of any dwelling on a lot, the width or street frontage of which has been decreased from the
width or street frontage as originally platted or as replatted and recorded in the plat records of Tarrant
County, Texas, nor shall a building permit be issued for the erection or placing of any dwelling on the
rear yard of any corner lot situated in Districts SF-1, P-MF, MD or MH.
(6) Building Permit. A building permit may be issued by the city for the construction or placing of
a dwelling on a lot or tract of land composed of portions of two (2) or more lots as same appear upon
the map thereof as recorded in the deed records of Tarrant County, Texas, only when such lot or tract
has a street frontage of not less than the street frontage of any lot in the same block.
(7) Compliance. No yard or other space provided about any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of these regulations shall be considered as providing a yard or space for any other
building; provided further that no yard or open space on an adjoining property shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected.
(8) Location. Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot of record and in no case
shall there be more than one (1) building on one (1) lot, except as otherwise provided in this article.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 3C)
(9) Exemption. Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, all city-owned property on
which public works buildings and structures are located as of October 13, 2015 is exempt from the
district regulations and supplementary regulations of this article as long as such property is solely
used for municipal purposes. (Ordinance 1056 adopted 10/13/15)
ARTICLE 14.400 ZONING DISTRICT MAP
Sec. 14.401 Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/562
The districts aforesaid and the boundaries of such districts are shown upon the map attached hereto and made a
part of these regulations, being designated as the “official zoning map,” and said maps and all the notations,
references and other information shown thereon is hereby adopted and shall be as much a part of these
regulations as if the matters and information set forth by said map were all fully described herein. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 4A)
Sec. 14.402 Adopted
Original, official, and identical copies of the official zoning map are hereby adopted bearing the signature of the
Mayor and the attestation of the city manager or his/her designee and shall be filed and maintained as follows:
(1) One copy shall be filed with the city manager or his/her designee and retained as the original
record and shall not be changed in any manner.
(2) One reproducible copy shall be filed with the city manager or his/her designee and shall be the
official zoning map and shall be maintained by posting thereon all changes and subsequent
amendments hereafter made by the city council.
(3) One copy shall be filed with the city engineer and shall be maintained by posting thereon all
changes and subsequent amendments.
(4) Other sectional maps for interpretation purposes may be made as shall be approved by
resolution by the city council.
(5) Reproductions for information purposes may from time to time be made of the official zoning
map.
(6) The official zoning map is subject to public inspection in the office of the city manager or
his/her designee.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 4B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
ARTICLE 14.500 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 14.501 “SF-1” - Single-Family District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the “SF-1” – Single-Family District is to allow single-family detached dwellings
on lots of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, together with the allowed accessory uses, in order to
promote low population densities within integral neighborhood units.
(b) Uses Generally. In the “SF-1,” no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected,
reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or maintained unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for one (1)
or more of the following uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Churches.
(3) Public schools, elementary and high.
(4) Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and operated by the city.
(5) Farms, truck gardens, orchards or nurseries for the growing of plants, shrubs and trees,
provided no retail or wholesale business sales offices are maintained on the premises, and provided
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/562
that no obnoxious fertilizer is stored upon the premises, and no obnoxious soil or fertilizer processing
is conducted thereon.
(6) Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when situated in the same dwelling, when
not involving the conduct of a business or industry, but including home occupation. The furnishing of
board or lodging for not more than four (4) persons in a dwelling occupied as a private residence
shall be considered an accessory use, provided no window or other display or sign is used to
advertise such use.
(7) Hobby shops, as an accessory use.
(8) An unilluminated nameplate for each family not exceeding one (1) square foot in area,
containing the name and occupation of the occupant of the premises, provided the nameplate is
attached flatwise to the building; and unilluminated signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in
area pertaining to the sale or rental of property on which they are located, provided, however, that no
advertising sign of any other character shall be permitted in any Single-Family District.
(c) Accessory Uses. Detached accessory buildings, not exceeding one (1) story in height, including private
garage, private stable or servants' quarters, when located not less than sixty (60) feet from the front lot line, nor
less than the distance required for the main building from any side lot line; provided that if the accessory
building is located within the “required” rear yard, a five (5) foot setback from all lot lines is required. A garage
shall provide space for not more than one (1) motor vehicle for each two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square
feet of lot area. A stable shall provide for not more than one (1) horse or mule for each twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of lot area. A servants' quarters shall be occupied only by servants employed on the premises. The
utility services to servants' quarters shall be metered through the same meters as those serving the main building
on the premises. No detached accessory building shall exceed the height of the main building. The board of
adjustment may approve as a special exception an accessory building which exceeds the height limitation herein
for accessory buildings which inherently require a greater height, such as detached garages for motor homes;
provided that no such accessory structure shall exceed the maximum height allowed in this zoning district. An
accessory building may be constructed as a part of the main building, in which case the regulations controlling
the main building shall apply.
(d) Height Regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories in height.
(e) Area Regulations.
(1) Front Yard Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5A)
(2) Side Yard:
Interior Lot Not less than five (5) feet.
Corner Lot Not less than five (5) feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/562
Not less than twenty (20) feet on the side of the lot
adjacent to a side street, measured from the nearest
edge of the curb or pavement on the side street, or
when there is no curb or pavement, the side lot line.
(Ordinance 762 adopted 10/19/04)
(3) Lot Area per Family At least five thousand (5,000) square feet per family.
(4) Width of Lot Not less than sixty (60) feet.
(f) Landscaping. No requirements.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5A)
(g) Parking Regulations. The following parking regulations shall apply:
(1) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit located behind the front building
line; provided, however, that at least one parking space shall be located within a private garage.
(2) Parking spaces and any adjoining private driveways shall be constructed of an improved
monolithic surface of concrete or asphalt or other paved surface approved by the building official.
The paved surface shall be two inches (2") or more in thickness and shall not exceed one-half inch
(1/2") in height above the adjacent unpaved surface. On nonconforming lots without paved parking
spaces and driveways, the parking spaces and driveways shall only be located perpendicular to the
curb cut or drive approach or in the rear yard as authorized by Subsection (g)(4), and may not
encroach into any portion of the remaining front yard. (See Diagram 1-A)
Editor's note–Diagram 1–A has not been printed and is attached to Ordinance 776 on file in the office
of the city secretary.
(3) All vehicles shall be driven and parked so as to completely rest upon a paved surface. On
nonconforming lots without paved parking spaces and driveways, all vehicles shall be driven and
parked so as to completely rest upon the unpaved parking spaces or driveway as provided in this
section, or in the side yard adjacent thereto. (See Diagram 1–B)
Editor's note–Diagram 1–B has not been printed and is attached to Ordinance 776 on file in the office
of the city secretary.
(4) All vehicles parked or stored in the required rear yard of a structure must be placed behind a
screening partition of fencing materials or dense vegetation so as to obscure the vehicle from view
from a public street or public right-of-way. In addition, the parking or storage area and driveway
(from the curb cut or drive approach to the parking or storage area) must be constructed of paved
monolithic concrete or asphalt or other paved surface approved by the building official.
(Ordinance 776, sec. 1, adopted 4/12/05)
Sec. 14.502 “MD” - Moderate Density District
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/562
(a) Purpose. The “MD” - Moderate Density District is intended to provide areas for moderately high density
development of duplex or single-family attached dwelling units which are constructed at an approximate density
of nine (9) units per acre.
(b) Uses, Generally. In the “MD” District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be here after
erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or maintained unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for
one (1) or more of the following uses.
(1) Duplex dwelling unit.
(2) Single-family attached dwelling unit.
(3) Churches.
(4) Public schools, elementary and high.
(5) Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and operated by the city.
(6) Farms, truck gardens, orchards or nurseries for the growing of plants, shrubs and trees,
provided no retail or wholesale business sales offices are maintained on the premises, and provided
that no obnoxious fertilizer is stored upon the premises, and no obnoxious soil or fertilizer processing
is conducted thereon.
(7) Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when situated in the same dwelling, when
not involving the conduct of a business or industry, but including home occupation. The furnishing of
board or lodging for not more than four (4) persons in a dwelling occupied as a private residence
shall be considered an accessory use, provided no window or other display or sign is used to
advertise such use.
(8) Hobby shops, as an accessory use.
(9) An unilluminated nameplate for each family not exceeding one (1) square foot in area,
containing the name and occupation of the occupant of the premises, provided the nameplate is
attached flatwise to the building; and unilluminated signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in
area pertaining to the sale or rental of property on which they are located, provided, however, that no
advertising sign of any other character shall be permitted in any MD-Moderate Density District.
(c) Accessory Uses. Detached accessory buildings, not exceeding one (1) story in height, including private
garage, private stable or servants' quarters, when located not less than sixty (60) feet from the front lot line, nor
less than the distance required for the main building from any side lot line; provided that if the accessory
building is located within the “required” rear yard, a five (5) foot setback from all lot lines is required. A garage
shall provide space for not more than one (1) motor vehicle for each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet of lot area. A stable shall provide for not more than one (1) horse or mule for each twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of lot area. Servants quarters shall be occupied only by servants employed on the premises. The
utility services to servants quarters shall be metered through the same meters as those serving the main building
on the premises. No detached accessory building shall exceed the height of the main building. The board of
adjustment may approve as a special exception an accessory building which exceeds the height limitation herein
for accessory buildings which inherently require a greater height, such as detached garages for motor homes;
provided that no such accessory structure shall exceed the maximum height allowed in this zoning district. An
accessory building may be constructed as a part of the main building, in which case the regulations controlling
the main building shall apply.
(d) Height Regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories in height.
(e) Area Regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/562
(1) Front
Yard
Not less than
twenty-five (25)
feet
(2) Side
Yard
Not less than five
(5) feet.
(3) Lot
Area
per
Family
At least four
thousand (4,000)
square feet per
family
(f) Landscaping. No requirements.
(g) Parking. Two on-site parking spaces for each unit.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5B)
Sec. 14.503 “MH” - Manufactured Housing District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the “MH”- Manufactured Housing district is to provide adequate space and
restrictions for the placement of HUD-Code manufactured homes and industrialized housing in the city within
designated subdivisions. (This does not include mobile homes as defined in this article). The “MH” District is
also established to provide housing densities compatible with existing and proposed neighborhoods by providing
alternative housing types both in construction and economy within the “MH” District. No HUD-Code
Manufactured Home shall be allowed on any parcel or lot except on parcels or lots within the “MH” District.
(b) HUD-Code Manufactured Home/Industrialized Housing Subdivision. Land within the “MH” District shall
be developed as a HUD-Code manufactured home or industrialized housing subdivision. Lots within the “MH”
District will be sold to private individuals in strict conformance with the terms and conditions under which the
manufactured home or industrialized housing subdivision was approved by the city council. All roadways within
a HUD-Code manufactured home or industrialized housing subdivision shall be dedicated to the public. Private
interior drives must be approved by the city council. Land zoned “MH” which is not developed as a HUD-Code
manufactured home or industrialized housing Subdivision may be developed as “SF-1,” so long as it is
developed in accordance with the regulations of the “SF-1” district. In such case HUD-Code manufactured
homes will not be permitted.
(Ordinance 706 adopted 1/14/03)
(c) Uses Generally. In the “MH” District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be installed,
erected, reconstructed, altered, maintained, enlarged, converted to any use except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
(1) Manufactured housing dwelling.
(2) Single-family dwellings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/562
(3) Churches.
(4) Public schools, elementary and high.
(5) Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and operated by the city.
(6) Farms, truck gardens, orchards or nurseries for the growing of plants, shrubs and trees,
provided no retail or wholesale business sales offices are maintained on the premises, and provided
that no obnoxious fertilizer is stored upon the premises, and no obnoxious soil or fertilizer processing
is conducted thereon.
(7) Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when situated in the same
dwelling, when not involving the conduct of a business or industry, but including home occupation.
The furnishing of board or lodging for not more than four (4) persons in a dwelling occupied as a
private residence shall be considered an accessory use, provided no window or other display or sign
is used to advertise such use.
(8) Hobby shops, as an accessory use.
(9) An unilluminated nameplate for each family not exceeding one (1) square foot in area,
containing the name and occupation of the occupant of the premises, provided the nameplate is
attached flatwise to the building; and unilluminated signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in
area pertaining to the sale or rental of property on which they are located, provided, however, that no
advertising sign of any other character shall be permitted in any residential district.
(d) Site Plan Requirements. All properties within this district shall be contiguous and shall be totally
developed under a unified site plan. No application for a building permit for the construction of a building shall
be approved unless a site plan has been approved meeting the conditions provided in Section 14.602.
(e) Height Regulations. No building shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet, or one (1) story in height.
(f) Area Regulations. The following minimum standards shall be required, measured from property lines:
(1) District
Area
Requirement
The minimum
of one-half
(1/2) acre
(2) Front Yard Not less than
twenty-five
(25) feet
(3) Side Yard Not less than
five (5) feet
(4) Lot Area per
Family
At least three
(3) times
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/562
larger than the
manufactured
home to be
placed thereon
and no less
than three
thousand
(3,000) square
feet in area.
(5) Minimum
Clearance
Twenty (20)
feet between
manufactured
homes and
fifteen (15)
feet between
any
manufactured
home and the
district
boundary that
does not abut
upon a public
street. Where
the district
abuts upon a
public street,
twenty-five
(25) feet of
minimum
clearance shall
be maintained
between the
manufactured
home and the
public street.
(g) Landscaping Requirements. No requirements
(h) Development and Installation Standards.
(1) HUD-Code manufactured homes and industrialized homes shall have the axles, wheels, and
tow bar or tongue removed and shall be secured to a permanent foundation or footing and piers, all in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
(2) HUD-Code manufactured homes must have a minimum of an eighteen inch crawl space left
under all homes.
(3) A concrete, or asphalt surface with good drainage shall cover the area where a home is to be
sited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/562
(4) Each HUD-Code Manufactured home site shall have a slab or patio not less than twenty feet in
length and six feet in width, comprised of concrete, flagstone, or similar substance installed adjacent
to each site.
(5) HUD-Code manufactured homes shall have permanent steps installed at all exits.
(6) Skirting shall be securely attached between the HUD-Code Manufactured home and the ground
on all sides within thirty days of home installation. Skirting materials shall consist of materials which
are compatible with design of the home and enhance its appearance. Unpainted or untreated
corrugated metal, screen or wire, or lattice type skirting is prohibited.
(7) Construction, siting, and installation of the homes shall be in conformance with applicable
federal, state, and local codes and standards, and each HUD-Code Manufactured Home shall have
affixed a seal of the appropriate federal or state department.
(8) Sanitation, fire protection and underground utility services shall be provided to each lot in
accordance with the city ordinances and regulations.
(9) Ingress and egress to the property shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
city ordinance standards and regulations.
(10) When private drives are provided, drainage and garbage collection right-of-way, fire lanes
and utility easements shall be provided as required by the city. Such can be accomplished by
designating all private interior drives within the project as easements for vehicular access and service.
(11) Soil conditions, groundwater level, drainage, flooding, and topography shall not create
hazards to the developed portion of the property or the health and safety of the residents.
(12) Any structural alteration or modification of a HUD-Code manufactured home or industrialized
home after it is placed on the site must be approved by the building official of the city. All structural
additions shall comply with the city's building codes and ordinances.
(i) Interior Streets and Walkways. Internal streets, no-parking signs, and streets name signs shall be privately
owned, built, and maintained, unless dedicated to and accepted by the city. Streets shall be designed for safety
and convenient access to all manufactured home spaces and in accordance with the general design standards of
the city's development regulations.
(j) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section
14.603, and all other applicable ordinances of the city.
(k) Screening. A solid, opaque screening wall or fence of not less than six (6) feet in height, shall be provided
along all perimeter property lines of a HUD-Code manufactured home and industrialized housing subdivision
which do not abut a dedicated street, as indicated on the site plan. Said screening wall or fence shall be of a
decorative masonry construction. This requirement can be waived or modified if natural or man-made physical
features create an adequate separation or buffer from adjacent uses, as determined by the city council. However
any request to waive this requirement shall be presented as an element of the site plan and shall be subject to
approval at that time only.
(l) Water and Sewer. Each HUD-Code manufactured home or industrialized home space or lot shall be served
by water and sanitary sewer. Engineering plans for water and sanitary sewer shall be submitted for review by the
city council, at the time of site plan approval. Water and Sewer must be in compliance with the city's building
regulations.
(m) Drainage. Engineering plans for drainage shall be submitted for review by the city council at the time of
site plan approval. All applicable requirements of the city shall be complied with.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/562
(n) HUD-Code Manufactured Home or Industrialized Housing Sales. HUD-Code manufactured home or
industrialized housing subdivisions shall be for residential purposes only. Sales of these homes shall be limited
to those which become available on the market on an individual basis.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5C)
Sec. 14.504 “C” Commercial District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the “C” Commercial District is to provide locations for general commercial uses
representing various types of retail shopping, businesses, and service facilities that serve that community or
regional area.
(b) Uses, Generally. In the “C” District, no building or land shall be used, and no buildings shall be hereafter
erected, reconstructed, or altered or enlarged, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for one (1)
or more of the following uses.
(1) Auto parking areas, for passenger cars only.
(2) Barber and beauty shops.
(3) Book or stationery stores, or newsstands.
(4) Churches.
(5) Cleaning, pressing and laundry collection offices.
(6) Custom dressmaking or millinery shops.
(7) Doctors' and dentists' offices, clinics or medical, surgical or dental laboratories.
(8) Offices.
(9) Parks.
(10) Photograph, portrait or camera shops and photo finishing.
(11) Public schools, elementary and high.
(12) Signs and billboards on the ground are prohibited, but signs maybe erected on buildings,
provided they are fastened flat against the wall, or erected on the roof. Signs on the roof shall not
extend beyond the building wall, nor shall any sign have a height of more than ten (10) feet.
Any person wishing to construct a sign that does not conform with the terms of these regulations
must make a special application for approval of the planning and zoning commission.
In approving or disapproving a sign the city zoning commission shall take into consideration the
height, size, structure, site and proximity to public streets and other structures. The said commission
is empowered to deny an application for a sign with flashing light or lights if the height of the sign,
its proximity to public streets and the size or color of the flashing portion of the sign would so
resemble a traffic signal, an ambulance signal or emergency signal of the police or fire department as
to cause confusion in the mind of a reasonably prudent motorist. The commission is empowered to
deny the application or change the nature of the sign if the elements of consideration above, in the
particular case, would make the proposed sign one that would in reasonable probability confuse a
reasonable prudent motorist.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/562
(13) Studios of artists.
(14) Antique shops.
(15) Auditoriums, theaters, moving picture shows, having a seating capacity for not more than one
thousand, five hundred (1,500) people.
(16) Automobile, motorcycle, or trailer sales, or sales or rental areas, provided vehicles are in
good operating condition, and no repairs are made on the premises.
(17) Bakeries, provided that the floor area does not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet.
(18) Banks.
(19) Baths, turkish and similar massage and health treatments.
(20) Bicycles, and bicycle repair shops.
(21) Bird stores, pet shops, taxidermists shops and aquariums.
(22) Blueprinting or photostatting.
(23) Business colleges, or private schools operated as a commercial enterprise.
(24) Caterer or wedding service.
(25) Christmas tree sales.
(26) Cigar or tobacco stores.
(27) Cleaning, dyeing and pressing works, laundry and washaterias, provided that the floor area
does not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet for separate or combined uses.
(28) Confectionery stores.
(29) Dancing schools.
(30) Day nursery.
(31) Delicatessen shops.
(32) Department stores.
(33) Dog and cat hospitals, or small animal hospitals, if conducted wholly within a completely
sound proofed and air conditioned building, provided that noise or odors created by activities within
the building shall not be perceptible beyond the property line, and that no animals are kept outside
the building at any time.
(34) Drive-in businesses, where car service is given, including refreshment stands, cafes,
restaurants, food stores, and similar activities.
(35) Drug stores.
(36) Dry goods and notions stores.
(37) Duplicating service, printing by mimeographing, multigraphing, and offset printing, provided
that the floor area does not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/562
(38) Electrical and gas appliance and supply sales, electrical and gas repair and installation
services when limited to small shops, the principal business of which is a neighborhood service.
(39) Filling stations, gasoline, oil, washing, greasing and accessories; not including motor, fender,
or body repairs; provided that they comply with other ordinances of the city.
(40) Florist or gift shops.
(41) Frozen food lockers for individual or family use, not including the processing of food except
cutting or wrapping.
(42) Garages, storage only.
(43) Hardware, paint and wall paper stores.
(44) Household and office furniture, furnishings and appliances.
(45) Ice storage houses having not more than seven and one-half (7 1/2) tons capacity.
(46) Jewelry stores, optical goods.
(47) Liquor stores or package stores.
(48) Miniature golf courses and driving tees.
(49) Mortuaries, funeral homes and undertakers.
(50) Museums.
(51) Nursery yards or buildings for retail sales, provided that all incidental equipment and
supplies, including fertilizer and empty containers are kept within a building.
(52) Offices.
(53) Piano stores, musical instruments and supplies.
(54) Plumbing and heating appliances and supply sales, and plumbing and heating repairs and
installation services, when limited to small shops, the principal business of which is a neighborhood
service.
(55) Radio and television sales and servicing.
(56) Restaurants, tea rooms and cafeterias or cafes.
(57) Retail stores, businesses or shops for custom work or the manufacture of articles to be sold at
retail on the premises, excluding coal and wood yards, provided that in such manufacture the total
mechanical power shall not exceed five (5) horsepower for the operation of any one machine,
provided that the space occupied by the manufacturing use permitted herein shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total floor area of the entire building or the equivalent of the ground floor area
thereof, and provided further that such manufacturing use is not obnoxious or offensive by reason of
vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or fumes.
(58) Shoe-shine parlors.
(59) Commercial swimming pools, subject to the following conditions:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/562
(A) Such swimming pool shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in area,
measured at the scum gutter.
(B) No pool shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet from a dwelling district.
(C) The area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the pool area,
with a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet allowable.
(D) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the minimum ratio of one (1) off-street
parking space to each two hundred (200) square feet of pool area or fraction thereof, and the
parking arrangement shall have the approval of the city traffic engineer.
(60) Tailor, clothing or wearing apparel shops.
(61) Variety stores.
(62) Accessory building and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses, including air
conditioning, ice and refrigerating plants purely incidental to a main activity permitted on the
premises. No accessory use shall be construed to permit the keeping of articles or material in the
open or on the outside of the building.
(63) Pawnshops.
(c) Height Regulations. Not to exceed three (3) stories in height, or forty-five (45) feet.
(d) Area Regulations.
(1) Front Yard. At least thirty (30) feet, except in cases existing buildings are in the same block; in
such cases, the minimum front yard shall be an average of the existing buildings in the block.
(2) Rear Yard. At least ten (10) feet, except where the rear of the lot of the commercial districts
abuts on a dwelling district, and, in such case, there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.
(3) Side Yard. At least three (3) feet, except where the side of the lot of the commercial district
abuts a dwelling district; in such case, the side yard shall be at least five (5) feet.
(4) Width of Lot. The lot shall be at least fifty (50) feet in width.
(e) Landscaping. See Article 14.600.
(f) Parking. See Article 14.600.
(g) Site Plan. Prior to issuance of a building permit, a site plan, in accordance with Section 14.602 will be
required. The site plan shall be approved by the city council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning
commission.
(h) Public Hearing Required. A public hearing in accordance with Section 14.703 shall be required for all
“C” applications or site plans.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5D)
Sec. 14.505 “I” Industrial District
(a) Purpose. The “I” Industrial District is intended to permit a range of assembly, warehousing and service
type manufacturing and wholesale uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/562
(b) Uses, Generally. In the “I” District, no building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter
erected, reconstructed, altered, maintained or enlarged, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for
one or more of the following uses:
(1) Manufacture of basket materials, bicycles, cowboy boots, boxes, caskets, shoes, and textile
fabrics.
(2) Stamping, dyeing, shearing or punching metal, not exceeding one-eighth (1/8) inch in
thickness.
(3) Accessory uses, buildings and use customarily incidental to all permitted uses.
(4) Amusement or baseball parks.
(5) Churches.
(6) Public schools, elementary and high.
(7) Parks.
(8) Storage yards. (All storage yards must be fenced with solid fence, excluding sheet metal of any
type.)
(9) Candy, canning or preserving factories.
(10) Carpet and rug cleaning.
(11) Cleaning, dyeing, pressing works, laundry and washaterias.
(12) Cold storage plants.
(13) Contractor's plants or storage yards, provided a six (6) foot solid fence, excluding sheet iron
or sheet aluminum,, is erected.
(14) Furniture repair, within building.
(15) Heavy equipment sales and auction yard.
(16) Lumber yards, provided a six (6) foot solid fence, excluding sheet iron or sheet aluminum, is
erected.
(17) Machine shops, provided power not to exceed ten (10) horsepower is employed in the
operation of any one machine.
(18) Manufacture of products from aluminum, brass, bronze, copper, steel, tin or other metals and
from bone, leather, paper, rubber, shell, wire, or wood of any kind, provided power not to exceed fifty
(50) horsepower is employed in the operation of any one machine.
(19) Manufacture of artificial flowers, ornaments, awnings, tents and bags, bleaching, cleaning or
polishing preparations, boats (small) twenty-eight (28) feet or less in length, brooms or brushes,
buttons and novelties, canvas products, clothing, suits, dresses for wholesale trade; food products,
syrups, fruit juices, extracts, drugs or medicine, furniture, gas or electric fixtures, ice cream,
mattresses or their renovation; peanut and pecan products, potato chips, radio and television sets,
signs, including electric; provided power not in excess of fifty (50) horsepower is employed in the
operation of any one machine.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/562
(20) Meat processing (no slaughtering).
(21) Mini-warehouse storage facility (with outdoor storage).
(22) Pattern shops.
(23) Printing, lithographing, book binding, newspapers and publishing.
(24) Sheet metal shops using sheet metal of sixteen (16) gauge, or thinner.
(25) Spray painting or paint mixing.
(26) Terminal, motor freight on approval of the building official, after a recommendation by the
city traffic engineer, and provided that such motor freight terminals shall meet the following
requirements:
(A) A traffic flow plan approved by the city traffic engineer, based on an accurate plot plan
drawn to scale. The applicant shall prepare and submit the plot plan to the city traffic engineer.
(B) Loading, parking and maneuvering space shall be entirely on private property.
(C) The operation of any such motor freight terminal shall be no less than two hundred feet
(200) from an “SF- I,” “MD,” “MH,” “P-W,” “C,” or “P-C” District.
(27) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above.
(c) Height Regulations.
(d) Area Regulations.
(1) Front Yard At least thirty (30) feet, except in cases where existing
buildings are in the same block; in such cases, the
minimum front yard shall be an average of the existing
buildings in the block.
(2) Rear Yard At least ten (10) feet, except where the rear of the
commercial lot abuts on a dwelling district, and, in such
case, there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.
(3) Side Yard At least three (3) feet, except where the side of a
commercial lot abuts a dwelling district; in such case, the
side yard shall be at least five (5) feet.
(4) Width of Lot The lot shall be at least fifty (50) feet in width.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/562
(e) Landscaping Regulations. Article 14.600.
(f) Parking. Article 14.600.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5E)
Sec. 14.506 “P-MF” Planned Multi-Family District
(a) Purpose. The “P-MF” Planned Multi-Family District is established to provide adequate space and site
diversification for multi-family apartments where the maximum density does not exceed twelve (12) units per
gross acre. The “P-MF” District should be characterized by landscaping and open space and should be
convenient to major thoroughfares and arterial streets. A planned development approval process is utilized in
this district to provide for quality multi-family developments which are compatible with surrounding properties.
(b) Planned Development Uses. In a “P-MF” District, no land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected, reconstructed, altered, maintained or enlarged, unless otherwise provided in these regulations.
(1) Multi-family dwellings.
(c) Accessory Uses. Any accessory use permitted within the residential districts of the city shall be permitted
as accessory uses in the “P-MF” District.
(d) Conditions for Planned Multi-Family Developments. “P-MF” District shall be considered appropriate
where the following conditions prevail:
(1) The project utilizes innovative land development concepts and is consistent with the
comprehensive land use plan and the goals and objectives of the city;
(2) Dwelling units are situated such that an appreciable amount of land for open space is available
and is integrated throughout the planned development;
(3) The project utilizes an innovative approach in lot configuration and mixture of multi-family
housing types;
(4) Aesthetic amenities may be provided in the planned development design which are not
economically feasible to provide in conventional single-family projects; or
(5) The project provides a compatible transition between adjacent existing conventional singlefamily
residential projects and provides a compatible transition for the extension of future
conventional single-family projects into adjacent undeveloped areas.
(e) Density, Area, and Height Regulations. In approving the “P-MF” District, the city council shall, after
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, specify density, area, height, screening, parking,
landscaping, and other regulations as may be required in subsection (i), development plan. Such standards shall
be indicated on the development plan and shall be made a part of the article.
(f) Ownership. An application for approval of a development plan or site plan under the Planned Multi-Family
District regulations may be filed by a person having a legal interest in the property. In order to ensure unified
planning and development of the property, the applicant shall provide evidence, in a form satisfactory to the city,
prior to final approval of the development plan or site plan that the property is held in single ownership or is
under single control. Land shall be deemed to be held in single ownership or under single control if it is in joint
tenancy, tenancy in common, a partnership, a trust, or a joint venture, or persons having a legal interest in the
property. The development plan or site plan shall be filed in the name(s) of the record owner(s) of the property,
which shall be included in the application.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/562
(g) Development Schedule.
(1) An application for a Planned Multi-Family District shall be accompanied by a development
schedule indicating the approximate date on which construction is expected to begin and the rate of
anticipated development to completion. The development schedule, when adopted and approved by
the city council, shall become part of the Planned Multi-Family Regulations and shall be adhered to
by the owner, developer, and their assigns or successors in interest.
(2) The city shall require the owner/developer of the planned development to submit a written
report on a regular basis to the planning and zoning commission. Said written report shall describe
the progress achieved towards the development schedule. However, upon request by the
owner/developer, the planning and zoning commission may, for good cause shown by the
owner/developer, recommend to the city council that the development schedule be extended or
revised as may be indicated by the facts of the case.
(3) In the event that the owner/developer neglects to provide a written report, as established and
agreed to in the planned development, or if the owner/developer neglects to initiate any progress, the
city may initiate proceedings to rezone the property to a zoning district deemed appropriate.
However, no rezoning effort shall be initiated by the city prior to making an official inquiry of the
owner/developer regarding the status of the planned development.
(h) Platting Requirements. No application for a building permit for the construction of a building or structure
shall be approved unless the property on which proposed improvements are planned has been platted. Said plat
must meet all the requirements of the city, and have been approved by the city council and recorded in the
official records of the County in which the property is located.
(i) Development Plan. An application for a “P-C” district shall include and be accompanied by a development
plan, which shall become a part of the amending ordinance. The development plan shall include the following
information:
(1) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites or
building lots; any areas proposed for dedication or reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility
and garbage easements, school sites, street widening, street changes; the points of ingress and egress
from existing public streets on an accurate survey of the boundary of tract and topography with a
contour interval of not less than five (5) feet, or spot grades where the relief is limited.
(2) A plan indicating the arrangement and provision of off-street parking and off-street loading
where required. Such a plan may be presented as a ratio of off-street parking and off-street loading
area to building area when accompanied by a typical example indicating the feasibility of the
arrangement proposed and when the areas where the example would be applied are dimensioned on
the drawing of the entire site. Any special traffic regulation facilities proposed or required to assure
the safe function of the circulation plan shall also be shown.
(3) A designation of the maximum building coverage of the site shall be indicated upon the
development plan. General footprints of building shall be indicated showing the approximate position
and sizes of any proposed structures.
(4) Landscaping and screening shall be provided as required in Article 14.600 and shall be
indicated on the development plan.
(5) Any other development and protective requirements considered necessary to protect the health,
safety and general welfare, and to create a reasonable transition to and protection from property
adjacent to a “P-MF” District.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/562
(6) Any or all of the required features may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is
clear and capable of evaluation by the city manager or his/her designee and interpretation by the
building inspector.
(j) Site Plan. Prior to issuance of a building permit, a site plan, in accordance with Section 14.602 will be
required. The site plan shall be approved by the city council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning
commission. The site plan may be submitted concurrently with the development plan. If the development plan
and the site plan are submitted separately, a separate public hearing and action shall be required for both
submittals.
(k) Public Hearing Required. A public hearing in accordance with Section 14.703 shall be required for all “PMF”
applications or site plans.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5F; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.507 “P-C” Planned Commercial District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the “P-C” Planned Commercial District is to develop retail space and commercial
uses. A planned development approval process is utilized in this district. This provides a method for the
coordination of retail, office, hotel, commercial, and similar uses. A “P-C” Planned Commercial District may
include a combination of different commercial types and/or a variety of land uses which creatively complement
each other and harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity.
(b) Planned Commercial Development Uses. In a “P-C” Planned Commercial District, no land shall be used
and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, maintained or enlarged, except for those retail,
office, hotel, commercial or similar uses which are specifically approved by the city council for that site. The
approved uses may be for an entire class-of uses, such as general retail, or for specific types of uses, such as a
fast food restaurant.
(c) Accessory Uses. Any accessory use permitted within the commercial districts of the city shall be permitted
as accessory uses to a principal use in the “P-C” Planned Commercial District.
(d) Conditions for Planned Commercial Developments. The “P-C” Planned Commercial District shall be
considered appropriate where the following conditions prevail:
(1) The project utilizes innovative land development concepts and is consistent with the
comprehensive land use plan and the goals and objectives of the city;
(2) The project utilizes an innovative approach in lot configuration and mixture of commercial type
uses;
(3) Commercial uses are situated such that an appreciable amount of land is available for open
space or joint use as parking space and is integrated throughout the planned development;
(4) Aesthetic amenities may be provided in the planned development design which are not
economically feasible to provide in conventional commercial projects;
(5) The project provides a compatible transition between adjacent existing single-family residential
projects and provides a compatible transition for the extension of future single-family projects into
adjacent undeveloped areas; or
(6) The project is located adjacent to Highway 199/ Jacksboro Highway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/562
(e) Preexisting Uses. Any use lawfully existing and in operation in a “P-C” Planned Commercial District on
the effective date of this article shall be considered to be a nonconforming use and may be continued or changed
to a similar use provided that no changes are made in the density, area, height, screening, parking, landscaping or
other development criteria applicable to the site without prior approval of a development plan by the city
council.
(f) Use Designations. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a new use in a
“P-C” Planned Commercial District, a use designation must be approved by the city council following a
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The approval of a use designation shall be considered
to be a change in zoning which must be approved by ordinance following the notice and public hearing
requirements of Section 14.703. All applications for a use designation which will require new construction or a
change in the development criteria applicable to the site shall include a development plan as required by
subsection (j) below and a site plan as required by subsection (k) below, or a combined and abbreviated
development and site plan as permitted by subsection (l) below.
(g) Density, Area, and Height Regulations. In approving a “P-C” Planned Commercial District or a use
designation in a “P-C” Planned Commercial District, the city council shall specify density, area, height,
screening, parking, landscaping, and other development criteria as may be required in subsection (j),
development plan. Such standards shall be indicated on the development plan and shall be made a part of the
article. No property located in a “P-C” Planned Commercial District shall be modified as to density, area, height,
screening, parking, landscaping, or other development criteria unless a development plan containing such
revised development criteria is approved.
(h) Ownership. An application for approval of a use designation, development plan or site plan in the “P-C”
Planned Commercial District may be filed by a person having a legal interest in the property. The application
shall be filed in the name(s) of the record owner(s) of the site, which shall be included in the application. The
applicant shall provide evidence, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, prior to final approval, that the
applicant has the authority to file the application on behalf of all owners of the site.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 56)
(i) Development Schedule.
(1) An application for a use designation for new construction or construction that increases the
floor area of the principal structure(s) shall be accompanied by a development schedule specifically
indicating the dates on which construction is expected to begin and on which particular phases of
construction will be completed. The development schedule, if adopted and approved by the city
council, shall become part of the planned commercial regulations and shall be adhered to by the
owner, developer, and their assigns or successors in interest. Failure to adhere to the approved
development schedule shall be a violation punishable under Section 14.709 of this chapter.
(2) The city shall require the owner/developer of the planned development to submit a written
report on a regular basis to the planning and zoning commission. Said written report shall describe
the progress achieved towards the development schedule. However, upon request by the
owner/developer, the planning and zoning commission may, for good cause shown by the
owner/developer, recommend to the city council that the development schedule be extended or
revised as may be indicated by the facts of the case.
(3) In the event that the owner/developer neglects to provide a written report, as established and
agreed to in the planned development, or if the owner/developer neglects to initiate any progress, the
city may initiate proceedings to rezone the property and/or rescind the use designation on the
property. However, no rezoning effort shall be initiated by the city prior to making an official inquiry
of the owner/developer regarding the status of the planned development.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/562
(4) If construction has commenced and the owner/developer has failed to adhere to the timelines
set forth in the development plan, the city may compel the owner/developer to remove any unfinished
structure from the property. If the owner/developer fails to remove the structure, the city may remove
it and recover its costs from the owner/developer.
(Ordinance 775, sec. 1, adopted 12/14/04)
(j) Development Plan Requirement. An application for a “P-C” Planned Commercial District, or approval of
a use designation in a “P-C” Planned Commercial District, which will require new construction which increases
the floor area of the principal structure(s) shall include and be accompanied by a development plan, which shall
become a part of the amending ordinance. The development plan shall include the following information:
(1) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites or
building lots; any areas proposed for dedication or reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility
and garbage easements, school sites, street widening, street changes; the points of ingress and egress
from existing public streets on an accurate survey of the boundary of tract and topography with a
contour interval of not less than five (5) feet, or spot grades where the relief is limited.
(2) Where multiple types of commercial land uses are proposed, a land use plan delineating the
specific areas to be devoted to various commercial uses shall be required.
(3) A plan indicating the arrangement and provision of off-street parking and off-street loading
where required. Such a plan may be presented as a ratio of off-street parking and off-street loading
area to building area when accompanied by a typical example indicating the feasibility of the
arrangement proposed and when the areas where the example would be applied are dimensioned on
the drawing of the entire site. Any special traffic regulation facilities proposed or required to assure
the safe function of the circulation plan shall also be shown.
(4) A designation of the maximum building coverage of the site shall be indicated upon the
development plan. General foot print of buildings shall be indicated showing the approximate
position and sizes of any proposed structures.
(5) Landscaping and screening shall be provided as required in Article 14.600 and shall be
indicated on the development plan.
(6) Any or all of the required features may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is
clear and capable of evaluation by the city manager or his/her designee and interpretation by the
building inspector.
Except as provided in subsection (m), any amendment to a development plan must be approved by
ordinance following the notice and public hearing requirements of Section 14.703.
(k) Site Plan Requirement. Prior to issuance of a building permit, for new construction which increases the
floor area of the principal structure(s) or construction that changes the development criteria for the site, a site
plan, in accordance with Section 14.602, will be required. The site plan shall be approved by the city council
upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. The site plan may be submitted concurrently
with the development plan. If the development plan and the site plan are submitted separately, a separate public
hearing and action shall be required for both submittals.
(l) Combined and Abbreviated Development and Site Plan Submittal. If application is made for a new use
designation in a “P-C” Planned Development District on a site which contains existing improvements which are
not proposed to be enlarged, the following combined and abbreviated development and site plan shall be
permitted in place of a development plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/562
(1) Combined and abbreviated development and site plan shall contain the following: A scale
drawing showing existing building and proposed use designations, easements, points of ingress and
egress from existing public streets, the arrangement and provision of off-street parking and off-street
loading, and the location of landscaping and screening provided on site. These items shall be shown
on an accurate survey of the boundary of the lot. All of the required features may be incorporated on
a single drawing if such drawing is clear and capable of evaluation by the city manager or his/her
designee and interpretation by the building inspector.
(2) A combined and abbreviated development and site plan must be approved by ordinance
following the notice and public healing requirements of Section 14.703.
(m) Administrative Approval of Development Plan and Site Plan. A development plan and site plan may be
approved by the city manager or his/her designee without the approval of the city council and planning and
zoning commission if said application is located within an existing structure and: (1) does not increase the floor
area of the existing structure; and (2) does not change the existing use on the site. The city manager or his/her
designee may, for any reason, elect to present the development plan or site plan to the planning and zoning
commission and city council for approval.
(n) Platting Requirements. No application for a building permit for the construction of a building or structure
shall be approved unless the property on which the proposed improvements are planned has been platted. The
plat must meet all the requirements of the city, and must have been approved by the city council and recorded in
the official records of Tarrant County.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5G; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.508 “P-I” Planned Industrial District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the “P-I” Planned Industrial District is to provide a mechanism to achieve
industrial development which will contribute to the diversification of the city's economic base in a manner
consistent with the land use plan. The district is to allow development with a compatible mixture of industrial
land uses not provided for in other industrial districts in accordance with a specific plan of development. The
regulations are intended to provide a method for protecting adjacent development from adverse impacts
associated with economic development while promoting efficient and economic land use arrangements. (1987
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5H)
(b) Planned Industrial Development Uses. In a “P-I” Planned Industrial District, no land shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, except for those retail, office, hotel,
commercial or similar uses which are specifically approved by the city council for that site. The approved uses
may be for an entire class of uses, such as general retail, or for specific types of uses, such as a fast food
restaurant. Amusement machine establishments may be approved by the council in a “P-I” District, provided that
no amusement machine establishment may be located within 300 feet of a church, school, or hospital, measured
from property line to property line. (Ordinance 692 adopted 7/9/02)
(c) Accessory Uses. Any accessory use permitted within the industrial districts of the city shall be permitted
as accessory uses to a principal use in the “P-I” Planned Industrial District.
(d) Conditions for Planned Industrial Developments. The “P-I” District shall be considered appropriate where
the following conditions prevail:
(1) The project utilized innovative land development concepts and is consistent with the
comprehensive land use plan and the goals and objectives of the city;
(2) The project utilizes an innovative approach in lot configuration and mixture of industrial type
uses;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/562
(3) Industrial uses are situated such that an appreciable amount of land is available for open space
or joint use as parking space and is integrated throughout the planned development;
(4) Aesthetic amenities may be provided in the planned development design which are not
economically feasible to provide in conventional industrial projects; or
(5) The project provides a compatible transition between adjacent existing single-family residential
projects and provides a compatible transition for the extension of future single-family projects into
adjacent undeveloped areas.
(e) Preexisting Uses. Any use lawfully existing and in operation in a “P-I” Planned Industrial District on the
effective date of this article shall be considered to be a nonconforming use and may be continued or changed to a
similar use provided that no changes are made in the density, area, height, screening, parking, landscaping or
other development criteria applicable to the site without prior approval of a development plan by the city
council.
(f) Use Designations. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a new use in a
“P-I” Planned Industrial District, a use designation must be approved by the city council following a
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The approval of a use designation shall be considered
to be a change in zoning which must be approved by ordinance following the notice and public hearing
requirements of Section 14.703 of this article. All applications for a use designation which will require new
construction or a change in the development criteria applicable to the site shall include a development plan as
required by subsection (j) and a site plan as required by subsection (k), or a combined and abbreviated
development and site plan as permitted by subsection (l).
(g) Density, Area, and Height Regulations. In approving a “P-I” Planned Industrial District or a use
designation in a “P-I” Planned Industrial District, the city council shall specify density, area, height, screening,
parking, landscaping, and other development criteria as may be required in subsection (j), development plan.
Such standards shall be indicated on the development plan and shall be made a part of the article. No property
located in a “P-I” Planned Industrial District shall be modified as to density, area, height, screening, parking,
landscaping, or other development criteria unless a development plan containing such revised development
criteria is approved.
(h) Ownership. An application for approval of a use designation, development plan or site plan in the “P-I”
Planned Industrial District may be filed by a person having a legal interest in the property. The application shall
be filed in the name(s) of the record owner(s) of the site, which shall be included in the application. The
applicant shall provide evidence, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, prior to final approval, that the
applicant has the authority to file the application on behalf of all owners of the site.
(i) Development Schedule.
(1) An application for a use designation for new construction or construction that increases the
floor area of the principal structure(s) shall be accompanied by a development schedule indicating the
approximate date on which construction is expected to begin and the rate of anticipated development
to completion. The development schedule, if adopted and approved by the city council, shall become
part of the Planned Industrial Ordinance and shall be adhered to by the owner, developer, and their
assigns or successors in interest.
(2) The city shall require the owner/developer of the planned development to submit a written
report on a regular basis to the planning and zoning commission. Said written report shall describe
the progress achieved towards the development schedule. However, upon request by the
owner/developer, the planning and zoning commission may, for good cause shown by the
owner/developer, recommend to the city council that the development schedule be extended or
revised as may be indicated by the facts of the case.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/562
(3) In the event that the owner/developer neglects to provide a written report, as established and
agreed to in the planned development, or if the owner/developer neglects to initiate any progress, the
city may initiate proceedings to rezone the property to a zoning district deemed appropriate.
However, no rezoning effort shall be initiated by the city prior to making an official inquiry of the
owner/developer regarding the status of the planned development.
(j) Development Plan Requirement. An application for a “P-I” Planned Industrial District, or approval of a
use designation in a “P-I” Planned Industrial District which will require new construction which increases the
floor area of the principal structure(s) or a change in the development criteria applicable to the site shall include
and be accompanied by a development plan, which shall become a part of the amending ordinance. The
development plan shall include the following information:
(1) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys, building sites or
building lots, any areas proposed for dedication or reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility
and garbage easements, school sites, street widening, street changes, the points of ingress and egress
from existing public streets on an accurate survey of the boundary of tract and topography with a
contour interval of not less than five (5) feet, or spot grades where the relief is limited.
(2) Where multiple types of industrial land uses are proposed, a land use plan delineating the
specific areas to be devoted to various industrial uses shall be required.
(3) A plan indicating the arrangement and provision of off-street parking and off-street loading
where required. Such a plan may be presented as a ratio of off-street parking and off-street loading
area to building area when accompanied by a typical example indicating the feasibility of the
arrangement proposed and when the areas where the example would be applied are dimensioned on
the drawing of the entire site. Any special traffic regulation facilities proposed or required to assure
the safe function of the circulation plan shall also be shown.
(4) A designation of the maximum building coverage of the site shall be indicated upon the
development plan. General foot print of buildings shall be indicated showing the approximate
position and sizes of any proposed structures.
(5) Landscaping and screening shall be provided as required in Article 14.600 and shall be
indicated on the development plan.
(6) Any or all of the required features may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is
clear and capable of evaluation by the city manager or his/her designee and interpretation by the
building inspector.
(7) Except as provided in subsection (m), any amendment to a development plan must be approved
by ordinance following notice and public hearing requirements of Section 14.703.
(k) Site Plan Requirement. Prior to issuance of a building permit, for new construction or construction which
increases the floor area of the principal structure(s), a site plan, in accordance with Section 14.602, will be
required. The site plan shall be approved by the city council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning
commission. The site plan may be submitted concurrently with the development plan. If the development plan
and the site plan are submitted separately, a separate public hearing and action shall be required for both
submittals.
(l) Combined and Abbreviated Development and Site Plan Submittal. If application is made for a new use
designation in a “P-I” Planned Commercial District on a site which contains existing improvements which are
not proposed to be enlarged, the following combined and abbreviated development and site plan shall be
permitted in place of a development plan:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/562
(1) Combined and abbreviated development and site plan shall contain the following: A scale
drawing showing existing building and proposed use designations, easements, points of ingress and
egress from existing public streets, the arrangement and provision of off-street parking and off-street
loading, and the location of landscaping and screening provided on site. These items shall be shown
on an accurate survey of the boundary of the lot. All of the required features may be incorporated on
a single drawing if such drawing is clear and capable of evaluation by the city manager or his/her
designee and interpretation by the building inspector.
(2) A combined and abbreviated development and site plan must be approved by ordinance
following notice and public hearing requirements of Section 14.703.
(m) Administrative Approval of Development Plan and Site Plan. A development plan and site plan may be
approved by the city manager or his/her designee without the approval of the city council and planning and
zoning commission if said application is located within an existing structure and: (1) does not increase the floor
area of the existing structure; and (2) does not change the existing use on the site. The city manager or his/her
designee may, for any reason, elect to present the development plan or site plan to the planning and zoning
commission and city council for approval.
(n) Platting Requirements. No application for a building permit for the construction of a building or structure
shall be approved unless the property on which the proposed improvements are planned has been platted. The
plat must meet all the requirements of the city, and must have been approved by the city council and recorded in
the official records of Tarrant County.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5H; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.509 “M-PD” Mixed Planned Development District Regulations
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Mixed Planned Development District is to encourage creative development of
the land, provide locations for well planned comprehensive developments, and provide for variety and flexibility
in the development patterns of the city which promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community. A Mixed Planned Development District (M-PD) may include a combination of different dwelling
types and/or a variety of residential and nonresidential land uses which creatively complement each other and
harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity.
(b) Planned Development Uses. In a “M-PD” Mixed Planned Development District, no land shall be used and
no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, except for those retail, office, hotel,
commercial or similar uses which are specifically approved by the city council for that site. The approved uses
may be for an entire class of uses, such as general retail, or for specific types of uses, such as a fast food
restaurant.
(c) Accessory Uses. Any accessory use permitted within the residential and commercial districts of the city
shall be permitted as accessory uses to a primary use in the “M-PD” Mixed Planned Development District.
(d) Conditions for a Mixed Residential and Nonresidential Planned Developments. Mixed Planned
Developments shall be considered appropriate where the following conditions prevail:
(1) The project utilized innovative land development concepts and is consistent with the
comprehensive land use plan and the goals and objectives of the city;
(2) Dwelling units are situated such that an appreciable amount of land for open space is available
and is integrated throughout the planned development; so as to permit a developer to collect the
density and reflect a development plan that incorporates the aggregate total number of dwelling units
into the overall development plan;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/562
(3) The project utilizes an innovative approach in lot configuration and mixture of residential
housing types;
(4) Higher densities than conventional single-family projects of the same acreage is achievable
with appropriate buffering between existing conventional single-family developments and increased
open space;
(5) Non-residential uses are situated such that an appreciable amount of land is available for open
space or joint use as parking and public access space and is integrated throughout the planned
development;
(6) Aesthetic amenities may be provided in the planned development design which are not
economically feasible to provide in conventional residential and nonresidential projects; or
(7) The project provides a compatible transition, which may include buffer yards, thoroughfares, or
transitional uses, whichever is appropriate, between adjacent existing single-family residential
projects and provides a compatible transition for the extension of future single-family projects into
adjacent undeveloped areas.
(e) Preexisting Uses. Any use lawfully existing and in operation in a “M-PD” Mixed planned development
District on the effective date of this article shall be considered to be a nonconforming use and may be continued
or changed to a similar use provided that no changes are made in the density, area, height, screening, parking,
landscaping or other development criteria applicable to the site without prior approval of a development plan by
the city council.
(f) Use Designations. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a new use in a
“M-PD” Mixed Planned Development District, a use designation must be approved by the city council following
a recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The approval of a use designation shall be
considered to be a change in zoning which must be approved by ordinance following the notice and public
hearing requirements of Section 14.703 of this article. All applications for a use designation which will require
new construction or a change in the development criteria applicable to the site shall include a development plan
as required by subsection (j) and a site plan as required by subsection (k), or a combined and abbreviated
development and site plan as permitted by subsection (l).
(g) Density, Area, and Height Regulations. In approving a “M-PD” District or a use designation in a “M-PD”
Mixed Planned Development District, the city council shall specify density, area, height, screening, parking,
landscaping, and other development criteria as may be required in subsection (j), development plan. Such
standards shall be indicated on the development plan and shall be made a part of the article. No property located
in a “M-PD” Mixed Planned Development District shall be modified as to density, area, height, screening,
parking, landscaping or other development criteria unless a development plan containing such revised
development criteria is approved.
(h) Ownership. An application for approval of a use designation, development plan or site plan in the “M-PD”
Mixed Planned Development District may be filed by a person having a legal interest in the property. The
application shall be filed in the name(s) of the record owner(s) of the site, which shall be included in the
application. The applicant shall provide evidence, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, prior to final
approval, that the applicant has the authority to file the application on behalf of all owners of the site.
(i) Development Schedule.
(1) An application for a use designation for new construction or construction that increases the
floor area of the principal structure(s) shall be accompanied by a development schedule indicating the
approximate date on which construction is expected to begin and the rate of anticipated development
to completion. The development schedule, if adopted and approved by the city council, shall become
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/562
part of the Mixed Planned Development Ordinance and shall be adhered to by the owner, developer,
and their assigns or successors in interest.
(2) The city shall require the owner/developer of the planned development to submit a written
report on a regular basis to the planning and zoning commission. Said written report shall describe
the progress achieved towards the development schedule. However, upon request by the
owner/developer, the planning and zoning commission may, for good cause shown by the
owner/developer, recommend to the city council that the development schedule be extended or
revised as may be indicated by the facts of the case.
(3) In the event that the owner/developer neglects to provide a written report, as established and
agreed to in the planned development, or if the owner/developer neglects to initiate any progress, the
city may initiate proceedings to rezone the property to a zoning district deemed appropriate.
However, no rezoning effort shall be initiated by the city prior to making an official inquiry of the
owner/developer regarding the status of the planned development.
(j) Development Plan Requirement. An application for a “M-PD” Mixed Planned Development District, or
approval of a use designation in a “M-PD” Mixed Planned Development District which will require new
construction which increases the floor area of the principal structure(s) or a change in the development criteria
applicable to the site shall include and be accompanied by a Development plan, which shall become a part of the
amending regulations. The development plan shall include the following information:
(1) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys, building sites or
building lots, any areas proposed for dedication or reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility
and garbage easements, school sites, street widening, street changes, the point of ingress and egress
from existing public streets on an accurate survey of the boundary of tract and topography with a
contour interval of not less than five (5) feet, or spot grades where the relief is limited.
(2) Where multiple types of commercial land uses are proposed, a land use plan delineating the
specific areas to be devoted to various commercial uses shall be required.
(3) A plan indicating the arrangement and provision of off-street parking and off-street loading
where required. Such a plan may be presented as a ratio of off-street parking and off-street loading
area to building area when accompanied by a typical example indicating the feasibility of the
arrangement proposed and when the areas where the example would be applied are dimensioned on
the drawing of the entire site. Any special traffic regulation facilities proposed or required to assure
the safe function of the circulation plan shall also be shown.
(4) A designation of the maximum building coverage of the site shall be indicated upon the
development plan. General foot print of buildings shall be indicated showing the approximate
position and sizes of any proposed structures.
(5) Landscaping and screening shall be provided as required in Article 14.600 and shall be
indicated on the development plan.
(6) Any or all of the required features may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is
clear and capable of evaluation by the city manager or his/her designee and interpretation by the
building inspector.
(7) Except as provided in subsection (m), any amendment to a development plan must be approved
by ordinance following the notice and public hearing requirements of Section 14.703.
(k) Site Plan Requirement. Prior to issuance of a building permit, for new construction or construction which
increases the floor area of the principal structure(s) or construction that changes the development criteria for the
site, a site plan, in accordance with Section 14.602, will be required. The site plan shall be approved by the city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/562
council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. The site plan may be submitted
concurrently with the development plan. If the development plan and the site plan are submitted separately, a
separate public hearing and action shall be required for both submittals.
(l) Combined and Abbreviated Development and Site Plan Submittal. If application is made for a new use
designation in a “M-PD” Mixed Planned Development District on a site which contains existing improvements
which are not proposed to be enlarged, the following combined and abbreviated development and site plan shall
be permitted in place of a development plan:
(1) Combined and abbreviated development and site plan shall contain the following: A scale
drawing showing existing building and proposed use designations, easements, points of ingress and
egress from existing public streets, the arrangement and provision of off-street parking and off-street
loading, and the location of landscaping and screening provided on site. These items shall be shown
on an accurate survey of the boundary of the lot. All of the required features may be incorporated on
a single drawing if such drawing is clear and capable of evaluation by the city manager or his/her
designee and interpretation by the building inspector.
(2) A combined and abbreviated development and site plan must be approved by ordinance
following the notice and public hearing requirements of Section 14.703.
(m) Administrative Approval of Development Plan and Site Plan. A development plan and site plan may be
approved by the city manager or his/her designee without the approval of the city council and planning and
zoning commission if said application is located within an existing structure and: (1) does not increase the floor
area of the existing structure; and (2) does not change the existing use on the site. The city manager or his/her
designee may, for any reason, elect to present the development plan or site plan to the planning and zoning
commission and city council for approval.
(n) Platting Requirements. No application for a building permit for the construction of a building or structure
shall be approved unless the property on which the proposed improvements are planned has been platted. The
plat must meet all the requirements of the city, and must have been approved by the city council and recorded in
the official records of the Tarrant County.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 5I; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.510 Uses Permitted in Each Zoning District
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, the following uses shall be permitted as a
matter of right in each zoning district, including each planned development zoning district, without specific
approval of the city council:
(1) Gas well drilling and operations.
(Ordinance 852 adopted 1/9/07)
ARTICLE 14.600 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Sec. 14.601 Nonconforming Uses
(a) Purpose and Intent. Within the districts established by this article, there may exist buildings or uses of land
and buildings which were lawful before this article was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the terms of this section or future amendments. Such nonconforming buildings or
uses of land and buildings may be continued although they do not conform with the provisions of this section,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/562
subject to the limitations and conditions set forth in this section. Such nonconforming uses are declared by this
section to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved.
With due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in light of the public welfare, the
character of the area surrounding the nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of surrounding
properties and their values, it is the declared purpose of this article that nonconforming uses be eliminated and
be required to conform to the regulations prescribed in this section.
(b) Building on Nonconforming Lots of Record. In any district, buildings may be erected on any single lot of
record, provided there is access to such buildings from a street and the lot is in the same ownership as recorded
on the effective date of this section. This provision shall apply even though the lot fails to meet the minimum
requirements for area, width, or depth for the district in which it is located; however, all other requirements shall
still apply. All buildings constructed on nonconforming lots of record shall meet all development regulations in
the district unless proper variances are granted by the board of adjustment. No building shall be constructed on
multiple lots. Whenever construction is desired on multiple lots, the property owner or his/her agent shall replat
the property into a single lot.
(c) Nonconforming Buildings. Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building, provided
that no structural alterations shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the building is
brought into conformity with the provisions of this article.
(d) Nonconforming Use of Buildings. A nonconforming use of a building shall not be increased or enlarged
and no occupancy of additional buildings or land by a nonconforming uses shall be permitted, except that a
nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout any parts of the building which were manifestly
arranged or designed for such use and which were owned or leased by the owner of the nonconforming use on
the effective date of this article, provided no structural alterations, except those required by law or ordinance, are
made, and provided further that no additional dwelling units shall be added where the nonconforming use results
from there being more dwelling units on the lot than is permissible in the district in which the building is
located. The board of adjustments shall have the authority to permit an extension of a building which is
nonconforming as to uses not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing floor area, subject to the
development regulations applicable in the zoning district.
(e) Nonconforming Use of Land. A nonconforming use of land may not be expanded or extended beyond the
area of land actually being occupied by the use at the time it becomes nonconforming, except to provide offstreet
loading or off-street parking space facilities. Notwithstanding the above, the board of adjustment may
permit an expansion of a nonconforming use of land on a lot of record not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%)
of the existing area of the land actually being occupied by the nonconforming use, subject to the development
regulations applicable to the zoning district.
(f) Discontinuance or Abandonment.
(1) A nonconforming use, when discontinued or abandoned, shall not be resumed and any further
use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article. Discontinuance or abandonment shall be
defined as follows:
(A) When land used for a nonconforming use shall cease to be used in a bona fide manner for
the nonconforming use for sixty (60) consecutive calendar days.
(B) When a building designed or arranged for a nonconforming use shall cease to be used in
a bona fide manner as a nonconforming use for a period of six (6) consecutive calendar months.
(C) When a building designed or arranged for a conforming use shall cease to be used in a
bona fide manner as a nonconforming use for a period of three (3) consecutive calendar months.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/562
(D) When land or a building used only on a seasonal basis is not used in a bona fide manner
as a nonconforming use during such season.
(2) Discontinuance or abandonment shall be conclusively deemed to have occurred irrespective of
the intent of the property owner if the nonconforming use was dilapidated, substandard, or was not
maintained in a suitable condition for occupancy during the above time periods.
(3) Upon evidence of hardship, the board of adjustment shall have the power to extend the time
limits in subsection (A) not to exceed one (1) year.
(g) Destruction of Nonconforming Use.
(1) If a nonconforming building or a building occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by
fire, the elements or otherwise, it may not be reconstructed or rebuilt except to conform with the
provisions of this article unless the destruction amount is less than fifty percent (50%) of its fair
market value at the time of destruction.
(2) If the destruction is greater than fifty percent (50%) and less than total, the board of adjustment
may, after a public hearing, authorize repair, taking into consideration the property owner's
circumstances and the effect on surrounding properties.
(3) Upon submission by the owner of sufficient evidence to prove that the destruction amounts to
less than fifty percent (50%) of the total value of the entire nonconforming use and that the destroyed
building or structure constituted an integral part of the nonconforming use without which the
nonconforming use cannot be profitably operated, the board of adjustment may permit the
reconstruction of such destroyed building or buildings under conditions which reasonably allow the
owner to recoup his original investment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a single-family residence which is destroyed
shall be permitted to be reconstructed without board of adjustment approval regardless of the extent
of destruction, provided that the construction complies with all current building codes and is
commenced within six (6) months of the date of destruction. The failure of the owner to start such
reconstruction within six (6) months shall forfeit the owner's right to restore or reconstruct the
dwelling except in conformance with this article.
(5) If the owner of a nonconforming use fails to begin reconstruction of the destroyed building
(when permitted to do so by the terms of this article) within six (6) months of the date of destruction
or approval by the board of adjustment, the nonconforming building or use shall be deemed to be
discontinued or abandoned as provided in subsection (f) above.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 6A)
(6) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the owner of a manufactured home that has
been destroyed by fire or natural disaster, may replace the manufactured home, provided that the
installation complies with all applicable state or local regulations and the owner applies for a permit
and commences installation within six (6) months of the date of destruction. The failure of the owner
to start such installation within six (6) months shall forfeit the owner's right to replace the
manufactured home except in conformance with this article. In this subsection (6), the terms “fire”
and “natural disaster” shall have the same meanings as the identical terms in Section 1201.008(f) of
the Texas Occupations Code. (Ordinance 873, sec. 1, adopted 11/13/07)
(h) Registration of Nonconforming Uses. The owner of any nonconforming use shall register said
nonconforming use with the code enforcement department within six (6) months of the effective date of this
article. Registration shall be confirmed by the issuance of a “certificate of occupancy – nonconforming,” which
shall be considered legal evidence of the existence of the nonconforming use. The zoning administrator shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/562
maintain on file for the city all “certificates of occupancy nonconforming.” After six (6) months from the
effective date of this article, the board of adjustment shall have the authority to direct the city to issue a
“certificate of occupancy – nonconforming,” upon presentation of evidence adequate to satisfy the board that a
building or land were lawful uses before this article was passed or amended. A pending request to the board of
adjustment shall be sufficient defense against enforcement of fees for violation of the article. In the event that
the owner of a nonconforming use does not register the use as required, there shall be a rebuttable presumption
that the nonconforming use was not legally existing on the effective date of this article, and the nonconforming
use shall be deemed illegal and a violation of this article.
(i) Additional Limitations and Provisions Regarding Nonconforming Uses.
(1) A nonconforming use or building, if changed to a conforming use or building, may not be
changed back to a nonconforming use or building.
(2) No nonconforming accessory use or structure shall continue after the principal use or structure
shall have ceased or terminated unless the accessory use or structure shall thereafter conform to the
provisions of the zoning district in which it is located.
(3) Nothing contained in this article shall require any change in the plans, construction or
designated use of a building or land development project for which a building permit was lawfully
issued no more than six (6) months prior to the adoption or amendment or this article, provided, that
such construction shall have been started at the time such use became nonconforming and shall have
been diligently prosecuted to completion.
(4) The foregoing provisions of this article shall also apply to uses made nonconforming by
subsequent amendments to the zoning regulations or by annexation into the city limits of the city.
(5) Any use which is permitted as a special exception use by the board of adjustment shall, upon
its establishment, be considered a conforming use in that district, provided that this regulation shall
not be so interpreted as to waive any conditions placed on the special exception by the board of
adjustment.
(6) The board of adjustment shall, from time to time, on its own motion, or upon cause presented
by interested persons, inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming
use within the city. The board of adjustment may take specific action to abate, remove, limit or
terminate any nonconforming use or building under reasonable guidelines as set forth in Section
14.702. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to take such action.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 6A)
(j) Replacement of Manufactured Home by Owner.
(1) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the owner of a manufactured home that
occupies a lot within the city may remove the manufactured home from its location and place another
manufactured home on the same property, provided that the replacement is a newer manufactured
home and is at least as large in living space as the prior manufactured home, and provided that the
installation complies with all applicable state or local regulations and the owner applies for a permit
and commences installation within six (6) months of the date of removal. The failure of the owner to
start such installation within six (6) months shall forfeit the owner's right to replace the manufactured
home except in conformance with this article.
(2) Replacement of a manufactured home in accordance with this subsection (j) is limited to a
single replacement.
(Ordinance 873, sec. 2, adopted 11/13/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/562
Sec. 14.602 Site Plan Requirements
Whenever a site plan is required by this article, such site plan must conform to the requirements of this section.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all site plans must be approved by the city council after recommendation of
the planning and zoning commission.
(1) Requirement Prior to Building Permit. When required by this article, a site plan must be
approved prior to issuance of a building permit by the city.
(2) Changes to the Site Plan. Changes to the site plan shall be processed in the same manner as the
original approved site plan.
(A) Except as otherwise provided, any site plan that is amended shall require approval of the
city council after review by the planning and zoning commission.
(B) Changes to the site plan which will affect the use of the land shall require either an
amendment to a PD or a rezoning of property, whichever applies, and shall require the
appropriate public hearings.
(C) Changes of details within a site plan which do not alter the basic physical relationship of
the property to adjacent property, do not alter the uses permitted, do not increase the density,
floor area, height, or reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site as indicated on the
approved site plan, may be authorized by the city manager or his/her designee. An aggrieved
party may appeal the decision of the city manager or his/her designee to the zoning board of
adjustment in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(3) Council Approval. City council approval of a site plan that accompanies a zoning change
request shall become part of the amended ordinance. Hearings held by the council for consideration
of approval of such zoning change and accompanying site plan shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of Section 14.703.
(4) Compliance with City Design Standards. The site plan must comply with design standards,
policies, and any design criteria deemed necessary by the city council to protect the safety, health,
and welfare of the city.
(5) Site Plan Contents. The site plan shall contain, where applicable, the information listed below
and any or all of the required features may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is
clear and capable of evaluation by the planning and zoning commission, the city council and the staff
personnel required to enforce and interpret this section.
(A) The location of all existing and planned structures on the subject property and
approximate locations of structures on adjoining property within 100 feet.
(B) Lighting and/or fencing and/or screening of yards and setback areas and proposed
changes.
(C) Design of ingress and egress.
(D) Off-street parking and loading facilities, and calculations showing how the quantities
were obtained.
(E) Height of all structures.
(F) Proposed uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/562
(G) Landscape plan.
(H) The location, general size, and type of all major trees or closely grouped trees may be
shown in general grouping if necessary.
(I) The location and type of all signs, including lighting and heights.
(J) Elevation drawings if requested by staff, planning and zoning commission, or city
council.
(K) Street names on proposed streets.
(L) Proposed water, wastewater collection, and storm sewer lines; proposed grading and
drainage patterns.
(M) Engineering drawings of all improvements to be dedicated to the city, if the property is
not to be final platted or if engineering drawings have not been previously submitted for the
site. If the property is to be final platted, these may be provided at that time.
(N) Utility and drainage easements for dedicated infrastructure, if required.
(O) Such additional terms and conditions, including design standards, as the planning and
zoning commission and the city council deem necessary.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 6B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.603 Vehicle Parking Regulations
(a) Purpose. Except hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or
converted for any use permitted in the district in which it is located unless there shall be provided on the lot or
tract or on an immediately contiguous lot or tract, or on a lot or tract within 150 feet of such building or
structure, vehicle parking in the following ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the designated
districts, except that an established use lawfully existing at the effective date of this article need not provide
vehicle parking as hereinafter set forth provided such use is not expanded and that no existing vehicle parking in
connection with said uses at the effective date of this article may be reduced below the minimum number of
spaces as hereinafter required.
(b) General Regulations. In the “SF-I,” “MD,” “C,” and “I” zoning districts the minimum off-street parking
spaces for all permitted uses shall be as listed in subsection (c) below. Where parking spaces result from the
computation of requirements, the requirement shall be construed to be that the fractional space will be treated as
another full parking space required.
(c) Schedule of Minimum Number of Parking Spaces.
Use Number
of Spaces
Required for Each Additional
Requirements
(1) Single-Family
Residential District
2 Dwelling Unit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/562
(2) Duplex, Triplex, Quad
Residential District
2 Dwelling Unit
(3) Multiple Family
Residential
2 Dwelling Unit
(4) Manufactured
Housing
2 Dwelling Unit 150 sq. ft. of additional
area for each 2 units for
common area for
storage of boats and
trailers and visitor
parking
(5) Bank, Savings and
Loan or similar
financial
establishment
5 per 1000 sq. ft. floor
area
(6) Bowling Alley 4 per lane
(7) Clinics or Dr. Office 5 per 1000 sq. ft. floor
area
(8) Churches 1 each 4 sanctuary seats Up to 90% may be on
adj. lot if owner signs
an agreement with the
church to use his lot
during church services
(9) Commercial
Amusement
10 plus 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. floor
area over 1000 sq. ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/562
(10) Convalescent Home,
Hospital (Chronic
Care), Home for the
Aged
10 plus 1 space for each
4 beds
(11) Gasoline Service
Station
5 each 1000 sq. ft. floor
space minimum of 4
spaces
(12) Golf Course 2.5 per hole (minimum)
(13) High School, College
or University
1 per classroom,
laboratory or
instruction area plus
one space for each 3
students
(14) Hospital (Acute Care) 1 for each 2 beds plus 1
space for each 3 staff
members
(15) Hotel or Motel 5 plus 1 per each room,
unit, or guest
accommodation
(additional space
required for
restaurants and related
facilities
(16) Institution
(Philanthropic)
10 plus 1 for each
employee
(17) Library or Museum 10 plus 1 per 300 sq. ft.
floor area
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 528/562
(18) Manufacturing,
Processing or
Repairing
1 per 2 employees or per
1000 sq. ft. floor area,
whichever is greater
(19) Office, general 5 per 1000 sq. ft. floor
area
(20) Recreational, private
or commercial area of
building (other than
listed)
5 per 1000 sq. ft. floor
area
(21) Restaurant or Cafeteria 1 for each 2 seats under
maximum seating
(22) Retail /Personal
Service
5 per 1000 sq. ft. floor
area
(23) Furniture and
Appliance Stores
5 per 1000 sq. ft. floor
area
(24) Schools, Elementary
or Junior High
1 per classroom plus 1
for each 3 seats in any
auditorium,
gymnasium or other
assembly place
(25) Storage or
Warehousing
1 for each 2 employees
or per 1000 sq. ft.
whichever is greater
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/562
(26) Theaters, meeting
rooms, places of
public assembly
1 for each 4 seats
(27) Shopping Center or
Mall
5 for each 1000 sq. ft.
floor area
If less than 2 then
parking must be
calculated for each
business
(28) Motor Vehicle Service 5 per 1000 sq. ft. of floor
area
(29) Beauty and Barber
Shop
5 per 1000 sq. ft. of floor
area
(d) Handicapped Parking Requirements. In each parking facility in the MF, MH, C, 1, and PD districts a
portion of the total parking shall be specifically designated, located, and reserved for vehicles licensed for use by
the handicapped. These spaces will be provided according to the following schedule:
Total
Spaces
in Lot
No. of Required Handicapped
Spaces
Up to
25
1
26 to
50
2
51 to
75
3
76 to
100
4
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/562
101 to
150
5
151 to
200
6
201 to
300
7
301 to
400
8
401 to
500
9
Over
500
2% of total
(1) Location. Such parking spaces shall be located on an accessible circulation route and as near as
is reasonably possible to the primary entities to the building or facility. In separate parking structure,
lots or basement garages parking spaces shall be located on the shortest possible circulation route. In
addition, the parking spaces shall be located in proximity to the accessible point of ingress including
elevators and there shall be an accessible route from the point of egress to the nearest primary
entrance into the building or facility.
(2) Additional Requirements. One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be
served by an access aisle eight (8), feet wide minimum and shall be designated “van accessible.”
(e) Minimum Dimensions for Off-Street Parking.
(1) The design and dimensions of off-street parking shall be in accordance with the following table
of minimum dimensions.
Parking
Angle
Stall
Width
Stall
Length
Maneuvering
Space
90
degree
9 feet 18 feet 24 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/562
60
degree
9 feet 20.1
feet
20 feet
45
degree
9 feet 19.1
feet
18 feet
(2) When off-street parking facilities are provided adjacent to a public alley, the width of said alley
may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement.
(3) Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts herein
specified, or when off-street parking facilities are provided but not required by this article, said offstreet
parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering
space herein specified.
(f) Special Off-Street Parking Requirements.
(1) In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking
requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each class of use
included in the building for development.
(2) In the Residential Districts, no parking space, garage or carport or other automobile storage
space or structure shall be used for the storage of any truck, truck trailer, van, recreational vehicle, or
boat exceeding one and one half (1 1/2) ton capacity.
(3) In the residential districts a boat or recreational vehicle (RV) may be parked or stored on the
residential premises of the owner provided that such boat or RV is.
(A) Parked on a permanently paved surface when parked in the side yards;
(B) not parked beside a structure in the required side yards;
(C) not parked within three (3) feet of the rear or side property lines when parked in the rear
of a structure;
(D) not used for sleeping quarters for more than seven (7) days or nights within any 6 month
period;
(E) not parked over the front property line or in the right-of-way except when used in
conformance to subsection (d). For corner lots the RV may not be parked within 15 feet of the
property line corner formed by the intersecting street.
(4) Floor area of structures devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in the
computing of off-street parking requirements.
(5) Private access drives to parking lots to serve nonresidential uses shall not be through residential
districts.
(g) Parking Requirements for New or Unlisted Uses. Where questions arise concerning the minimum offstreet
parking requirements for any use not specifically listed, the requirements may be interpreted as those of a
similar use.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 6C)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/562
Sec. 14.604 Landscaping
(a) Purpose.
(1) This section establishes landscaping requirements in zoning districts C, I, P-MF, P-C, P-I and
M-PD to enhance the community's ecological, environmental, and aesthetic qualities and
beautification efforts.
(2) It is the intent of this section to reduce the negative effects of glare, noise, erosion and
sedimentation caused by expanses of impervious and unvegitated surfaces within the urban
environment.
(3) It is also the intent of this section to preserve and improve the natural and urban environment
by recognizing that the use of landscaping elements can contribute to the processes of air
purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, abatement of noise, glare and heat,
provision of habitats for wildlife, and enhance the overall beauty of the city.
(b) Landscape Installation Required.
(1) No building permit shall be issued after the effective date of this article for the construction of
any new building in zoning districts C, I, P-MF, P-C, P-I and M-PD unless a landscaping plan has
been approved in accordance with this article. Except as otherwise provided in this article, a
minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the lot on which the new building is
constructed shall be landscaped. This 20% requirement may be reduced by as much as fifty percent
(50%) through the application of credits granted in the manner described in subsection (e) below.
(2) The landscaping requirements in this article shall not apply to any lot for which a site plan, plot
plan or landscaping plan has previously been approved by the city in conjunction with zoning or
other development approval, provided that no substantive revisions are made to such approved plan.
If only a portion of a large tract or lot is being developed, twenty percent (20%) of the area being
developed, as determined by the building official according to the submitted site plan, will be
required to be landscaped.
(c) Landscaping Plan Required.
(1) A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the city for approval. The landscape plan may be
submitted as a part of the site plan.
(2) The landscape plan shall contain the following information:
(A) minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet;
(B) location of all trees to be preserved; method of preservation during the construction phase
of development shall be approved by the director of parks and recreation.
(C) location of all plants and landscaping material to be used including paving benches,
screens, fountains, statues, or other landscape features;
(D) species of all plant material to be used;
(E) size of all plant material to be used;
(F) spacing of plant material where appropriate;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/562
(G) layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler or water system, including placement of
water sources;
(H) description of maintenance provisions of the landscape plan;
(I) persons responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan.
(d) Locational Criteria.
(1) Not less than forty (40) percent of the total landscaping required by this article shall be located
in the designated front yard.
(2) All landscape material shall comply with visibility requirements of the city Code of
Ordinances.
(e) Credits Toward Landscaping Requirements. Credits toward the landscaping requirements set forth in
subsection (b) above may be granted in the following manner:
Additional Enhancement Credit
(1) Three inch tree (trunk diameter measured 12" above
grade)
200 sq. ft.
(2) Six inch tree (trunk diameter measured 12" above
grade)
400 sq. ft.
(3) Ten, one (1) gallon shrubs 100 sq. ft.
(4) Twenty ,five square feet flower bed 100 sq. ft.
(A) In no instance shall the total amount of landscaping on a lot be reduced through credits
by more than fifty (50) percent of the landscaped area required by this article.
(B) A flower bed is any area where the soil has been specifically prepared for the planting of
flowering plants. In addition, in order to be considered for credit calculations at least 80% of the
prepared area must be covered with flowering plant material at the time of peak growth.
(f) Installation and Maintenance.
(1) All required landscaped area shall be permanently landscaped with living plant material, and
shall have either an irrigation system installed or shall be accessible to a bibcock, faucet, or other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/562
water source on the same lot or parcel. Synthetic or artificial lawn or plant material shall not be used
to satisfy the requirements of this article.
(2) Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other such material or plants not
a part of the landscaping.
(3) All plant materials shall be main lined in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for
the season of the year.
(4) Plant materials which die shall be replaced with plant material of similar variety and size
within a six (6) month period, with a one time extension not exceeding six (6) months being provided
upon approval of the city manager or his/her designee.
(g) Certificate of Occupancy.
(1) All landscaping shall be completed and installed in accordance with the approved landscape
plan within six (6) months of a certificate of occupancy being granted. A one time extension not to
exceed six (6) months may be granted upon approval of the building official or his designee.
(2) If these requirements have not been satisfied within the six (6) month period from when the
certificate of occupancy is issued, the property owner shall be considered in violation of this article
and shall be subject to the penalties established herein.
(h) Nonconforming Uses and/or Structures. All uses that are in existence at the time of the adoption of this
section, which do not meet the landscaping requirements provided herein, will be considered as being legal
nonconforming to these landscape requirements. These nonconforming uses/structures will be subject to Section
14.602 of the city zoning ordinance, unless otherwise provided for in this section.
(i) Modification, Variances and Appeal.
(1) Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in complying with the
provisions of this article relating to landscaping such as the presence of existing facilities or unusual
topography, the city manager or his/her designee may grant modifications in individual cases,
provided he shall first find that a special individual circumstance makes strict compliance with this
article impractical; that the modification is in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article;
and that the proposed modification is at least the equivalent of the requirements prescribed by this
article. Such modification may only be made upon written application filed with the city manager or
his/her designee and the details of any action granting the modification shall be recorded and entered
into the files of the city. In order to be considered for a modification, the applicant shall provide to
the city manager or his/her designee an alternative landscape plan for review and approval. The
landscape plan must illustrate a plan to landscape as much area as available and shall provide for
irrigation of landscaped areas and a phasing schedule for completing the landscaping. All
landscaping improvements must be approved by the city manager or his/her designee.
(2) Variances and Appeals. Any applicant who desires a variance or elimination of the
requirements herein or who desires to appeal a decision of the city manager or his/her designee shall
file a written appeal with the city manager or his/her designee for consideration by the city council.
Such appeal shall be accompanied by adequate graphic reproductions a written summary of the
request and justification for the request. The city council shall have the authority to grant an
interpretation or variance to the requirements of this article if it determines that a literal enforcement
of the regulations will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in the development of the
property, that the situation causing the unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty is unique to the
affected property and is not self-imposed, that the variance will not injure and will be wholly
compatible with the use and permitted development of adjacent properties, and that the granting of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/562
the variance will be in harmony with the intent and purpose of this article. The decision of the city
council shall be final.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 6D; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.605 Temporary Uses and Events
(a) Purpose. Certain temporary uses of land are essential to the full development and utilization of the land
and are deemed to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city. Temporary uses and special events
are allowed only as enumerated in this article.
(b) Permitted Temporary Uses and Special Events. The permissible temporary uses and special events, the
conditions of use and the zoning districts wherein the uses are permitted are:
(1) Temporary outdoor sales and on property zoned C, I, P-C, P-I or M-PD by the existing
occupants of existing businesses of such properties, may be permitted by the city manager or his/her
designee upon the application and granting of a temporary use permit.
(2) No temporary building, tent or similar structure shall be erected in any required setbacks or
designated easements. Tents shall conform to the Uniform Fire Code. No tent or similar structure
shall be erected without first obtaining a permit. No temporary building shall be moved on any lot,
tract, or parcel of land without first obtaining a permit. No business shall be conducted from
temporary building, tent, or similar structure until all inspections have been completed to the
satisfaction of the city. No outside use of property for sales will be allowed except by the existing
occupants of the property. This includes parking of vehicles for a purpose other than conducting
business on the premises. All temporary building, tents, or similar structures shall be removed from
the property at the end of the permitted period of operation.
(3) In no event shall temporary uses be allowed for more than ninety (90) consecutive days or
more than once per year for any lot, parcel or tract of land. There will be no extension of the 90 days.
All sales shall meet the special conditions, if any, imposed by the city manager or his/her designee
and/or the fire marshal for the protection of the public interest and the welfare of the community.
(4) The temporary outdoor sale of Christmas trees may be permitted on those properties zoned C, I,
P-C, P-I, or M-PD for a period of forty (40) days prior to Christmas Day. Hours of operation will be
from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week. The city manager or his/her designee may issue
a permit for such sale when he/she finds that there is available adequate off-street parking area, either
improved or unimproved, and that location and layout of drives, parking areas, lighting, and sale
signs will not constitute a hazard to public travel on the abutting public streets. The city manager or
his/her designee shall establish the terms and conditions for the temporary use at the time of
approval. In the event that a sponsor is dissatisfied with the city manager's or his/her designee's
decision, the sponsor may appeal the requested use to the city council. Trees, stands, equipment,
trash, signs, lighting and shelters shall be removed by the permit holder no later than January 4th
following Christmas.
(5) Carnivals, circuses and special fundraising events sponsored by a public entity, civic or nonprofit
organization located within the city may be allowed as a temporary use for a period not
exceeding seven (7) consecutive days. Except for churches and public or semi-public school
sponsored events on their property, such events shall be on a site containing not less than two acres in
a nonresidential zoning district. Except for churches, public or semi-public schools, only one permit
for a carnival, circus or special fundraising event shall be issued to the same civic or non-profit
organization within a 180 day period. Adequate parking and sanitary facilities shall be made
available to the satisfaction of the city manager of his/her designee. The city manager or his/her
designee shall establish the terms and conditions for the temporary use at the time of approval. In the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/562
event that an applicant is dissatisfied with the city manager's or his/her designee's decision, the
applicant may appeal the requested use to the city council.
(6) The temporary sale of snow cones may be permitted on those properties zoned C, I, P-C, P-I or
M-PD for a period April 1 to September 30. Hours of operation are from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
The city manager or his/her designee may issue a permit for such sale when it is found that there is
available adequate off-street parking area, either improved or unimproved, as determined by the city
manager or his/her, and that location and layout of drives, parking areas, lighting and sale signs will
not constitute a hazard to public travel on the abutting public street. All structures, stands, trash,
signs, lighting, or anything associated with the temporary use shall be removed at the end of the
period of permitted use.
(7) The temporary sales of pumpkins may be permitted on those properties zoned C, I, P-C, P-I, or
M-PD for a period of forty (40) days between the months of October and November. Hours of
operation are from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. The city manager or his/her designees shall establish the
terms and conditions for the temporary use at the time of approval. In the event that a sponsor is
dissatisfied with the manager's or his/her designee's decision, the sponsor may appeal the requested
use to the city council. All pumpkins, stands, structures, trash, signs, lighting, or anything associated
with the temporary use shall be removed at the end of the period of permitted use.
(c) Temporary Uses Not Permitted. The outdoor sale of furniture, home furnishings, clothes, plants, flowers,
pottery, statues, decorative items, paintings, toys, papers or magazines, vehicles, farm and garden equipment,
tools, fencing lumber, building supplies, animals, livestock, or foods and drink, except as noted, or any other
activity that the city manager or his/her designees find appropriate. (Ordinance No. 580 of May 13, 1999)
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 6E; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.606 Masonry Requirement
(a) Masonry material will consist of brick, stone, tile, rock, stucco, cement, concrete tile wall or, if approved
by city council, concrete block, or other masonry materials of similar characteristics.
(b) In general, unless specifically provided below, the masonry requirements set forth shall be applicable to all
residential and nonresidential districts.
(1) Residential. All exterior wall surface of all permanent structures shall consist of 75% masonry.
Exterior wall surface is the area between the wall corners, extending from the finished floor level of
the foundation to the door or window header height of the first floor, whichever is greater. The
calculation of the minimum masonry requirements will not include windows, doors, glass
construction materials, or sidewalk or walkway covers.
(2) Nonresidential. All exterior wall surface of all permanent structures shall consist of 75%
masonry. Exterior wall surface is the area between the wall corners, extending from the finished floor
level of the foundation to the door or window header height of the top floor, whichever is greater.
This requirement shall apply to all of the minimum masonry requirements will not include windows,
doors, glass construction materials, or sidewalk or walkway covers.
(3) Any enlargement of an existing permanent residential or nonresidential structure shall match
percentage of masonry on the adjacent surface of the existing permanent residential or nonresidential
structure.
(4) Any one-story detached accessory building in SF-1 Single-Family Residential zoning, used as a
tool/storage shed of less than 120 square feet does not require a building permit and will not have to
meet the minimum masonry requirement. Any permanent one story detached accessory building of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 537/562
120 square feet or more in SF-1 Single-Family Residential zoning, that is used for storage will not
have to meet the minimum masonry requirement, as long as new materials, including factory
finished/painted steel and all materials used in residential construction are used in the construction. A
permanent accessory building cannot meet or exceed the total square footage of the primary
structure/residence, nor have a height exceeding the primary structure/residence. All detached
accessory buildings not in SF-1 Single-Family Residential zoning shall meet the minimum masonry
requirements.
(5) In case of damage of more than 50% to a nonconforming structure the owner can apply for a
variance of the masonry requirement to the city council.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 6F)
Sec. 14.607 Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to:
(1) establish regulations for the siting of towers and antennas;
(2) minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(3) encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites;
(4) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where
the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
(5) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse
visual impact of the towers and antennas;
(6) encourage using existing facilities as primary option sites for new antennas; and
(7) enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide services to the
community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
(b) Definitions. As used in this section:
Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the
sending or receiving or electromagnetic waves.
FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
City Council. The city council of the city.
Height. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest
point on the tower or other structure, even if the highest point is an antenna.
Monopole. A support structure for an antenna composed of a single spire; guide wires shall not be permitted
upon such structures.
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers and similar
structures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 538/562
(c) Applicability.
(1) Generally. The requirements of this article govern the location of towers that exceed, and
antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for the zoning
district in which the tower or antenna is to be located.
(2) Exemptions. Except for the requirements below, this section does not apply to:
(A) antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the
city; provided, a license or lease authorizing the antenna or tower has been approved by the city
council;
(B) amateur radio and TV antennas, including ham radio and CB's; however, commercial
use shall not be permitted, and the height of the antenna shall not be more than 10 feet higher
than the building it is attached to;
(C) a tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date
of this article, which is referred to in this article as a “preexisting tower” or “preexisting
antenna;” or
(d) Site Plan.
(1) Requirement. An approval for constructing any telecommunications tower or antenna shall
require submission of a site plan to the city council.
(2) Factors Considered in Approving Site Plan. In addition to the factors listed in subsection (e)(1),
the city council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to approve a site plan:
(A) Height of the proposed tower;
(B) Capability of the tower to structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed
by the applicant as certified by a licensed professional engineer;
(C) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;
(D) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(E) Surrounding topography;
(F) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(G) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the
effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(H) Proposed ingress and egress;
(I) Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in subsection (e)
(1); and
(J) Compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances of the city.
When approving a site plan, the city council may impose conditions to the extent the city council
concludes that conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed tower
antenna or adjoining properties. The city council may also waive or reduce the burden on the
applicant of one or more of these criteria if the city council concludes that the purposes of this article
are better served thereby.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 539/562
(3) Written Report Upon Denial of Site Plan. The city shall document in writing any denial of a
site plan to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities, stating the reason for
denial and including substantial evidence that supports the denial.
(e) Requirements for the Installation of Towers and Antennas.
(1) Availability of Suitable Existing Towers or Other Structures. No new tower shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city council that no existing
tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna
may consist of any of the following:
(A) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(B) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(C) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the
applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
(D) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the
antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures
would cause electromagnetic interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(E) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an
existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(F) Other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(2) Setbacks and Separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all
towers:
(A) Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site
residential structure.
(B) Towers, guys, and accessway facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback
requirements.
(C) Towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any
existing tower that is over 90 feet in height. Distances shall be measured in a straight line
between the nearest points on the bases of the towers.
(D) Only one tower shall be permitted upon each platted lot.
The city council may reduce the setbacks and separation requirements if the purposes of this
article would be better served thereby.
(3) Height Restrictions. A tower must meet the following height and usage criteria:
(A) for a single user, a tower may be no higher than 90 feet in height;
(B) for two users, a tower may be no higher than 120 feet in height; and
(C) for three or more users, a tower may be no higher than 150 feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 540/562
(4) Security Fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height
and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.
(5) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers:
(A) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively
screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer
shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
(B) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping
requirement may be reduced or waived.
(C) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be presented to the
maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer.
(6) Visual Characteristics.
(A) Towers shall be maintained with either a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(B) At a tower site, the design of the buildings related structures shall, to the extent possible,
be maintained with materials, color, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the
tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment.
(C) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting
electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(D) Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable
authority. If lighting is required, the city may review the available lighting alternatives and
approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
(E) Advertisement signs, flags, and banners shall be prohibited from towers.
(7) Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the
FM, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If applicable federal standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the
towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring the towers and antennas into compliance
with the revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of the standards and
regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal
agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(8) Building Codes, Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a
tower shall construct and maintain the tower in compliance with standards contained in applicable
local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electric
Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If upon inspection the city concludes that a
tower fails to comply with those codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the
tower into compliance with the standards. If the owner fails to bring the tower into compliance within
30 days, the city may remove the tower at the owner's expense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 541/562
(f) Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of the antenna or tower shall remove it
within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of the abandonment. If the antenna or tower
is not removed within the 90 days, the city may remove the antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are
two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall become effective until all users cease using the
tower.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 6H)
Sec. 14.608 Carports
(a) Intent. It is the intent of the city council that carports be allowed in single-family residential zoning
districts subject to the regulations and requirements set forth in this section. Carports are expressly prohibited in
any zoning districts of the city with the exception of SF-1.
(b) For purposes of this section, a carport is a structure that is not enclosed by any covering on at least three
sides and that serves the purpose of providing cover for off-street parking of private vehicles of the residents of a
single-family dwelling. In order to be permitted in an SF-1 zoning district, a carport shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) A side yard shall be required, and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width from the
property line. No carport shall be adjacent to a public or private street.
(2) A front yard setback for carports shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the back of the curb;
but in no case shall any portion of the carport project beyond the property line or easement.
(3) No carport shall exceed four hundred fifty square feet (450 sq. ft.) in roofed area.
(4) No carport shall contain an open-sided area that is in excess of ten feet (10') in height.
(5) The supporting structural elements in the outside perimeter of the roofed area shall be
constructed of 14-gauge or thicker aluminum or steel and conventional wood framed construction
meeting the requirements of the City Building Code as adopted by the City of Lake Worth.
(6) For carports with metal roofs, the roof material shall consist of 26-gauge or thicker aluminum
or steel with proper protection by paint or other materials to prevent corrosion and oxidation, or by
composition shingles applied over approved decking. Corrugated metal and all-fiberglass panels are
expressly prohibited.
(c) Fees. The construction of carports shall be subject to all building permit fees and requirements established
by the City of Lake Worth.
(Ordinance 875 adopted 12/11/07)
Sec. 14.609 Developments Across City Boundaries
(a) Purpose. The requirements of this section are designed to provide for the orderly development of retail
facilities that are located both within and outside the city limits of the city and that have primary or secondary
access to a roadway with the city.
(b) In addition to other parking regulations that apply, parking for a retail facility is permitted only as an
accessory use, and is allowed only when immediately adjacent to a retail facility that is located within the
corporate limits of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 542/562
(c) No access shall be allowed from a retail facility located within an adjacent city to a public street within the
city until a traffic impact analysis is submitted for approval by the city council showing that the public street is
designed and constructed in accordance with the currently approved master thoroughfare plan and the city's
development policies, procedures and standards, and that such public street is designed to accommodate any
traffic generated by the retail facility.
(d) The requirements of this section may be waived by the city council where the retail facility is to be
developed pursuant to an interlocal agreement which places development controls on the facility that adequately
address traffic impact issues on adjacent public streets and otherwise protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ordinance 778, sec. 1, adopted 12/14/04)
ARTICLE 14.700 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 14.701 Planning and Zoning Commission
(a) Creation and Purpose. A planning and zoning commission is hereby created in order to accomplish the
following purposes:
(1) To identify community needs and to advise the city council of the short range effect of these
needs on the total development of the city;
(2) To recommend achievable community goals for long-range planning and development of the
city;
(3) To recommend achievable plans, programs and policies that will aid the entire community in
achieving defined goals; and
(4) To help the public understand the plans, programs and polices adopted by the city council so
that concerned citizens can conduct private activities in harmony with these plans, programs and
policies.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7A)
(b) Membership and Appointment.
(1) The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of seven (7) qualified electors of the
city. The city council will consider for appointment to the commission only those persons who have
demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment,
interest in planning and zoning and an availability to prepare for and attend meetings. In addition, all
appointees shall have resided in the city for at least two (2) years prior to appointment. It is the intent
of the city council that members shall, by reason of diversity of their individual occupation, constitute
a commission which is broadly representative of the community. A member of the planning and
zoning commission shall not serve simultaneously as a member of the board of adjustment.
(Ordinance 953, sec. 1, adopted 12/14/10)
(2) Upon passage of this article, the city council shall immediately appoint members of the
planning and zoning commission. Upon appointment of the new members, all previous appointments
to the planning and zoning commission shall become null and void.
(c) Terms of Office. The members of the commission shall be identified by place numbers one (1) through
seven (7). Upon initial appointment pursuant to this article, members in the odd-numbered places shall be
appointed to serve terms expiring October 1, 1995, and members appointed to the even number places shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 543/562
serve terms expiring October 1, 1996. Thereafter, the terms of office for said members shall be two (2) years
beginning on October 1st of the year of appointment. The odd-numbered places shall expire in the oddnumbered
years and the even-numbered places shall expire in the even-numbered years. Commission members
may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. Newly appointed
members shall be installed at the first regular commission meeting after their appointment.
(d) Organization.
(1) The commission shall hold an organizational meeting in October of each year and shall elect a
chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The commission shall meet regularly and
shall designate the time and place of its meetings. The commission shall adopt its own rules and
procedures and shall keep a record of its proceedings consistent with the provisions of this article and
the requirements of law.
(2) Any member of the commission who misses three consecutive meetings without commission
approval shall be deemed to have vacated his commission membership. The city council, upon
receiving certification of three consecutive absences, shall fill the vacancy for the expired term. The
commission shall enter into its minutes a statement either approving or disapproving a given
members' absence. Six disapproved absences in any twelve (12) month period shall be deemed as
grounds for removal from said commission by the city council.
(e) Duties and Powers. The planning and zoning commission is hereby charged with the duty and invested
with the authority to:
(1) Inspect property and premises at reasonable hours where required in the discharge of its
responsibilities under the laws of the State of Texas and the city.
(2) Formulate and recommend to the city council for its adoption a city plan for the orderly growth
and development of the city and it environs, and from time to time recommend such changes in the
plan as it finds will facilitate the movement of people and goods, and the health, recreation, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(3) Formulate a zoning plan as may be deemed best to carry out the goals of the city plan and hold
public hearings and make recommendations to the city council relating to the creation,
implementation and amendment of zoning regulations and districts as provided in Chapter 211 of the
Texas Local Government Code and the city charter.
(4) Exercise all the powers of a commission as to approval or disapproval of plans, plats or replats
and the vacation of plans, plats and replats as set out in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government
Code and the city charter.
(5) Study and recommend the location, extension and planning of public rights-of-way, parks or
other public places, and the vacating or closing of same.
(6) Study and recommend the general design and location of public buildings, bridges, viaducts,
street fixtures and other structures and appurtenances.
(7) Study and recommend the design, alteration, location or relocation of works of art which are, or
may become, property of the city.
(8) Initiate, in the name of the city, for consideration at public hearings, all proposals:
(A) for the opening, vacating or closing of public rights-of-way, parks or other public places;
(B) for the original zoning of annexed areas; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 544/562
(C) for the change of zoning district boundaries on an area-wide basis. No fee shall be
required for the filing of any such proposal in the name of the city.
(9) Formulate and recommend to the city council for its adoption policies and regulations
consistent with the adopted city plan governing the location and/or operation of utilities, public
facilities and services owned or under the control of the city.
(10) Each October, submit a progress report to the city council summarizing its activities, major
accomplishments for the past year, and a proposed work program for the coming year. The report
shall contain for the year attendance records of all members and the identity of commission officers.
(11) Prepare and recommend to the city council a five year capital improvement plan.
(12) Prepare and recommend to the city council a city annexation policy and update same
periodically.
(13) At the direction of the city council, study, hold public hearings and submit reports on any
topics pertaining to planning, zoning and development that the council deems appropriate.
(14) Conduct an ongoing assessment program pertaining to the planning, zoning and development
ordinances of the city, recommending to the city council all necessary changes and updates to said
ordinance.
(f) Meetings and Quorum. A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four (4) members of the
commission. The members of the commission shall regularly attend meetings, public hearings and work sessions
of the commission and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized expenses
attendant to the performance of their duties. The members shall comply with all statutory time limits and public
notice requirements and all meetings of the commission shall be held in compliance with the Texas Opens
Meetings Act.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7A)
Sec. 14.702 Board of Adjustment
(a) Appointment. There is hereby created a board of adjustment consisting of five (5) members who shall be
appointed by the city council. In addition, the city council shall appoint two (2) alternate members who shall
serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular members. It is the declared policy of the city council that it will
consider and appoint only those persons who have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the
community, independent judgment, understanding of zoning and planning and availability to prepare for and
attend meetings. In addition, all appointees shall have resided in the city for at least two (2) years prior to
appointment. A member of the board of adjustment shall not serve simultaneously as a member of the planning
and zoning commission. Regular members shall be appointed to places numbered one (1) through five (5) and
alternate members shall be appointed to places numbered six (6) and seven (7). The terms of office of said
members shall be two (2) years beginning on October 1st of the year of appointment. The odd-numbered places
shall expire in the odd-numbered years and the even-numbered places shall expire in the even-numbered years.
Board members may be appointed to succeed themselves. (Ordinance 953, sec. 2, adopted 12/14/10)
(b) Removal and Vacancies. Members and alternates of the board of adjustment may be removed from office
by the city council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. After initial appointment of the
regular members and alternates, all vacancies occurring on the board shall be filled by the city council for the
unexpired term.
(c) Proceedings of the Board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 545/562
(1) The board of adjustment shall hold an organizational meeting in October of each year. The
members of the board of adjustment, including alternative members, shall elect a chairperson and
vice-chairperson from among its members. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules of procedure to
govern its proceedings; provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this article or
state statute. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times
as the board may determine. The chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
(2) All cases before the board of adjustment shall be heard by a minimum of four (4) members. All
meetings of the board of adjustment shall be open to the public and shall be held in compliance with
the Texas Open Meetings Act. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact and shall keep records of its decisions and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the
office of the city manager or his/her designee and kept as a public record.
(3) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator, or to grant any variance or special
exception to this article or to decide in favor of the applicant on any other matter upon which the
board is required to pass under this article.
(d) Notice and Hearing.
(1) The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of any appeal, variance,
special exception, or other matter which the board of adjustment is authorized to review hereunder,
give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide the same
within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney or agent. The
notice provided in this article shall be given by publication in the official city newspaper stating the
time and place of such hearing, which shall not be earlier than ten (10) days from the day of the
publication, and in addition thereto, the board of adjustment shall mail notices of the hearing to the
petitioner and, the owners of the property lying within two hundred feet (200') of any point of the lot
or portion thereof for which a variance, exception or other action relating only to a specific property
is proposed, and to all other persons deemed by the board of adjustment to be affected by the appeal.
Such owners and persons shall be determined according to the current tax rolls of the city and
substantial compliance therewith shall be deemed sufficient; provided, however, that the deposition
of such written notice in the mail by the board of adjustment shall be deemed sufficient compliance
with this requirement.
(2) Any special exceptions approved by the board of adjustment, under the provisions of this
section shall authorize the issuance of a building permit for a period of ninety (90) days from the date
of the favorable action of the board, unless the board in its minutes shall at the time grant a longer
period or unless an extension is granted by the board. If a building permit shall not have been issued
within the ninety (90) days or any other period as the board of adjustment may specifically grant, the
special exception shall be deemed waived and all rights thereunder terminated. Such termination and
waiver shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal to the board of adjustment in accordance
with the rules and regulations regarding appeals.
(3) The same appeal to the board of adjustment shall not be allowed on the same piece of property
prior to the expiration of one (1) year from a denial by the board of adjustment of any appeal unless
the denial was made without prejudice or unless other property in the same zoned areas shall have,
within such one (1) year period, been altered or changed by ruling of the board of adjustment, in
which case such change of circumstance shall permit the filing of a subsequent appeal, but such
appeal shall be considered on its own merits as in all other cases.
(e) Powers. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 546/562
(1) Variances. The board of adjustment may authorize a variance from the height and area
regulations and other development regulations in this article when, in its opinion, undue hardship or
practical difficulty will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the board shall
prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to protect the public interest and
property in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the board finds:
(A) There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the
strict application of the provisions of this article deprive the applicant of reasonable use of his
land;
(B) The special circumstances or conditions do not result from the actions of the applicant;
(C) The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property
right of the applicant;
(D) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
injurious to other property in the vicinity; and
(E) The granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly
development of other land in the vicinity in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Such findings of the board, together with the specific facts upon which they are based, shall be
incorporated into the official minutes of the board of adjustment meeting at which such variance is
granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
article so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done.
Pecuniary hardship to the applicant, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
In making its findings, the board shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land
involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, and the probable effect such variance will have upon
traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity.
(2) Special Exception. The board of adjustment may permit a special exception when such use or
development is specifically authorized by this article in reaching its decision, the board of adjustment
shall not approve a special exception unless it shall determine that the requested exception will
establish only those uses permitted under this article; that the location of the proposed activities and
improvements are clearly defined on a site plan filed by the applicant, and that the exception will be
wholly compatible with the use and permitted development of adjacent properties either as filed or
subject to such requirements and conditions as the board of adjustment fords to be necessary to
protect and maintain the stability of adjacent properties.
(3) Appeals of Decisions of Zoning Administrator.
(A) All questions of interpretation, enforcement or applicability of this article shall first be
presented to the zoning administrator and such questions shall be presented to the board of
adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator. Appeals to the board
of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision or action of the zoning
administrator regarding the interpretation, enforcement or applicability of this article. Such
appeal shall be taken within sixty (60) days after the decision has been rendered, by filing with
the zoning administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning
administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment with the papers constituting
the record upon which action appealed from was taken.
(B) An appeal shall stay all preceding of the action appealed from unless the zoning
administrator certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been
filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certification, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 547/562
by restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on
application, after notice to the zoning administrator, for due cause shown.
(C) In exercising its power under this provision, the board of adjustment may in conformity
with the provisions of Chapter 211, Texas Local Government Code, revise or reform, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as sought to be made
and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may require
such conditions and safeguards as the board finds necessary to preserve the spirit and intent of
this article.
(4) Nonconforming Uses. After a public hearing, the board of adjustment may require the
discontinuance of nonconforming uses under any plan whereby the full value of the structure or use
can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of
the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this article.
(f) Classification of New and Unlisted Uses.
(1) It is recognized that new types of land may develop and forms of land uses not anticipated
herein or clearly covered herein may be the basis of a request for zoning in the city.
(2) In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, an interpretation of the article as to
which zoning district such uses are permitted in and under what conditions shall first be made by the
zoning administrator. In rendering his interpretation, the zoning administrator shall consider the
nature and characteristics of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the
various zoning districts, and determine in his opinion which zoning district or districts such use
should be listed in.
(3) The decision of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the board of adjustment under the
provisions of subsection (e)(3) above.
(g) Waiver of Mandatory Yard and Setback Requirements. The board of adjustment may approve a waiver of
up to fifteen (15) percent of any required yard area or setback without following the notice and hearing
requirements of subsection (d) above. The board of adjustment may in its discretion delegate to the zoning
administrator its authority under this provision for all or a portion of the fifteen (15) percent area or setback
waiver when such a waiver is necessary due to a surveying or construction error in the placement of the original
foundation or site improvement. The zoning administrator shall not be authorized to approve a waiver under this
section until the board of adjustment shall have issued a written decision outlining the terms and conditions
under which these waivers may be granted.
(h) Termination of Approval. Any variance or special exception shall terminate automatically when the
specified period of the variance or special exception has expired or the use has been abandoned. In addition
where any condition under which a variance or special exception has been granted appears to have been
violated, the board of adjustment may hold a public hearing to determine whether or not the approval previously
granted should be terminated.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
(i) [Reserved for Future Use.] (Ordinance 860, sec. 1, adopted 5/8/07)
(j) Limitations on Power. The listed conditions required to exist on any matter on which the board of
adjustment is authorized to consider under this article shall be construed as limitations on the powers of the
board to act. Nothing herein shall be construed to empower the board of adjustment to effect changes in the
zoning districts established by this article or the uses permitted therein.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 548/562
(k) Grievances. Any person or persons jointly or separately, aggrieved by any decision of the board of
adjustment, or any taxpayer or any of officer, department or board of the city may present to a court of record, a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of
such illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days of the questioned decision of the
board of adjustment, and not thereafter, and shall comply in all respects with the requirements set forth in
Section 211.011 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7B; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.703 Public Hearings
(a) Requirements For Public Hearing.
(1) The city planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for
amendment, supplement, or change in zoning classification prior to making its recommendation and
report to the city council.
(2) Written notice of all public hearings before the city planning and zoning commission, on a
proposed amendment, supplement or change shall be sent to all owners of real property lying within
two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice shall be given
not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing, by depositing a notice properly addressed
and postage paid in the United States Post Office to such property owners as the ownership appears
on the last approved city tax roll.
(b) Notice of Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed
amendment, supplement, or change in zoning classification. At least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city. Such hearing may be held jointly
with the hearing before the city planning and zoning commission required pursuant to Section 14.706.
(c) Zoning Changes That Do Not Affect Specific Property. These changes are usually associated with textual
changes. When any proposed amendment, supplement, or change of zoning map or text of this zoning chapter
does not affect the land use character or zoning classification of specific property, notice of public hearing of the
planning and zoning commission shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time and place of such
hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered. Such notice shall be published not less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the public hearing.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7C)
Sec. 14.704 Certificate of Occupancy
(a) Vacant Land. No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for agricultural uses, and no building
hereafter created, reconstructed, altered or enlarged shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued by the building official.
(b) Certificate of Occupancy for a Building. A certificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of
an existing building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and said certificate
shall be issued within three (3) days after the request for same has been made in writing to the building official
after the erection, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of such building or part thereof shall have been
completed in conformity with provisions of these regulations. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of
occupancy, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building inspector for a period of time not
exceeding six (6) months during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending
its completion. Such temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 549/562
duties or obligations of the owners or of the city relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other
matter covered by these regulations, and such temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such
restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the occupant. Requests for certificate of
occupancy for any change in the use of a building shall be made in writing at least ten (10) days in advance of
such change and shall be issued within three (3) days after such request if the new use is in conformity with the
provisions of these regulations.
(c) Certificate of Occupancy for a Legal Nonconforming Use. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for
all legal nonconforming uses. Application for certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming uses shall be
filed within six (6) months from the effective date of these regulations, accompanied by affidavits of proof that
such nonconforming uses were not established in violation of these regulations, or any previous zoning
ordinance.
(d) Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a
building or land complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of this
article. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the city manager or his/her designee, and
copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
affected.
(e) Permit for Excavation. No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has
been made for building permit.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7D; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.705 Permits
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a drawing or plat, in duplicate, showing the lot,
the location of the building on the lot, accurate dimensions of building and lot and such other information as
may be necessary to provide the enforcement of these regulations. This plat shall be prepared after the lot has
been staked by a competent surveyor. A careful record of the original copy of such applications and plats shall
be kept in the office of the building inspector, and the duplicate copy shall be at the building at all times during
construction. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7E)
Sec. 14.706 Changes and Amendments
(a) Persons or Bodies That May Request Changes of Amendments.
(1) Any person, corporation or group of persons having a proprietary interest in any property, upon
proof of such interest, may petition the city council for a change or amendment to the provisions of
the article, or the planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion, institute proposals for
change and amendment in the public interest. All petitions for the amendment of this article shall
bear the signature of the owners of all property within the area of request.
(2) The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the
boundaries of the districts or regulations herein. Before taking action on any proposed amendment,
supplement, or change, the city council shall submit the same to the planning and zoning commission
for its recommendation and report.
(b) Procedure.
(1) The planning and zoning commission shall hold public hearing on any application for
amendment, supplement, or change prior to making its recommendation and report to the city
council. Written notice of all public hearings before the planning and zoning commission on a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 550/562
proposed amendment, supplement or change shall be sent to all owners of real property lying within
two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice shall be given
not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing by depositing a notice, properly addressed
and postage paid in the United States Post Office to such property owners as the ownership appears
on the last city tax roll.
(2) A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment,
supplement, or change. At least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper of the city.
(3) If such proposed amendment, supplement, or change has been denied by the planning and
zoning commission, or if a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been
filed with the city manager or his/her designee, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of
twenty (20) percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or those
immediately adjacent to and extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom, such amendment shall not
become effective except by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the members of the city council.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7F; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.707 Repeal
This section shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances and the Code of the city, except where the
provisions of this article are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances, they are hereby repealed.
Ordinance No. 106, as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11,
Section 7G)
Sec. 14.708 Separability Clause
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and
sections of this article are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall
be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this article, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this article
of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
11, Section 7H)
Sec. 14.709 Penalties for Violation
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in accordance with the general
penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, or other persons who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each
be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
(c) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation, including but not limited to seeking injunctions and civil penalties.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7I)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 551/562
Sec. 14.710 Savings Clause
All rights and remedies of the city are expressly saved as to any and all violations of the provisions of Ordinance
No. 106, as amended, codified as Chapter 11 of the Revised Code of Ordinance of the city (1987), as amended,
or any other ordinances affecting zoning and land use which have accrued at the time of the effective date of this
article; and, as to such accrued violations and all pending litigation, both civil and criminal, whether pending in
court or not, under such ordinances and code, same shall not be affected by this article but may be prosecuted
until final disposition by the courts. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7J)
Sec. 14.711 Publication in Pamphlet Form
The city manager or his/her designee of the city is hereby authorized to publish this article in book or pamphlet
form for general distribution among the public, and the operative provisions of this article as so published shall
be admissible in evidence in all courts without further proof than the production thereof. (1987 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7K; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.712 Publication in the Official Newspaper
The city manager or his/her designee of the city is hereby directed to publish in the official newspaper of the
city, the caption, penalty clause, publication clause, and effective date clause of this article two (2) days as
authorized by Section 52.013 of the Local Government Code. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section
7L; Ordinance 707 adopted 6/10/03)
Sec. 14.713 Effective Date
This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication as required by law, and it
is so ordained. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 7M)
Sec. 14.714 Fee Schedule
The city council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule containing the fees and charges for permits, zoning
change requests, zoning board of adjustment proceedings and any other matters pertaining to this chapter. The
schedule of fees and charges may be altered or amended only by action of the city council. (Ordinance 860, sec.
2, adopted 5/8/07)
ARTICLE 14.800 MEACHAM FIELD JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD*
Sec. 14.801 Board Created; Powers and Duties
There is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Meacham Field Joint Airport Zoning
Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in the Airport Zoning Act, Article 46e, as
amended, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. (1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 8A)
Sec. 14.802 Membership
(a) The Meacham Field Joint Airport Zoning Board shall consist of seventeen (17) members:
(1) Two (2) to be appointed by the city council of Blue Mound;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 552/562
(2) Two (2) to be appointed by the city council of Fort Worth;
(3) Two (2) to be appointed by the city council of Haslet;
(4) Two (2) to be appointed by the city council of Lake Worth;
(5) Two (2) to be appointed by the city council of River Oaks;
(6) Two (2) to be appointed by the city council of Saginaw;
(7) Two (2) to be appointed by the city council of Sansom Park;
(8) Two (2) to be appointed by the Commissioners Court of Tarrant County; and
(b) The seventeenth (17th) member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and said
seventeenth (17th) member shall serve as chairman of the Meacham Field Joint Airport Zoning Board.
(1987 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Section 8B)
ARTICLE 14.900 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 14.1000 HISTORIC LANDMARKS
Sec. 14.1001 Purpose
It is recognized that the city represents the unique confluence of time, land, and place that shaped the identity of
generations of citizens, collectively and individually, and produced significant historic, architectural, and
cultural resources that constitute their heritage. This article has been established to provide for the protection,
enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks of historical and cultural importance and significance. It also
proposes to promote the economic, cultural, educational and general welfare of the public. (Ordinance 881
adopted 4/8/08)
Sec. 14.1002 Definitions
The following words, when used in this article, shall take precedence and shall have the meaning respectively
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of this article clearly indicates otherwise. Words that are not
defined in this article shall have the meaning as defined by the city.
Alteration. Any change to the exterior of a building, structure, object or site. Alteration shall include, but is not
limited to, changing roofing or siding materials; changing, elimination, or adding exterior doors, door frames,
windows, window frames, shutters, fences, railings, columns, beams, walls, porches, steps, porte-cocheres,
balconies, or ornamentation, or the dismantling, moving or removing any exterior feature. Alteration does not
include routine maintenance or repair.
Architectural Design Guidelines. Any design guidelines and/or construction standards approved by the city
council and, where applicable, the Secretary of the Interior's standards for the rehabilitation of historic buildings
so long as said standards are not inconsistent with those adopted by the city council.
Certificate of Appropriateness. A current and valid permit issued by the building official or the city council, as
applicable, which approves the issuance of a building permit for construction, alteration, rehabilitation,
restoration relocation or demolition required by this article.
City Council. The city council of the City of Lake Worth.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 553/562
Designated. The formal recognition by the city council of a building, structure, object, or site as historically,
architecturally, culturally or archaeologically significant to the city, state, nation or region.
Economic Hardship.
(1) A property is incapable of earning a reasonable economic return, regardless of whether that
return represents the most profitable return possible;
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a
purchaser, which would result in a reasonable economic return on the property; and
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.
Exterior Feature. An element of the architectural character and general arrangement of the external portion of a
building, structure or object, including building material that is visible from a public right-of-way.
Historic Landmark. Any site, individual building, structure, or object designated by ordinance of the city council
that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration and/or preservation for its historic, cultural and/or architectural
significance to the city.
Nonresidential. Property that shall not be used for residential purposes under the zoning ordinance of the city.
Preservation. The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and material of a
building or structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover of a site. It shall include initial stabilization
work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic building materials.
Residential. Property that may be used for residential purposes under the zoning ordinance of the city.
Routine Maintenance and Repair. This generally refers to activities relating to a property that would be
considered ordinary or common for maintaining the property. Routine maintenance and repair includes, but is
not limited to the following:
(1) The reapplication of paint that is the same or similar as an existing color;
(2) Minor repair using the same or similar material and design as the original;
(3) Repair or replacement of roof using the same materials or materials of like or similar material,
design and shape;
(4) The process of cleaning (including but not limited to low-pressure water blasting and stripping,
and sandblasting and high-pressure water blasting); and
(5) Replacement of windows and doors with those of like or similar design and shape.
(Ordinance 881 adopted 4/8/08; Ordinance 981, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/12)
Sec. 14.1003 Designation of Historic Landmarks
A historic landmark shall be voluntarily designated as follows:
(1) Nomination of Historic Landmark.
(A) Nomination for historic landmark designation shall be voluntary and made to the
building official on forms provided by the building official. The nomination shall be submitted
to the building official by the owner of record of the nominated property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 554/562
(B) Any proposal to designate a historic landmark shall be reviewed by the building official.
The building official shall recommend to the planning and zoning commission designation of
buildings, structures or objects as historic landmarks and the public rights-of-way in and
surrounding them, by adopting zoning overlay districts designated as “H” on the city's official
zoning maps pursuant to procedures incorporated into the city's zoning ordinance.
(2) Criteria. The following criteria shall be considered when determining whether a nominated
property is eligible for consideration.
(A) Significance in history, architecture, archeology and/or culture;
(B) Association with events that have made a significant contribution to the patterns of local,
regional, state or national history;
(C) Association with the lives of persons significant in our past;
(D) Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction;
(E) Representative work of a master designer, builder or craftsman; or
(F) An established and familiar visual feature of the city.
(3) Duties of Building Official.
(A) A residential property shall be designated as a historic landmark only upon the request of
the property owner that the property be nominated for such designation.
(B) The building official may nominate a nonresidential building, site, or structure for the
purpose of designating it as a historic landmark.
(C) The owners, interested parties, and technical experts may present testimony or
documentary evidence which will become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural,
or cultural importance of the proposed historic landmark before the building official.
(D) Within sixty (60) days from receipt of the nomination, the building official shall forward
a recommendation to the planning and zoning commission stating that the nomination does or
does not meet the criteria for designation.
(E) The recommendation to the planning and zoning commission shall be accompanied by a
report prepared by the building official stating the significance or lack of significance of the
nominated property and its relationship to the criteria as set forth in subsection (2) above.
(F) The designation as a historic landmark does not obligate the property owner to improve,
alter, or change a property. However, owners of designated property shall comply with the
provisions of this article and all other city ordinances.
(4) Planning and Zoning Commission Public Hearing. The planning and zoning commission shall
give notice and conduct its meeting on the proposed designation within sixty (60) days of receipt of
the recommendation from the building official. The planning and zoning commission shall give
published and mailed notice to owners of the proposed historic landmark and those within two
hundred (200) feet of the proposed historic landmark, such notice to be given, not less than ten (10)
days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their said property for city
taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. At least fifteen (15) days notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper, or a paper of general
circulation in the city. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct its public hearing and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 555/562
make a recommendation to the city council in the same manner and according to the same procedures
as specifically provided in the general zoning ordinance of the city.
(5) City Council Public Hearing.
(A) The city council shall schedule a hearing on the building official's recommendation to be
held within sixty (60) days of receipt of the recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission. The city council shall give notice, follow the publication procedure, hold hearings,
and make its determination in the same manner as provided in the general zoning ordinance of
the city.
(B) The city council shall designate the historic landmark by ordinance or reject the
nomination of the historic landmark.
(6) Automatic Eligibility. Designated Recorded Texas Historic Landmarks and/or properties listed
in the National Register of Historic Places shall be automatically eligible for designation as a historic
landmark upon processing of a nomination application by the owner of the property or structure.
(7) Recording. Upon designation of a historic landmark, the city council shall cause the
designation to be recorded in the official real property records of the county and with the county
appraisal district.
(8) Historic Markers. The building official shall be responsible for determining the material, size,
shape, color and design of historical markers for historic landmarks designated by the building
official.
(9) Relation of Historic Landmark Designation to Base Zoning District.
(A) Designation of a building, structure, or object by the city council as a historic landmark is
intended as a zoning overlay which supplements the primary underlying zoning district
classification. The permitted uses of the property shall be determined and controlled by the use
regulations set forth for the primary zoning district classification for the property.
(B) The height of structures and the minimum dimensions of lots and yards shall be
determined by the regulations set forth for the underlying primary zoning district classification.
(C) If there is any conflict between the provisions of this subsection and any other provision
of the zoning ordinance, the most restrictive regulation shall apply in the absence of a specific
directive to the contrary.
(D) If there is any conflict between the adopted design guidelines and any provision of this
subsection, the most restrictive regulation shall apply.
(10) Removal of Historic Designation. The city council shall remove the historic designation from
a property if requested in writing by the owner.
(Ordinance 981, sec. 2, adopted 2/14/12)
Sec. 14.1004 Certificate of Appropriateness
(a) When Required. A person shall not alter a historic landmark without first obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness in accordance with this section.
(b) Routine Maintenance. A certificate of appropriateness is not required for routine maintenance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 556/562
(c) Penalty. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a
day during which the violation is continued, from the first day the unlawful act was committed until either a
certificate of appropriateness is obtained or the property is restored to the condition it was in immediately prior
to the violation (refer to section 4 “penalty clause” of Ordinance 881).
(d) Application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness must be submitted to the building official.
The application must include complete documentation of the proposed work. While there is no fee for the
certificate of appropriateness, this section shall not affect fee(s) that may be due under any other provision(s) of
this code. Within 10 business days after submission of an application, the applicant shall be notified in writing of
any additional documentation required. No application shall be deemed to be filed until it is made on forms
promulgated by the building official and contains all required supporting plans, designs, photographs, reports,
and other exhibits required by the building official. The applicant may consult with the building official before
and after the submission of an application.
(e) Architectural Design Guidelines. In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
building official shall be guided by the architectural design guidelines.
(f) Building Official's Determination of Procedure. If the building official determines that the scope of work
falls outside the scope of the architectural design guidelines, the certificate of appropriateness shall be denied.
(g) Appeal. The applicant may appeal the building official's decision by submitting to the building official a
written request for appeal within ten (10) business days of the decision. The written request for appeal starts the
standard certificate of appropriateness review procedure by the city council as set forth in Section 14.1006.
(Ordinance 981, sec. 3, adopted 2/14/12)
Sec. 14.1005 Routine Maintenance Work Review Procedure
Routine maintenance work identified below does not require a certificate of appropriateness:
(1) The reapplication of paint that is the same as an existing color, or the application of paint that is
a color that is consistent with architectural design guidelines;
(2) Minor repair using the same material and design as the original;
(3) Repair or replacement of roof using materials which reflect the composition, design, color,
texture and other visual qualities of the materials being replaced;
(4) The process of cleaning (including but not limited to low-pressure water blasting and stripping,
and sandblasting and high pressure water blasting); and
(5) Replacement of windows and doors with those of like or similar design and shape.
(Ordinance 881 adopted 4/8/08)
Sec. 14.1006 Certificate of Appropriateness Review Procedure
(a) Appeal to City Council. When the building official has determined that a proposed certificate of
appropriateness contains work that is outside the scope of the architectural design guidelines and has rejected it,
the applicant may appeal to the city council for review.
(b) Public Hearing. Within 60 calendar days after a complete application is filed, the city council shall hold a
public hearing and shall approve, deny with prejudice, or deny without prejudice the certificate of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 557/562
appropriateness. The city council may approve a certificate of appropriateness for work that does not strictly
comply with this article upon a finding that the proposed work is historically accurate, is consistent with the
spirit and intent of the architectural design guidelines and that the proposed work will not adversely affect the
historic character of the historic landmark. The city council may impose conditions on the certificate of
appropriateness. The applicant has the burden of proof to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable
action. The building official shall immediately notify the applicant of the city council's action. The city council's
decision must be in writing and, if the decision is to deny the certificate of appropriateness, with or without
prejudice, the writing must state the reasons why the certificate of appropriateness is denied.
(c) Standard for Approval. The city council must grant the application if it determines that:
(1) The proposed work is consistent with architectural design guidelines;
(2) The proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the historic landmark; and
(3) The proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the future preservation, maintenance and
use of the historic landmark.
(d) Issuance. If a certificate of appropriateness has been approved by the city council:
(1) The building official shall issue the certificate of appropriateness to the applicant; and
(2) If all requirements of the development and building codes are met and a building permit is
required for the proposed work, the building official shall issue a building permit to the applicant for
the proposed work.
(e) Reapplication. If a final decision is reached denying a certificate of appropriateness, no further
applications may be considered for the subject matter of the denied certificate of appropriateness for one year
from the date of the final decision unless:
(1) The certificate of appropriateness has been denied without prejudice; or
(2) The city council waives the time limitation because the city council finds that there are changed
circumstances sufficient to warrant a new hearing. A simple majority vote by the city council is
required to grant the request for waiver of the time limitation.
(f) Termination. After the work authorized by the certificate of appropriateness is commenced, the applicant
must complete the approved work within 180 calendar days. The building official may, in writing, authorize an
extension of the certificate of appropriateness for a period not to exceed 180 calendar days upon written request
by the applicant.
(g) Revocation. The building official may, in writing, revoke a certificate of appropriateness if:
(1) The certificate of appropriateness was issued on the basis of incorrect information supplied;
(2) The certificate of appropriateness was issued in violation of the architectural design guidelines,
the comprehensive zoning ordinance, or building codes;
(3) The work is not performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, the
comprehensive zoning ordinance, or building codes; or
(4) The applicant has suspended or abandoned the work for a period greater than 180 calendar
days.
(h) Amendments to a Certificate of Appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness may be amended by
submitting an application for amendment to the building official. The application shall then be subject to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 558/562
standard certificate of appropriateness review procedure.
(i) Emergency Procedure. If a historic landmark is damaged and it is determined that the structure is a public
safety hazard or will suffer additional damage without immediate repair, the property owner may temporarily
protect the structure. In such a case, the property owner shall apply for a certificate of appropriateness within 10
business days of the occurrence which caused the damage. The protection authorized under this subsection must
not permanently alter the architectural features of the structure.
(Ordinance 981, sec. 4, adopted 2/14/12)
Sec. 14.1007 Demolition by Neglect
No owner or person with an interest in a designated historic landmark shall permit the property to fall into a
serious state of disrepair, such that the result of such deterioration of any exterior architectural feature would
produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the landmark itself. Such deteriorated condition shall include:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
(2) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
(3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys;
(4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar;
(5) Ineffective waterproof of exterior walls, roof, or foundation, including broken windows or
doors; or
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition, which could lead to the
claim that demolition is necessary for public safety.
(Ordinance 881 adopted 4/8/08)
Sec. 14.1008 Economic Hardship Application Procedure
(a) After receiving a written notification from the building official of the denial of a certificate of
appropriateness, an applicant may commence the hardship process.
(b) When a claim of economic hardship is made due to the effect of this article, the owner must prove that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return
represents the most profitable return possible;
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a
purchaser, which would result in a reasonable economic return; and
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.
(c) The applicant shall consult in good faith with the building official, local preservation groups and interested
parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
(d) The city council shall hold a public hearing on the application within sixty (60) days (calendar days are
assumed unless otherwise stated) from the date the application is received by the building official. In the event
that the city council does not act within ninety (90) days of the receipt of the application, a permit may be
granted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 559/562
(Ordinance 981, sec. 5, adopted 2/14/12)
Sec. 14.1009 Enforcement
(a) In the event a certificate of appropriateness is required under the terms of this article, no building permit
shall be issued until the certificate of appropriateness has been issued. The certificate of appropriateness shall be
in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit required by the city.
(b) All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this article shall conform to
any requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the building official or other official to inspect
periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the event work is not being performed in accordance with
the certificate of appropriateness, the building official shall issue a stop-work order and all work shall
immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop work is in effect.
(c) The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to other enforcement procedures or penalties which
are available at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, those available for adversely affecting historic
structures or property under section 315.006 of the Texas Local Government Code and section 442.016 of the
Texas Government Code.
(Ordinance 981, sec. 7, adopted 2/14/12)
Editor's note–Former section 14.1009, “appeal to the zoning board of adjustment” and deriving from Ordinance 881 adopted 4/8/08
was repealed and deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 981, sec. 6, adopted 2/14/12. The remaining sections of this article have been
renumbered at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 14.1010 Tax Incentives
(a) Historical Assessed Value Exemption (Residential and Nonresidential).
(1) Historic landmarks shall only be eligible for an assessed value exemption during the initial year
of designation as a historic landmark. The assessed value exemption of twenty-five (25) percent of
the assessed value of the property shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), and
shall be based on meeting all of the following criteria:
(A) The designation for a historic landmark shall be approved prior to applying for any other
assessed value exemption.
(B) All modifications or expansions are completed pursuant to the issuance of certificates(s)
of appropriateness.
(C) The historic landmark is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, designated as
a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark or state archaeological landmark by the state historical
commission, or has been designated by the city as a historically significant site in accordance
with the state property tax code.
(D) The historic landmark must adhere to all city ordinances.
(E) The assessed value exemption shall be applicable only in the first year of designation.
(2) To be eligible for the historical assessed value exemption, the owner of the historic resource
must make application. Failure to apply for exemption will result in the loss of exemption for the
appropriate tax year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 560/562
(b) Residential Tax Incentive Program.
(1) Eligible residential historic landmarks shall be entitled to a reinvestment tax incentive of
twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed value for restorations amounting to one thousand two
hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) or more based on meeting all of the following criteria:
(A) Designation as a historic landmark must be in place prior to any application for the
reinvestment tax incentive.
(B) No restoration that has been started or completed prior to designation can be included in
the request for the reinvestment tax incentive.
(C) All modifications or expansions are completed pursuant to the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness provided for in Section 14.1004 above.
(D) The residential historic landmark is listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
designated as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark or state archaeological landmark by the
state historical commission, or has been designated by the city as an historically significant site
in accordance with the state property tax code.
(E) The residential historic landmark must adhere to all city ordinances.
(2) Each property owner who desires to apply for an historic reinvestment tax incentive shall apply
for said incentive on or before March 15th of the year the tax incentive is to be granted. The
incentive, if granted, shall be applicable for only one (1) year. Subsequent incentives for additional
projects must be applied for each year. Application shall be made on the official form provided by the
city.
(c) Nonresidential Tax Incentive Programs. Historic landmarks which are nonresidential and which are listed
on the National Register of Historic Places, or recorded as a state historic landmark or state archaeological
landmark by the state historical commission or which are designated as historical and appear on the historic
district map maintained by the city, shall be eligible for historic reinvestment tax incentives upon the terms and
conditions contained herein.
(1) Eligible nonresidential historic landmarks shall be entitled to a reinvestment tax incentive of
twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed value for restorations amounting to one thousand two
hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) or more. Investments eligible for this incentive shall be those made
for:
(A) Structural repairs and improvements.
(B) Electrical repairs and improvements.
(C) Plumbing repairs and improvements.
(D) Mechanical repairs and improvements.
(E) Interior repairs and improvements, incidental to above repairs and improvements.
(F) Exterior restoration.
(2) Before any of the eligible investments are made, the building official shall be consulted. If the
building official deems a certificate of appropriateness necessary, the standard rules for its procedure
shall apply.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 561/562
(3) Investments in personal property shall not be eligible for the reinvestment tax incentive. Each
property owner who desires to apply for a historic reinvestment tax incentive for a nonresidential
historic landmark shall apply for said incentive on or before March 15th of the year the tax incentive
is to be granted. The incentive, if granted, shall be applicable for only one (1) year. Subsequent
incentives for additional projects must be applied for each year. Application shall be made on the
official form provided by the city.
(4) In addition to the above requirements, each applicant must submit documentation reflecting the
cost of the eligible reinvestment project and complete the project within the agreed time frame. If
facade restoration is contemplated, the project must comply with architectural design guidelines. In
the absence of architectural design guidelines, the project must comply with the Secretary of the
Interior's standards. Prior to beginning the reinvestment project, the property owner shall apply for
and receive approval of a certificate of appropriateness provided for in Section 14.1004 above.
(5) The building official must approve all contemplated reinvestment projects via a certificate of
appropriateness. The applicant must secure all city permits and most secure periodic city inspection
of the project to ensure proper completion of the project.
(Ordinance 981, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/12)
Sec. 14.1011 Tax Incentive Application and Approval Process
(a) Prior to filing an application for a historic landmark tax incentive with the building official, the applicant
shall:
(1) Certify to the building official that the subject property is a designated historic landmark.
(2) Certify to the building official that the tax incentive request is for a project that has received a
certificate of appropriateness.
(3) Certify to the building official that the project for which the applicant wishes to receive a tax
incentive has been completed.
(b) An application for a tax incentive shall be initiated by the owner of the subject property or by his or her
agent, by completion of the appropriate application forms provided by the building official. The application shall
include all receipts for the cost of the project as well as an affidavit affirming that all information on the
application is correct and the receipts presented are for the cost of the project. Said application shall be received
by the building official at least twenty (20) days prior to a public meeting by the city council.
(c) No fees shall be required either upon filing of the application or upon approval or disapproval by the city
council.
(d) The building official shall prepare a report for the city council delineating the contents of the application,
an assessment as to whether the project was completed as put forth in the certificate of appropriateness and other
materials deemed useful by the city council in performing its duties.
(e) The city council shall hold a public meeting on all requests for tax incentives. Said meeting shall not be
scheduled until the completed application form is submitted.
(f) At the public meeting, the city council shall determine, from the data submitted by the applicant and the
information provided by the building official, if the completed project is substantially in compliance with the
certificate of appropriateness. If the city council finds that additional information relative to the pending
application is necessary for its review, the city council shall postpone the public meeting on an application until
such information is provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 562/562
(g) The city council shall have the authority to approve or disapprove an application for a tax incentive, or to
approve a request with such conditions as the city council deems necessary to bring the project into compliance
with the approved certificate of appropriateness. The city council shall not approve requests for tax incentives
where the project was completed prior to the adoption of this article, where the applicant has not obtained a
certificate of appropriateness, or where the applicant has not substantially complied with the requirements
imposed on a certificate of appropriateness.
(h) Effective Date. Upon approval by the city council of an application for a historic landmark tax incentive,
the building official shall, within ten (10) working days of said decision, notify the county appraisal district. The
appraisal district shall reduce the taxes for the historic landmark in accordance with the provisions herein and as
indicated by the approved application.
(Ordinance 981, sec. 9, adopted 2/14/12)

City of Lake Worth
Chapter 10
Subdivision
Date: 11/12/2019
Ordinance No. 1170
Adopted by City of Lake Worth City Council
ORDINANCE NO. 1170
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAKE WORTH, TEXAS, REPEALING AND REPLACING
THE CURRENT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS AND DESIGN CRITERIA
AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS (DCCS) AND ADOPTING A NEW SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS AND DESIGN CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
(DCCS) ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAKE WORTH; PROVIDING A PENALTY;
PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING SAVINGS; PROVIDING ENGROSSMENT
AND ENROLLMENT; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION IN THE OFFICIAL
NEWSPAPER OF THE CITY AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
ARTICLE 10.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10, SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 10.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................................ 1
ARTICLE 10.200 DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................ 9
ARTICLE 10.300 SITE DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES - PLAT ........................................ 21
ARTICLE 10.400 SITE DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS ...... 51
APPENDIX A PLAN AND PLATS
APPENDIX B DESIGN CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
THIS PAGE INT ENT IONALLY LEFT BLANK
ARTICLE 10.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 10.100, GENERAL PROVISIONS .......................................................... 1
Section 10.101 Authority ......................................................................... 2
Section 10.102 Jurisdiction ...................................................................... 2
Section 10.103 Purpose .......................................................................... 3
Section 10.104 Application of Regulations .............................................. 3
Section 10.105 Exemptions ..................................................................... 4
Section 10.106 Interpretation, Conflict and Separability ......................... 5
Section 10.107 Owner Consent............................................................... 5
Section 10.108 Applicability of Pending Plat Approval ............................ 6
Section 10.109 Superseding Regulations ............................................... 6
Section 10.110 Amendment .................................................................... 6
Section 10.Enforcement, Violation and Penalties ................................... 6
Section 10.112 Payment of All Indebtedness .......................................... 6
Section 10.113 Right to Deny Hearing .................................................... 7
ARTICLE 10.100, GENERAL PROVISIONS
Page 1
Page 2
ARTICLE 10.100, GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 10.101 Authority
A. This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of
Texas, including Chapters 43 and 212, Texas Local Government Code, as amended
B. The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted as the Subdivision Regulations of
the City of Lake Worth, Texas (sometimes hereinafter referred to as “City”), and shall be
applicable to the development of property, the subdivision of land and the filing of plats
and plans, as defined herein and in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code.
The City shall have all remedies and rights provided by said Chapter 212 with regard to
the control and approval of subdivisions and plats both within the City. The regulations
herein shall apply within the corporate limits of the City, as they may be from time to time
adjusted by annexation or disannexation.
Section 10.102 Jurisdiction
The provisions contained in the following sections of these subdivision regulations shall apply to
any of the following forms or types of land subdivision and development activity within the City
limits:
A. The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels.
B. All subdivisions of land whether by metes and bounds division or by plat, which were outside
the jurisdiction of the City subdivision regulations in Tarrant County, Texas and which
subsequently came within the jurisdiction of the City and its subdivision regulations
through annexation.
C. The division of land previously subdivided or platted into tracts, lots, sites or parcels subject
to and not in accordance with adopted City Subdivision Regulations in effect at the
time of such subdividing or platting and having occurred on or after Month Day, Year.
(adoption date of current ordinance)
D. The combining of two or more contiguous tracts, lots, sites or parcels for the purpose of
creating one or more legal lots except as otherwise provided herein.
E. When a building permit is required on property for the following reasons but not limited to:
1. New construction; or
2. Additions, such as increasing the square footage of an existing building by more
than 20 percent of its gross floor area; or
3. Moving of a primary structure onto vacant property.
F. For tracts where any public improvements are proposed.
G. Whenever a property owner proposes to divide land lying within the City into two (2) or
more tracts for purpose of development, that results in parcels or lots all greater than five
(5) acres in size, or in the event that development of any such tract is intended, and
where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated, he shall first obtain approval
of a concept plan and meet with the Development Review Committee (DRC). See Section
3.4.1 of this Ordinance for requirements for Concept Plans.
Page 3
ARTICLE 10.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 10.100
Section 10.103 Purpose
These Subdivision Regulations are intended to protect, promote, improve and provide for the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Lake Worth through
minimum standards which provide:
A. Equitable, harmonious, and efficient development and distribution of population and
land uses;
B. Effective transportation system providing facilities for efficient circulation for all
modes of transportation – pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular modes;
C. Adequate public facilities – communication, transportation, drainage, water,
wastewater, schools, parks, public safety and recreational facilities, and other public
facilities and services;
D. Protection and preservation of places of historical, cultural, natural or architectural
importance and significance to the community;
E. Safe, orderly, and efficient development and expansion of the City, in accordance
with and pursuant to its adopted regulations and ordinances; and
F. Encouragement of the development of a stable, prospering economic environment.
Section 10.104 Application of Regulations
A. Purpose
To carry out the purposes hereinabove stated, it is determined that:
1. Land must not be platted until proper provision has been made for adequate
public facilities for roadways, drainage, water, wastewater, public utilities,
capital improvements, parks, recreation facilities, and rights-of-way for
streets.
2. Proposed plats, or subdivisions which do not conform to the policies and
regulations shall be denied, or, in lieu of denial, disapproved conditioned on
conformance with conditions, and;
3. There shall be an essential nexus between the requirement to dedicate
rights-of-way and easements and/or to construct public improvements in
connection with a new subdivision and the need to offset the impacts on City
public facilities systems created by such new development.
4. No lots within a subdivision may be sold until a plat has been considered
and acted on by the Planning & Zoning Commission, and approved by the
City Council, or approved by the appropriate Administrative Officers, whichever
the case may be.
B. Approval Required
1. Land Development
Before any plat within the City is recorded with the County Clerk, it shall first
be approved for conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Page 4
Article 10.100
2. Permits
Unless otherwise exempt by the terms of these Subdivision Regulations, no
building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit,
utility tap or certificate of acceptance for required public improvements shall
be issued by the City for any parcel until:
i. A plat has been approved in accordance with these regulations;
ii. All water, wastewater, streets, drainage, electrical, public utilities
and park improvements, whether they are public or private, as required
by these regulations, have been constructed and accepted by
the City of Lake Worth in accordance with this Ordinance, adopted
Plans, or other applicable regulations; and
iii. Bonds or security for completion of improvements have been provided
in accordance with this Ordinance.
C. Violations
1. No transfer of land in the nature of a subdivision as defined herein shall be
exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance unless otherwise specified,
even though the instrument or document of transfer may describe land so
subdivided by metes and bounds.
2. The filing of any plan or plat with the County Clerk without complying with
the requirements of this Ordinance shall be deemed a violation of the provisions
of this Ordinance and is hereby prohibited.
3. The transfer of any land by the delivery of or by the filing of any instrument in
the nature of a conveyance without having first complied with the requirements
set forth herein shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this
Ordinance and is hereby prohibited.
D. Exception
There is, however, excepted from the provisions of this Ordinance any conveyance
transferring any land or interest in land to or from the State of Texas or City of Lake
Worth, Texas.
E. Note
Minimum standards for development are contained in the Zoning Ordinance, the
adopted Building Code and in this Ordinance. However, the Comprehensive Plan
and Thoroughfare Plan contain policies designed to achieve an optimum quality of
development. Subdivision design should be of a quality to carry out the purpose and
spirit of the policies expressed in these plans, the regulations specified in this ordinance,
and is encouraged to exceed the minimum standards required herein.
Section 10.105 Exemptions
The provisions of these subdivision regulations shall not apply to:
A. Land legally platted and approved prior to the effective date of these subdivision regulations
except as otherwise provided for herein (construction of facilities shall conform
to construction standards in effect at the time of construction); or
Page 5
Article 10.100
B. Existing cemeteries complying with all State and local laws and regulations (does
not apply to new cemeteries or expansion of existing cemeteries); or
C. Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or
D. When a building permit is requested for unplatted or already platted parcels for the
following activities:
1. Replacement or reconstruction of an existing primary single-family or duplex
structure but not to exceed the square footage of the original structure.
2. Additions (increase in square footage of structure) to the primary structure
but do not exceed more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the original
structure.
3. Accessory buildings and/or structures in compliance with current adopted
Building Code.
4. Remodeling or repair that does not include electrical work (no expansion of
square footage) and in compliance with the current adopted Building Code.
5. Moving a structure off a lot or parcel or for demolition permits.
Section 10.106 Interpretation, Conflict and Separability
A. Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety
and general welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the
purposes for which they are adopted.
B. Conflict with Other Laws
These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute of other provision of law except as provided in
these regulations. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations, or other
provision of law, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standard
shall control.
Section 10.107 Owner Consent
Written consent of the owner of any tract of land to be developed is required for any application
relating to or for a plat, replat, pre-application conference, plat amendment, or any application
to be reviewed by the Development Review Committee. A representative for the owner
may provide the required written consent in place of the owner if the representative has,
in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, express written authority to act on behalf of the
owner. Written consent is required in accordance with this Section, regardless of whether
these regulations refer to the party making application as “owner,” “subdivider,” “person”
“developer” or “applicant”.
Page 6
Article 10.100
Section 10.108 Applicability of Pending Plat Approval
All applications for plat approval, including final plats, pending on the effective date of these regulations
and which have not lapsed shall be reviewed under regulations in effect immediately
preceding the date of adoption of these regulations.
Section 10.109 Superseding Regulations
Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, all Subdivision Regulations of the City
of Lake Worth previously in effect are hereby superseded, except as provided in the regulations
herein, Exemptions and Applicability.
Section 10.110 Amendment
For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare, the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council may from time to time propose amendments to these regulations
which shall then be approved or disapproved by the City Council at a public meeting.
Section 10.111 Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties
A. Violations and Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of
the City Municipal Code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Civil Enforcement
Appropriate civil actions and proceedings may be maintained in law or in equity to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages, to impose additional penalties, to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation of these regulations, whether such violation occurs
with respect to lands within the corporate boundaries of the City. These remedies shall
be in addition to the penalties described above.
Section 10.112 Payment of All Indebtedness
No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent assessments, delinquent fees, or any other
delinquent debts or obligations to the City, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property,
shall be allowed to record an approved plat until the taxes, assessments, debts or obligations
directly attributable to said property and owed by the property owner or a previous owner
thereof shall have been first fully discharged by payment, or until an arrangement satisfactory to
the City has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. It shall be the applicant’s
responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, assessments, debts or obligations have
been paid before any plat is filed.
Page 7
Article 10.100
Section 10.113 Right to Deny Hearing
The City shall have the right to deny a hearing if the person or applicant proposing a subdivision
of land does not:
A. Submit all the information necessary and required for a pre-application conference
and/or plat application by the required deadlines;
B. Pay the required application fees (non-refundable);
C. Fail to provide any other items or information as prescribed by this and other applicable
ordinances.
Section 10.114 Schedule of Fees
Fees and charges for the filing of plats shall be as established by separate ordinance of the
City Council from time to time.
Page 8
THIS PAGE INT ENT IONALLY LEFT BLANK
Page 9
ARTICLE 10.200, DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 10.200, DEFINITIONS ............................................................................ 9
Section 10.201 General ........................................................................ 10
Section 10.202 Definitions ..................................................................... 10
Page 10
Article 10.200
Section 10.201 General
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in these Subdivision Regulations, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
Section 10.202 Definitions
ABANDONMENT - Relinquish the public interest, claim, or title to a public right-of-way, easement,
public way, or other public property.
ACCESS - Ingress and egress between the site and a paved public street, private street, or
approved access easement.
ADDITION - One or more lot, tract or parcel of land created for the purpose of development.
Refer also to Subdivision and Plat.
ADEQUACY - It is the policy of the City that every development and subdivision shall be served
by the applicable and appropriate public facilities (e.g. water, sanitary sewer, roads, access,
drainage facilities, parks, and public safety), as determined by the City Manager or designee
(City Engineer).
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS - Any office referred to in these Subdivision Regulations shall
be the person so retained in this position by the City, or his duly authorized representative. This
definition shall also include engineering, planning and other consultants retained by the City to
supplement or support existing City staff, as deemed appropriate.
1. Building Official
The officer or designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of
the building codes.
2. City Attorney
The attorney, or firm of attorney, that has been specifically employed by the City to assist
in legal matters. This term shall also apply if the City retains a person to perform the
functions of City attorney as an official City employee.
3. City Engineer
The registered professional engineer or firm of registered professional consulting engineers
that has been specifically employed by the City to perform engineering review,
design and related activities. The City Engineer is also the designated Floodplain Administrator.
4. City Manager
The person or authorized representative/designee holding the position of the chief executive
officer, as appointed by the City council, under the terms of the City Charter.
5. Planning and Zoning Administrator
The professional land planner, or firm of professional land planners, that has been specifically
employed by the City to assist in planning- and zoning-related matters. This
term shall also apply if the City retains a person to perform the functions of City planner
as an official City employee.
6. City Secretary
The person or authorized representative holding the office of City Secretary under the
terms of the City Charter.
A
Page 11
Article 10.200
7. Director of Building Development
The person designated by the City Manager to oversee the subdivision review process,
gather all staff comments and recommendations, and convey said recommendations to
the Commission, Council and other departments.
8. Director of Public Works
The person designated by the City Manager to oversee compliance with the City Master
Thoroughfare Plan and designate an individual to be part of the DRC; may also be City
Engineer.
AGENT - Any authorized person acting on behalf of the property owner during the land development
process.
AGREEMENT - Written contractual agreement between the City, the applicant or developer,
and/or other public or private agencies including the following:
1. Cross Access Easement Agreement
A reciprocal contract entered into by adjacent property owners and/or the City and to be
recorded in the county real property records, by which the property owners agree to
shared access and maintenance of drive approaches and/or parking areas.
2. Developer Agreement
A contract entered into by the applicant and the City, by which, among other things, the
applicant promises to complete the required public improvements within the subdivision
or addition within a specified time period following final plat approval.
APPEAL - Review of a decision or act by a higher approving authority or court of law.
APPLICANT - A person or entity that submits a formal application for an approval required by
this ordinance. Also, referred to as "developer", "subdivider", or other similar term.
APPLICATION - A written request for an approval required by this ordinance.
APPROVING AUTHORITY - The Governing Body, appointed Commissions, Committees and
Boards; Administrative Officers; and/or designees granted with the power to make land development
and subdivision decisions in accordance with the City Charter, City ordinances and regulations,
and state law.
BLOCK - One or more lots, tracts or parcels of land bounded by streets, railroads, or subdivision
boundary lines, or a combination thereof. Further, it is an area of land enclosed by streets and
occupied by or intended for building.
1. Block Length. The length of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property
corner to property corner measured along the property line of the block face:
a. The block face with the greatest dimension, or
b. The block face with the greatest number of lots.
2. Block Width. The width of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property
corner to property corner measured along the property line of the block face between
intersecting streets, and shall be the side with one of the following criteria:
a. The block face with the least dimension, or
b. The block face with the fewest number of lots.
A
Page 12
Article 10.200
CITY - The City of Lake Worth, Texas.
CITY COUNCIL - The duly elected governing and legislative body of the City of Lake Worth,
Texas. See also, Governing Body.
CITY STANDARDS - See Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS OR PLANS - Refer to Plans, Engineered Plans or Documents.
COMMISSION - See also, Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION - After receipt of the appropriate approvals and permits,
it is the initial disturbance of soils associated with land development including but not limited
to clearing, grading, excavating activities, or other construction activities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The general plan of the City, as recommended by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and adopted by the City Council, including all its revisions and plan
elements (including, but not limited to, the future land use plan, thoroughfare plan, parks and
open space plan, etc.). This plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land
uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks, water and wastewater
facilities, and other public and private developments and improvements. The following plans or
documents are associated with or incorporated into the Comprehensive Plan.
1. Future Land Use Plan
The element of the Comprehensive Plan that sets the direction of land use public policy
in Lake Worth and intended to depict the future land use pattern.
2. Parks Master Plan
An element of the Comprehensive Plan which supports the stated community vision
and depicts the existing parks, recreation areas, and open space within the municipality
and guides the dedication and/or development of future public parks, recreational facilities
and open space.
3. Master Thoroughfare Plan
An element of the Comprehensive Plan which is coordinated with the Future Land Use
Plan to guide the provision of the transportation network to facilitate development and
redevelopment objectives. Streets are typically classified as follows:
a. Freeways
A highway intended to move large volumes of traffic around and across the
city without direct access to adjacent land.
b. Arterial
A street that interconnects and augments the principal arterial system with
more land access at a lower level of traffic mobility.
c. Collector Streets
Also, known as feeder streets or secondary thoroughfares, which provide vehicular
circulation within neighborhoods, and from local streets to major thoroughfares.
May be continuous through several neighborhoods. Collects and
distributes traffic from local access streets, as in residential neighborhoods or
commercial developments, to the major arterial network.
d. Local or Residential Street
Local residential streets, also known as minor thoroughfares or streets, which
primarily provide direct vehicular access to abutting residential property Inter-
C
Page 13
Article 10.200
nal streets within a neighborhood that provide access to residential lots and building
sites and should be arranged to discourage most through traffic, except that
which is directly related to the area.
DEDICATION - The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use.
The transfer of title to, and responsibility for, public improvements to the local government from the
owner of a development subject to an improvements and exactions ordinance.
DEED RESTRICTION (RESTRICTIVE COVENANT) - Written agreement which restricts or limits
the use or activities that may take place on a property within a subdivision.
DESIGN CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS - The standards and specifications for
the construction of subdivision improvements. A copy is maintained and available for inspection at
the City Hall, and which is incorporated herein by reference.
DEVELOPMENT - Refer to Land Development.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE (DRC) - The review body comprised of representatives
from City departments tasked with the oversight of subdivision and land development. The DRC
shall be responsible for reviewing any development proposals, vacation, plans, plats, preliminary
engineering design plans and any other items deemed necessary which are associated with development.
DWELLING UNIT - Also refer to the Zoning Ordinance. Any building or portion thereof, which is
designed or used as living quarters for one or more families. The area of a structure set aside for
single-family living; a single-family residence is one dwelling unit; a duplex is two (2) dwelling units;
and each apartment is a separate dwelling unit within an apartment home complex.
ENGINEER - Refer to Professional Engineer.
ESCROW - A conveyance or monetary deposit to the City to be retained until the occurrence of a
contingency or performance of a condition, such as construction of public improvements in accordance
to the approved engineering documents.
FILING DATE - The date that the appropriate Administrative Officer determines that the application
satisfies all requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and all other applicable ordinances,
except for requested variances, and all applicable fees have been paid.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - A decision-making process that aims to reduce flood losses and
protection of the natural resources and function within the floodplains.
Administered by the City Engineer in accordance with Article 3.1600, Flood Damage Prevention, of
the Lake Worth Code of Ordinances.
GUARANTEE - A pledge, guarantee, or confidence in the form of an executed document provided
by a surety company or a guarantor to pay one party (the obligee) a certain amount if a second
party (the principal) fails to meet the terms of the agreement and/or satisfactorily complete the project.
Types of financial guarantee provided for land development are as follows:
1. Bond
A type of surety used by investors in construction projects to protect against an adverse
event that causes disruptions, failure to complete the project due to insolvency of the builder(
s), or the failure to meet contract specifications. Any form of a surety bond in an amount
and form satisfactory to the City.
2. Escrow
A deposit of cash with the City in accordance with City policies.
D
Page 14
Article 10.200
3. Letter of Credit
An irrevocable letter of credit on a form acceptable to the City and approved by the City
Attorney.
IMPROVEMENTS OR FACILITIES:
1. Off-site Improvements or Facilities
Existing or proposed facilities or improvements required for service to the site but not located
within the boundaries of the plat.
2. On-site Improvements or Facilities
Existing or proposed facilities or improvements constructed within the property boundaries
of the plat. These include streets, water lines, sewer lines, storm drainage, curb and
gutter, and any other construction or reconstruction to serve the property.
3. Public Improvements or Facilities
Existing or proposed facilities constructed to City standards, dedicated for public use, and
maintained by the City.
LAND DEVELOPMENT - Any new construction, including any building, structure or improvement
of any nature (residential or nonresidential), or the enlargement of any external dimension of any
building, structure, or improvement. Any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance is also
considered land development.
LAND USE - The purpose or activity, for which a parcel of land, a building or structure is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. Refer to Zoning Regulations.
LOT OR LOT OF RECORD - A divided or undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a
public street and which is or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement;
which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract/
lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record.
PERSON - any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision,
partnership, corporation, or other legal entity authorized by law, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PLAN - The following are documents often referenced when developing property within the City:
1. Concept Plan
A sketch drawing of initial development ideas superimposed on a topographic and/or aerial
map to indicate the general plan of development.
2. Construction Plans or Documents— Refer to Engineered Plans or Documents (below).
3. Drainage Plan
A general plan for handling the storm water affecting property proposed for development.
Refer to the Design Criteria and Construction Standards for requirements of the drainage
plan, as applicable.
4. Engineered Plans or Documents
The maps or drawings accompanying a plat and showing the specific location and design
of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the require-
I
Page 15
Article 10.200
ments of the City as a condition of approval of the plat. These drawings are signed
and sealed by a professional engineer.
PLAT - A plan, map or chart of a quantity of land with actual or proposed features (as lots);
the land represented; also, to make a plat.
The following are types of plats associated with the legal creation of a subdivision of land
and/or development on property within the City limits as established and provided for in this
Ordinance:
1. Amending Plat
Generally, any plat created for at least one of the purposes listed in this Ordinance
and, specifically, as described in Texas Local Government Code § 212.016.
2. Final Plat (aka File or Record Plat).
A subdivision plat that is presented to the proper review authority for approval and
intended to be recorded with the county clerk after proper certification. Note: minor
plats, short form, amending plats and replats are also final plats.
1. Preliminary Plat
An initial plat of the proposed plan for subdividing, improving, and developing a tract,
including supporting data such as topographic features, existing and proposed drainage
features and facilities, street layout and direction of curb flow, water and
wastewater utility layout, and other pertinent features with notations sufficient to substantially
identify the general scope and detail of the proposed development. The
plat of any lot or lots of record that is not to be recorded of record but is only a proposed
division of land for review and study by the city.
4. Replat
A plat (replat) of all or part of an existing subdivision, that may be recorded and is
controlling over the preceding plat without vacating that plat in accordance with this
Ordinance and Texas Local Government Code § 212.014.
5. Recorded Plat
Any plat that has been duly recorded in the plat records of Tarrant County.
6. Subdivision Plat
A plat that divides a tract in two (2) or more parts to
a. Lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to a municipality,
b. Lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or
c. Lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to
be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots
fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts.
A division of a tract includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using
metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed,
by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any
other method.
7. Vacating Plat
An instrument (approved and recorded in the same manner as the original plat) that
references a plat, or any part of a plat, that once executed and recorded causes the
referenced plat to have no effect.
P
Page 16
Article 10.200
PLATTING - Below are definitions pertaining to the process of platting property:
1. Minor Platting
A subdivision of land involving four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street which
does not require the creation of any new street(s) or the extension of municipal facilities;
amending plats; and certain replats described in Texas Local Government Code
§212.0065. The process includes final short form plat.
2. Plat Approval
Granted by the appropriate governing body or administrative officers when the plat document
is prepared in accordance to City standards.
3. Plat Certification
Executed statement(s) on the face of the plat provides evidence that the document is
prepared, reviewed and approved according to City standards and State law.
4. Plat Filing
The term used when an approved and certified plat is recorded with the County Clerk.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION - The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of
Lake Worth, Texas.
POWER OF ATTORNEY - A document used to appoint an agent to represent or make decisions
on behalf of another person or organization.
PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE - The meeting with City staff required prior to filing any
formal plat applications.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER - A person who has been duly authorized and licensed under the
provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act and/or by the Texas Board of Professional Engineers
to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas. Also, known as Engineer,
Registered Engineer, Registered Professional Engineer, or Licensed Engineer.
PROFESSIONAL LAND PLANNER - A person, other than a surveyor or engineer, who also
possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency in the planning of residential, commercial, industrial
and other related developments; such a proficiency often having been acquired by education
in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum and/or by
actual experience and practice in the field of land planning, and may be certified by the American
Institute of Certified Planners (AICP).
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR - A registered professional land surveyor, as authorized
by the State statutes to practice the profession of surveying.
PROPERTY OWNER - Also, known as "applicant" or "subdivider" or "developer.” Any person or
firm, association, syndicate, general or limited partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity,
or any agent thereof, that has sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to
commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this ordinance. In any event,
the term "property owner" shall be restricted to include only the owner(s) or authorized agent(s)
of such owner(s), such as a developer, of land sought to be subdivided.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS - Facilities, infrastructure and other appurtenances built to City
standards, and ultimately owned and maintained by the City. Public improvements provide a
public service (such as wastewater collection and treatment and water storage and distribution),
and which protect the general health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens of Lake
Worth, including efficiency in traffic circulation and access for emergency services.
P
Page 17
Article 10.200
PUBLIC FACILITIES SYSTEM - The operation and maintenance of water, wastewater, roadway,
drainage or park facilities owned or operated by or in behalf of the City for the purposes
of providing services to the public, including existing and new developments.
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT - A water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or
park facility that is a part of one or more of the City public facilities systems.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE EASEMENT (POSE) - An easement located at street intersections to
promote visibility at the intersection.
PUBLIC PARK - Land dedicated to the City specifically for development and use as a public
open space and/or recreational area.
PHASED DEVELOPMENT - Development that will occur in phases over time.
REVIEW - A review of an application for a development permit based on documents, materials,
and reports.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) - A use of land dedicated by plat or metes and bounds to and for use
by the public and which right-of-way is separate and distinct from the lots, parcel abutting it,
and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
The following are types of rights-of-way and/or design standards that may be established/
associated with the creation of a subdivision:
1. Alley
A minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to
abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides
of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
2. Parkway
The area between the curb or edge of pavement and the property line of the abutting
lot which is used for street improvements. See also Street Improvements.
3. Public Street
A public right-of-way, however designated, designed to City standards and maintained
by the City, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land and in accordance with
the Thoroughfare Plan.
4. Street Improvements
This means any street or thoroughfare, together with all appurtenances required by
City regulations to be provided with such street or thoroughfare, and including but not
limited to curbs and gutters, walkways (sidewalks), drainage facilities to be situated in
the right-of-way for such street or thoroughfare, traffic control devices, street lights and
street signs, for which facilities the City will ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation. Also, referred to as Parkway.
5. Street Right-of-Way
The width of the right-of-way for any roadway is the shortest perpendicular distance
between the lines which delineate the rights-of-way of the street.
ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY - A term used to describe the nature and extent of required
public improvements or facilities corresponding to the scale and type of proposed development;
the portion of costs of a public improvement.
P
Page 18
Article 10.200
SHALL, MAY - The word "shall,” wherever used in this ordinance, will be interpreted in its mandatory
sense; the word "may" shall be interpreted as permissive.
STREET(S) - A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place or other name. “Street” does not include a path or an alley. The design of
streets within a development or improved with redevelopment shall comply with the approved
Master Thoroughfare Plan. See also, Plan, Master Thoroughfare Plan.
1. Access or Frontage Road
A street or road that provides access to adjacent properties along a freeway or expressway.
2. Approach Street
A new or existing street not adjacent to a subdivision being developed but which provided
access or improved access to such subdivision.
3. Cul-de-sac
A street having but one outlet to another street and terminated on the opposite end by a
vehicular turnaround.
4. Dead End Street
A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
5. Street Width
The portion of the right-of-way constructed and designated for vehicular traffic. The shortest
distance between the opposite edges of a paved surface or where curbs exist, the distance
measured from face of curb to face of curb.
6. Standard Street
A standard street is a street or road that meets or exceeds the minimum Street Improvements.
This means any street or thoroughfare, together with all appurtenances required
by City regulations to be provided with such street or thoroughfare, and including but not
limited to curbs and gutters, walkways (sidewalks), drainage facilities to be situated in the
right-of-way for such street or thoroughfare, traffic control devices, street lights and street
signs, for which facilities the City will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance
and operation.
SUBDIVIDER - Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to
constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term “subdivider” shall be
restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner, or authorized agent of such owner or equitable
owner, such as a developer, or land sought to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION - Refer to Addition. A division or redivision of any tract of land situated within the
corporate limits for the purpose of transfer of ownership, layout of any subdivision of any tract of
land or any addition, or for the layout out of building lots, or streets, alleys or parts of other portions
for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto.
TRACT - An unplatted parcel of land described by metes and bounds and typically recorded in the
county deed records.
U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS - The branch of the U.S. Army that plans, engineers, and
manages national water resource projects and facilities.
UTILITY - Water, sanitary sewer, electric, gas, telephone, cable TV or any other such item of service
either for public or private use.
S
Page 19
Article 10.200
UTILITY (PUBLIC) - An entity that provides an essential commodity or service, such as electric,
gas distribution, and local telephone, and that is generally under government regulation.
A service provided to the public by either a private or a public agency.
WAIVER - As a part of the discretionary review process, the developer or applicant requests
certain regulations not apply to the subdivision.
U
Page 20
THIS PAGE INT ENT IONALLY LEFT BLANK
Page 21
10.300
ARTICLE 10.300, SITE DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES—PLAT ...................... 21
Section 10.301 Overview of Site Development Procedures ................ 21
Section 10.302 General Plat Review Procedures ................................. 24
Section 10.303 Specific Plats and Procedures ................................... 21
A. Preliminary Plat ............................................................. 28
B. Final Plat ....................................................................... 32
C. Minor Plat ...................................................................... 34
D. Amending Plat ............................................................... 36
E. Replat ............................................................................ 38
F. Residential Replat ......................................................... 40
G. Vacating Plat ................................................................. 42
Section 10.304 Additional Requirements for Plat Approval .................. 44
ARTICLE 10.300, SITE DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES - PLAT
Page 22
Article 10.300
Section 10.301 Overview of Site Development Process
No final plat shall be approved by the City Council, and no completed improvements shall be
accepted by the City or its representatives, unless and until such plat and improvements conform
to all applicable regulations and standards as prescribed by the City of Lake Worth. All
improvements, including, but not limited to streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, drainage
ways, water and sewer lines and improvements shall be designed, placed and constructed according
to the procedures and policies herein and with the criteria and details in Appendix B,
Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
A. Pre-application Meeting
The conceptual phase of the development process includes informal review of any development
proposal with staff and/or with the Development Review Committee (DRC)
during a Pre-application Meeting. Required forms, if applicable, are available from the
Planning and Zoning Department, and appointments should be made with Building and
Development Services. The plan or plat required for this phase is not an official plat
and does not constitute and shall not be construed as the submission of or filing of a
plat within the meaning of this Ordinance or within the meaning of the laws of the State
of Texas or of the United States, including, without limitation, Texas Local Government
Code Chapter 212, as amended.
B. Entitlements
The review and approval process by the City varies by the type of subdivision or land
development proposal and may also include zoning actions.
1. Plats
The applicable Administrative Officers and/or Approving Authority reviews the
plat and plans for compliance with City regulations and approves, approves
with conditions, or disapproves the plat and plans. Refer to Section 10.303,
Specific Plats and Procedures.
Page 23
Article 10.300
2. Engineered Construction Plans and Engineering Studies
Engineered studies and construction documents bearing the seal and signature of
a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas, and cost estimates with
the applicable development agreement are typically submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Department for distribution to the DRC with an approved preliminary plat
and prior to application for a final plat or replat. All plans shall be in accordance
with the regulations herein and with Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction
Standards.
3. Guarantee of Public Improvements
All required public improvements and facilities will be constructed prior to the legal
filing of the plat or shall be guaranteed with an approved agreement and the provision
of surety in accordance with these Subdivision Regulations, and with Appendix
B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
C. Physical Development
The technical review process varies by the type of subdivision or land development proposal.
Applicable approvals including, but not limited to, zoning and plat are required prior
to proceeding to the physical development. The applicable Administrative Officers review
the construction documents and engineering studies for compliance with City regulations.
1. Building Permit
An original complete application is required to be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Department. The following approvals are required prior to permit approval:
a. Preliminary plat;
b. Final plat;
c. Engineered construction plans;
d. Engineering studies; and
e. Off-site easements and dedications.
2. Certificate of Occupancy
Upon final inspection and completion of the project constructed in conformity with
approved plans, the City Manager and/or designee may issue a certificate of occupancy.
D. Legal Filings
1. Plat Certification
The certification on the face of the approved plat or plan shall be executed by the
applicable Approving Authorities prior to filing with the City Secretary or the Tarrant
County Clerk in accordance with the regulations herein and all applicable
state law requirements.
2. Filing of Approved Plat
Submit the required number of blackline copies, fees, tax certificate and other
copies, as may be required by City staff and the Tarrant County Clerk.
Page 24
Article 10.300
Section 10.302 General Plat Review Procedures
A. Intent of Required Procedures and Required Improvements
The requirements of these Subdivision and Development Regulations are designed and
intended to assure that:
1. All purchasers of property within the subdivision shall have a usable, buildable
parcel of land;
2. The impacts of new development are mitigated through contributions of rights-ofway,
easements and construction of capital improvements;
3. The City can provide for the orderly and economical extension of public facilities
and services which are:
a. Provided at the earliest stage of the development process;
b. Constructed and installed properly;
c. Required only according to the proportionate share of the costs; and
d. The new development and the required public facilities and services conform
to the adopted Comprehensive Plan, other adopted City plans, and
applicable capital improvements plans.
B. Role of Development Review Committee (DRC)
The Development Review Committee (DRC) is responsible for reviewing all development
proposals for compliance with these regulations and to:
1. Fairly and efficiently enforce the provisions of these regulations, including information
not evidenced on the plat or plan, and
2. Facilitate cooperation between the City and the applicant so that the application is
complete and in proper form.
C. Pre-Application Meeting
1. The Development Review Committee (DRC) will review sketches, plans, and or
plats with the applicant to determine what may be required for the proposed development.
No formal application is required, but sketches and plans should be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department in advance of the meeting.
2. Prior to submitting a formal application all DRC review comments from the Pre-
Application Meeting must be addressed.
D. Plat Determination
1. Based on the information provided at the pre-application conference and/or DRC
meeting, determination will be made regarding the type of plat or plan which is
best suited for the type of development proposed.
2. The name of the proposed subdivision and the street names shall be unique and
not duplicate the name of an existing plat or subdivision. The City will review and
prohibits duplication of an existing plat or subdivision. In such case, another
name will be required. Refer to Article 10.400, Minimum Design Standards.
Page 25
Article 10.300
E. Formal Plat Application
City staff is authorized to create and require the use of subdivision and platting application
forms, which are available on the City website or may be received in hard copy
form from the Planning and Zoning Department. The application forms specify all the
elements required for submittal.
F. Complete Application Required
1. A complete application must be submitted to the City to be considered.
2. No required application shall be accepted by the City for processing unless it is
accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with
the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations, all applicable City regulations,
and the application form.
3. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance
with the substantive requirements of this these Subdivision Regulations
and any applicable City regulations.
4. Within ten (10) business days after the submittal of the formal application, the
applicant will be notified of the application status, which may be one of the following:
a. Incomplete Application
i. An application which is lacking required information and/or fee
and will not be reviewed by the appropriate Administrative Officers,
departments and/or agencies. The determination shall
specify the documents or other information needed to complete
the application and shall state the date the application will expire
if the documents or other information is not provided.
ii. If the Planning Administrator issues two (2) incomplete determinations,
the applicant shall pay a re-submittal fee before any
additional application is approved by the City Council. The fee
shall be in the amount of the professional fees, including engineering;
and legal fees, if required, for the review of the application
and supporting documents and issuance of comments
plus an administrative fee of 20 percent of the total professional
fees.
iii. The applicant shall be deemed to have been notified if the City
has sent the applicant and/or the designated representative a
written explanation sent by USPS mail and/or email as specified
on the application.
b. Complete Application
i. An application that includes all the required information, documents,
and fees will be deemed complete, and distributed for
review by the appropriate administrative officers, departments,
and/or agencies.
ii. The applicant will be provided a fee receipt by the City.
Page 26
Article 10.300
G. Application Expiration
1. An application shall expire on the forty-fifth (45th) day after submittal if:
a. The applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary
to comply with the City’s requirements relating to the required
application;
b. The City has provided to the applicant, not later than the tenth (10th)
business day after the date the application is submitted, unless otherwise
specified, written notice that specifies the necessary documents
or other information, and the date the application will expire if the documents
or other information is not provided; and
c. The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information
within the time provided in the notification. If the required application
is not completed by the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application
is submitted to the appropriate Administrative Officers, the required
application will be deemed to have expired and it will be returned
to the applicant together with any accompanying information.
2. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired
pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that
is subsequently denied.
H. Filing Date
1. For the purpose of these Subdivision Regulations, the filing date of an application
for approval of a plat or plan shall be the date that the appropriate Administrative
Officers determine that the application satisfies all requirements
of these Subdivision Regulations and all other applicable ordinances, except
for requested variances, and all applicable fees have been paid.
2. The statutory period requiring formal approval or disapproval of the plat or
plan shall commence on the filing date.
3. Action shall be taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days
of the filing date unless a waiver is requested by the applicant.
4. A plat or plan shall be submitted to the City Council within 30 days after the
date the plat is approved or disapproved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
unless a waiver is requested by the applicant.
I. Certification Required
1. In accordance with the regulations herein and Texas Local Government Code
§ 212.009, as amended, when approved, all plans and plats shall include a
certificate of approval of endorsed (signature and date) by the Chair of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem and attested
by the City Secretary.
2. The certificate shall be on the face of the plan or plat document (Refer to Appendix
A, Plat and Plan Requirements).
Page 27
Article 10.300
J. Documentation of Approved Plat
1. City Clerk
As specified herein by plat type, submit one (1) hard copy and one (1) electronic
version of the approved plat.
2. Tarrant County Clerk
Submit the required number of blackline copies, electronic version, fees, tax
certificate and other copies, as may be required for by City staff and the Tarrant
County Clerk for official filing of the approved subdivision.
K. Miscellaneous Reviews Procedures
1. Phased Development
a. If the subdivider intends to develop the subdivision in phases or sections,
the plat shall include only those sections or phases of the subdivision
that the subdivider intends for immediate development.
b. The subdivider shall provide an illustration (hard copy and/or electronic
version) showing all phases of the development shall be provided to
City staff to review for substantial conformity.
2. Simultaneous Submission of Plats
An applicant may simultaneously submit both preliminary and final plat applications
for review and approval.
Page 28
Article 10.300
Section 10.303 Specific Plats and Procedures
A. Preliminary Plat
1. Purpose and Authority
a. The preliminary plat serves as a guide in the preparation of a final
plat, and in the engineering plans to serve the final plat. The plat is
not to be recorded and is only a proposed division of land for review
and study by the City.
b. The preliminary plat is not contemplated by the Texas Local Government
Code but is regulated herein.
2. Process and Applicability
The preliminary plat will be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and considered by the City Council.
3. Complete Application Submittal Required
An applicant must submit the completed application form, fee, additional documents,
if required, and plat prepared in accordance with the Appendix A,
Plat and Plan Requirements.
a. Additional copies of the preliminary plat may be required if revisions
or corrections are necessary.
b. Waivers may be requested in accordance with Section 10. 302, General
Plat Review Procedures.
c. Engineering studies may be required by the City Engineer in accordance
with these Subdivision Regulations and the Design Criteria and
Construction Standards.
4. Notice. Written notification is not required. Notice of scheduled public
meetings will be made as required by state law, as amended
5. Criteria for Approval
No preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and considered by the City Council, unless the following standards have
been met:
a. Acceptance of preliminary engineering studies and analysis by the
City Engineer as provided by the applicant to:
i. Confirm the adequacy of the existing utility and/or roadway
system to serve the proposed development; and
ii. Show the comprehensive drainage area and plan.
b. The plat conforms to the Comprehensive Plan, including, but not limited
to, all adopted water, sewer, future land uses, and thoroughfare
plans.
c. The plat conforms to applicable zoning and other regulations.
d. The plat meets all other requirements of these Subdivision Regulations.
Page 29
Article 10.300
6. Determination
a. Recommendation of Commission
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the preliminary
plat and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval
of the plat within 30 days of the filing date of the preliminary plat
application.
b. City Council Action
i. Commission Recommendation
Following the recommendation of the Commission, the City
Council shall make a decision to approve, approve with conditions
or disapprove the preliminary plat application within 30
days of the recommendation by the Commission.
ii. Conditional Approval or Denial
If the City Council conditionally approves or disapproves the
preliminary plat application, the Administrative Officers shall
provide the applicant a written statement of the conditions for
the conditional approval or reasons for disapproval that clearly
articulates each specific condition for the conditional approval
or reason for disapproval, including a citation to the
law that is the basis for the conditional approval or disapproval,
if applicable.
ii. Approval
Approval of the preliminary plat application by the City Council
shall also constitute approval of plans and any other documents
or information submitted with the preliminary plat application.
c. Applicant Response
i. If the City Council conditionally approves or disapproves a
preliminary plat, the applicant may submit to the Administrative
Officers a written response that satisfies each condition
for the conditional approval or remedies each reason for disapproval
provided to the applicant.
ii. There is no deadline for when the applicant may submit the
response.
iii. If the applicant submits a response under this section, the
response shall be reviewed by the Administrative Officers
and forwarded to the City Council for action within 15 days of
the date the response is submitted.
iv. The City Council shall take action to approve or disapprove of
the applicant’s previously conditionally approved or disapproved
preliminary plat.
Page 30
Article 10.300
v. The City Council shall approve the preliminary plat if the applicant’s
response adequately addresses each condition of
the conditional approval or each reason for disapproval.
vi. The City Council shall disapprove the preliminary plat if the
applicant’s response fails to adequately address each condition
of the conditional approval or each reason for the disapproval.
vii. The City Council may only disapprove the preliminary plat for
a specific condition or reason previously provided to the applicant.
If the City Council disapproves the preliminary plat,
the Administrative Officers shall provide the applicant a written
statement of the reasons for disapproval that clearly articulates
each specific reason for disapproval, including a citation
to the law that is the basis for the disapproval, if applicable.
If the preliminary plat is disapproved after the applicant
files a response under this section, the disapproval is final.
d. Approval
Approval of the preliminary plat application by the City Council shall
also constitute approval of plans and any other documents or information
submitted with the preliminary plat application.
7. Certification
Refer to Section 10.302, General Plat Review Procedures.
8. Documentation of Approved Plat
An approved and certified preliminary plat will be filed with the City Secretary.
9. Exception
For subdivisions less than five (5) acres which contain four (4) lots or less, the
requirement for a preliminary plat may be waived in writing by the City Manager
or the designated administrative official if no public improvements are being
proposed and if the development has access to a public street.
10. Commencement of Development
No construction activities or development activity shall commence, nor shall
any building permit, utility connection permit, electrical connection permit or
similar permit be issued, for any development or land division subject to this
Section, until a final plat has been approved by the applicable Approval Authority.
11. Extension and Reinstatement Procedure
An approved preliminary plat shall be valid for 12 months after the date of City
Council approval. If no action is taken within 12 months, the subdivider will be
required to file a new pre-application meeting for DRC review and pay all applicable
fees.
Page 31
Article 10.300
Actions include submission of the following:
a. Submittal of engineered construction documents and/or engineering
studies or a complete application for final plat approval.
b. Extension Request
A one-time, six (6) month extension may be granted by the DRC, provided
that a written request for an extension is signed and submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Department 60 days prior to the expiration
date.
c. Reinstatement Request
An approved preliminary plat may be reinstated by the DRC, provided
that a written request is signed and submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Department 60 days prior to the expiration date.
d. Determination
The decision of the DRC shall be in writing and may grant a sixmonth
extension or reinstate the plat or deny the request. If the request
is denied, the applicant or property owner must submit a new
application for approval and pay all applicable fees. In determining
whether to grant a request for extension or reinstatement, the DRC
shall take into account the following:
i. Reasons for lapse,
ii. The ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions
attached to the original approval, and
iii. The extent to which newly adopted subdivision regulations
shall apply to the plat or study.
Page 32
Article 10.300
B. Final Plat
1. Complete Application Submittal Required
An applicant must submit the completed application form, fee, additional documents,
if required, and plat prepared in accordance with the Appendix A,
Plat and Plan Requirements.
a. An application for final plat shall not be accepted by the City if a preliminary
plat has expired and become void.
b. A certificate from the County Clerk shall be submitted with the application
which shows the payment all taxes with no delinquent taxes
against the subject property.
2. Notice
Written notification is not required. Notice of scheduled public meetings will be
made as required by state law, as amended.
3. Criteria for Approval
No final plat shall be approved unless the following standards have been met:
a. The final plat shall conform with the preliminary plat, as approved,
incorporating all conditions, changes, directions and additions.
b. Approval of the preliminary plat is required prior to submittal and review
of the final plat, unless waived in accordance to Section
10.303.B.10, Exception.
c. An executed Public Improvements Agreement, as applicable, and
provision of security is provided to the Administrative Officers for consideration
by the City Council.
4. Determination
a. Recommendation of Commission
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the preliminary
plat and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval
of the plat within 30 days of the filing date of the preliminary plat
application.
b. City Council Action
i. Following the recommendation of the Commission, the City
Council shall make a decision to approve, approve with conditions
or disapprove the preliminary plat application within 30
days of the recommendation by the Commission.
ii. If the City Council conditionally approves or disapproves the
preliminary plat application, the Administrative Officers shall
provide the applicant a written statement of the conditions for
the conditional approval or reasons for disapproval that clearly
articulates each specific condition for the conditional approval
or reason for disapproval, including a citation to the
Page 33
Article 10.300
law that is the basis for the conditional approval or disapproval,
if applicable.
c. Applicant Response
i. If the City Council conditionally approves or disapproves a
preliminary plat, the applicant may submit to the Administrative
Officers a written response that satisfies each condition
for the conditional approval or remedies each reason for disapproval
provided to the applicant.
ii. There is no deadline for when the applicant may submit the
response.
iii. If the applicant submits a response under this section, the
response shall be reviewed by the Administrative Officers
and forwarded to the City Council for action within 15 days of
the date the response is submitted.
iv. The City Council shall take action to approve or disapprove of
the applicant’s previously conditionally approved or disapproved
preliminary plat.
v. The City Council shall approve the preliminary plat if the applicant’s
response adequately addresses each condition of
the conditional approval or each reason for disapproval.
vi. The City Council shall disapprove the preliminary plat if the
applicant’s response fails to adequately address each condition
of the conditional approval or each reason for the disapproval.
vii. The City Council may only disapprove the preliminary plat for
a specific condition or reason previously provided to the applicant.
If the City Council disapproves the preliminary plat,
the Administrative Officers shall provide the applicant a written
statement of the reasons for disapproval that clearly articulates
each specific reason for disapproval, including a citation
to the law that is the basis for the disapproval, if applicable.
If the preliminary plat is disapproved after the applicant
files a response under this section, the disapproval is final.
d. Approval
Approval of the preliminary plat application by the City Council shall
also constitute approval of plans and any other documents or information
submitted with the preliminary plat application.
5. Certification
Refer to Section 10.302, General Plat Review Procedures.
6. Documentation of Approved Plat
An approved and certified final plat will be filed with the Tarrant County Clerk.
Page 34
Article 10.300
C. Minor Plat
1. Complete Application Submittal Required
An applicant must submit the completed application form, fee, additional documents,
if required, and plat prepared in accordance with the Appendix A, Plat
and Plan Requirements.
a. Applicability
An application for approval of a minor plat may be filed only when all of
the following circumstances apply:
i. The proposed division results in four (4) or fewer lots;
ii. All lots in the proposed subdivision front onto an existing public
street and the construction or extension of a street or alley is
not required; and
iii. The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities
or public improvements to serve any lot within the subdivision.
b. A certificate from the County Clerk shall be submitted with the application
which shows the payment all taxes with no delinquent taxes against
the subject property.
2. Notice - Written notification is not required.
3. Criteria for Decision
The City Manager or designee shall approve a minor plat application when it
meets the following criteria:
a. The minor plat application is consistent with all zoning requirements for
the property and all other requirements of this Ordinance;
b. All lots to be created by the plat are already adequately served by all
required utilities and services; and
c. The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities or
public improvements to serve any lot within the subdivision; and
d. The applicant has submitted a completed application form, associated
documents, fee, and the minor plat containing the required information
specified in the Appendix A, Plat and Plan Requirements.
e. The Administrative Officers may, for any reason, elect to present a minor
plat for approval to the Planning and Zoning Commission and then
to the City Council.
i. The Administrative Officers shall not disapprove a minor plat
and shall refer any minor plat which the Administrative Officers
refuses to approve to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and then to the City Council within the time periods specified in
Section 212.009, Texas Local Government Code.
Page 35
Article 10.300
ii. If a minor plat is referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and then to the City Council, the approval process
shall comply with the processes provided for a final plat, as
applicable.
4. Certification - Refer to Section 10.302, General Plat Review Procedures.
5. Documentation of Approved Plat
An approved and certified minor plat will be filed with the Tarrant County
Clerk.
Page 36
Article 10.300
D. Amending Plat
1. Complete Application/Submittal Required
An applicant is required to submit the completed application form; associated
documents; fee, as applicable; and the plat containing the required information
specified in the Appendix A, Plat and Plan Requirements.
2. Notice
Written notification is not required. Notice of scheduled public meetings will be
made as required by state law, as amended
3. Criteria for Approval
The City Manager or designee may approve an amending plat, which may be
recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of the preceding
plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is solely
for one or more of the following purposes:
a. To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding
plat;
b. To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
c. To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding
plat;
d. To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement
from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
e. To show the location or character of a monument that has been
changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location
or character on the preceding plat;
f. To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission
previously approved, including lot numbers, acreage, street names,
and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
g. To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two
adjacent lots if:
i. Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
ii. Neither lot is abolished;
iii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants
or restrictions; and
iv. The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on
the property rights of the other owners in the plat;
h. To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a
building or other improvement on a lot line or easement;
i. To relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent
lots if:
Page 37
Article 10.300
i. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending
the plat;
ii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants
or restrictions; and
iii. The amendment does not increase the number of lots;
j. To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or
fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the
preceding plat if:
i. The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations
of the City;
ii. The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants
or restrictions; and
iii. The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council has approved,
after a public hearing, as a residential improvement
area; or
k. To replat one (1) or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
i. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending
the plat;
ii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants
or restrictions;
iii. The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
iv. The amendment does not create or require the creation of a
new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities.
4. Determination
The City Manager and/or designee may approve an amending plat that complies
with these regulations and does not require a waiver; provided, however,
the City Manager may, for any reason, elect to present an amending plat for
approval to the Planning and Zoning Commission and then to the City Council.
a. The City Manager shall not disapprove an amending plat and shall refer
any amending plat which the City Manager refuses to approve to
the Planning and Zoning Commission and then to the City Council
within the time periods specified in Section 212.009, Texas Local Government
Code.
b. If an amending plat is referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and then to the City Council, the approval process shall comply with
the processes provided for a final plat, as applicable.
5. Certification
Refer to Section 10.302, General Plat Review Procedures.
6. Documentation of Approved Plat
An approved amending plat will be filed with the Tarrant County Clerk.
Page 38
Article 10.300
E. Replat
1. Complete Application Submittal Required
An applicant must submit the completed application form, fee, additional documents,
if required, and plat prepared in accordance with the Appendix A,
Plat and Plan Requirements.
a. Requirements
A replat of a subdivision is controlling over the preceding plat without
vacation of the plat if the plat:
i. Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property
being replatted;
ii. Is approved by the City Council;
iii. Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions;
and
iv. When applicable, in compliance with subsection E.2. below.
b. A certificate from the County Clerk shall be submitted with the application
which shows the payment all taxes with no delinquent taxes
against the subject property.
2. Notice
a. Written notification is not required, unless the following applies.
b. Replat for Residential Lots. Notice shall be provided if the replat
meets the following:
i. If any of the proposed property to be replatted, within the immediate
preceding five (5) years, was limited by any interim
or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not
more than two (2) residential units per lot, or
ii. If any lot in the approved subdivision was limited by deed
restriction to residential use for not more than two (2) residential
units per lot.
iii. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication in
an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation
and by written notice forwarded to the owners of lots that are
in the original subdivision and that are within 200 feet of the
lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved
county tax roll of the property upon which the replat is
requested.
3. Process
The application process, approval process, criteria for approval, and recordation
of a replat shall comply with the processes as provided for a final
plat, as applicable.
Page 39
Article 10.300
4. Certification
a. Refer to Section 10.302, General Plat Review Procedures.
b. Note on Plat
A replat shall contain a note describing the purpose of the change or
modification framed in a bold line so as to be distinctly visible on the
face of the plat.
5. Documentation of Approved Plat
An approved replat will be filed with the Tarrant County Clerk.
Page 40
Article 10.300
F. Residential Replat
1. Complete Application Submittal Required
An applicant must submit the completed application form, fee, additional documents,
if required, and plat prepared in accordance with the Appendix A,
Plat and Plan Requirements.
2. Applicability
a. A replat without vacation of the preceding plat must conform to the
requirements of this section if:
i. During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted
was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification
to residential use for not more than two residential
units per lot; or
ii. Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions
to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units
per lot.
b. If a proposed replat described above requires a variance or exception,
a public hearing must be held by the City Council.
3. Notice
Notice of the public hearing required by Section F.2. shall:
a. Be given no less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing
in an official newspaper and
b. By written notice, with a copy of any special conditions, sent to the
owners, as indicated on the most recently approved ad valorem tax
roll of the City, of lots that are in the original subdivision within 200
feet of the lots to be replatted. The written notice may be delivered by
depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a
post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the City.
4. Determination
a. Variance
If the proposed replat requires a variance and is protested in accordance
with this subsection:
i. The proposed replat must receive, in order to be approved,
the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (¾) of the members
present of the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council.
ii. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners
of at least 20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately
adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and
extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original subdivision,
must be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council prior to the close of the public hearing.
Page 41
Article 10.300
b. If a proposed replat described by Section G.1. does not require a variance
or exception:
i. The City shall, not later than the 15th day after the date the
replat is approved, provide written notice by mail of the approval
of the replat to each owner of a lot in the original subdivision
that is within 200 feet of the lots to be replatted according
to the most recent City or County tax roll.
ii. This Section does not apply to a proposed replat if the Planning
and Zoning Commission or the City Council holds a public
hearing and gives notice of the hearing in the manner provided
herein.
5. Process
Except for public hearing, notice, and protest procedures as described above,
the application process, approval process, criteria for approval, and recordation
of a replat described by this Section shall comply with the processes
as provided for a final plat, as applicable.
6. Certification - Refer to Section 10.302, General Plat Review Procedures.
7. Documentation of Approved Plat
An approved replat will be filed with the Tarrant County Clerk.
Page 42
Article 10.300
G. Vacating Plat
1. Complete Application Submittal Required
Submit the completed application form, associated documents, and the vacating
plat containing the required information specified in Appendix A, Plat and Plan
Requirements.
2. Process and Applicability
a. The Vacating Plat will be considered by City Council with a recommendation
from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. By property owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat
may vacate, upon review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
approval by the City Council, the plat at any time before any lot in the
plat is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument
declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner
prescribed for the original plat (instrument language is available from
the city, upon request).
c. By all lot owners. If some or all of the lots covered by the plat have been
sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application
of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner
prescribed for the original plat.
3. Criteria for Approval
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review, and the City Council
may approve, the petition for vacation on such terms and conditions as
are in accordance with Texas Local Government Code § 212.013, as
amended, and as are reasonable to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
b. As a condition of vacation of the plat, the City Council may direct the
petitioners to prepare and seek approval of a revised final plat in accordance
with this ordinance such that the property does not become
"unplatted."
4. Determination
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval, and the City
Council shall approve, the plat vacation only if the criteria and conditions cited
above are satisfied.
5. Certification
Refer to Section 10.302, General Plat Review Procedures.
6. Documentation of Approved Plat
a. If the City Council approves vacating a plat, the City Secretary shall record
a copy of the plat vacation instrument in the office of the County
Clerk of Tarrant County along with an exhibit showing a drawing of the
area or plat vacated.
Page 43
Article 10.300
b. The County Clerk shall write legibly on the vacated plat the word
"vacated" and shall enter on the plat a reference to the volume and
page at which the vacating instrument is recorded.
c. If the City Council vacates only a portion of a plat, it shall cause a revised
final plat drawing to also be recorded that shows that portion of
the original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has not
been vacated.
d. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument the vacated
plat (or the vacated portion of the plat) has no effect.
Page 44
Article 10.300
Section 10.304 Additional Requirements for Plat Approval
A. Waivers
1. Purpose and Authority
a. The City Council may approve waivers to these subdivision regulations
so that substantial justice may be done, and the public interest secured
when it finds that unreasonable hardships or difficulties may result from
strict compliance with these regulations, and/or the purposes of these
regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal.
Any waiver granted shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of these regulations.
b. Waivers are regulated herein and in accordance with Section 10.101,
Authority.
2. Process and Applicability
a. Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of the adopted Comprehensive Land Use Plan and these regulations
so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured,
and substantial justice done.
b. Alternative standards. Waivers to the regulations herein and contained
in Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards may only be
granted based on evidence provided by the design engineer and
acknowledged by the City Manager and/or designee, that the alternative
standards provide the same degree of protection that the original standards
would provide.
c. Waivers should be submitted with the application for preliminary plat. If
a waiver is submitted after approval of the preliminary plat, a separate
application and fee and review process will be required.
3. Criteria for Approval
In granting a waiver, the City Council shall prescribe only conditions that it
deems necessary or desirable to protect the public interest. In making the findings
hereinbelow required, the City Council shall consider:
a. The nature of the proposed land use(s),
b. Existing adjacent land uses of land,
c. The number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision,
and
d. The probable effect of such waiver upon traffic conditions and upon the
public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity.
e. Pecuniary hardship standing alone shall not be deemed to constitute
undue hardship.
4. Determination
No waiver shall be granted unless the City Council finds:
a. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land
Page 45
Article 10.300
involved such that the strict application of the provisions of these regulations
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land;
b. That the waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant;
c. That the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and
d. That the granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing
the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the
adopted Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the provisions of these
regulations; or
e. That the waiver is necessary as a result of the determination regarding
the rough proportionality of an exaction requirement.
5. Official Record
Such findings, together with the specific facts, shall be incorporated into the
official minutes of the City Council meeting at which such waiver is granted.
B. Traffic Study
1. Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) are required for developments which include and/
or generate:
a. 50 or more dwelling units; or
b. 500 or more one-way trips per day; or
c. Collector or Arterial Streets not included in the Master Thoroughfare
Plan (MTP).
in order to accommodate
increased traffic because of the proposed development
C. Development Agreement
1. Agreement Required
As a condition to plat approval, the subdivider shall execute a contract with the
City providing for the installation of public improvements required by the development
regulations of the City.
Page 46
Article 10.300
a. This agreement shall be considered by the City Council at a regularly
scheduled meeting.
b. This agreement, entitled “Development Agreement,” shall constitute a
covenant which will run with the land and will be binding upon any assignee
or owner in the chain of title. The Development Agreement
shall be in the form provided in, Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction
Standards.
2. Revisions
After execution of the Development Agreement by the subdivider and the City,
any changes in the contract or the plans or specifications that alter the scope of
the project must be recommended by the City Engineer, approved by the City
Attorney, and considered by the City Council at a regularly scheduled meeting.
Upon approval, an addendum to the Development Agreement shall be executed
by the subdivider and the City.
D. Adequacy of Specific Facilities
1. Purpose and Authority
All lots to be platted shall be connected to the City public facility systems, as
follows:
a. A public water system which has capacity to provide water for domestic
use and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection.
b. An approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The City
Manager and/or designee shall be responsible for determining the approved
means of wastewater collection and treatment.
c. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system
for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation and shall be
properly related to the approved Master Thoroughfare Plan. New subdivisions
shall be supported by a thoroughfare network having adequate
capacity, and safe and efficient traffic circulation. Each development
shall have adequate access to the thoroughfare network.
d. Drainage improvements serving new development shall be designed
to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system.
The City may require the use of control methods such as retention
or detention, the construction of off-site drainage improvements,
or drainage impact fees in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed
subdivision.
2. Process and Applicability
a. Minimum Design Standards
Article 10.400 of these regulations provides for the minimum requirements
for development plans within the City. Additional technical
standards are provided in the Appendix B, Design Guidelines and
Construction Standards.
Page 47
Article 10.300
b. Adequacy
The City Manager and/or designee shall review the development for
adequacy of the proposed and existing public improvements necessary
to support the subdivision or development.
E. Rough Proportionality
1. Authority
Rough Proportionality is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code,
§ 212.904, as amended.
2. Process and Applicability
a. Plat application
The City Manager and/or designee shall review the plat application
and prepare a written statement affirming that each exaction requirement
to be imposed as a condition of approval is roughly proportionate
to the demand created by the subdivision or development on the
applicable City public facility systems, taking into consideration the
following:
i. Current categorical findings and recommendations made by
the North Central Texas Council of Government (NCTCOG)
in developing standard specifications for public infrastructure
improvements and storm water management;
ii. Proposed and potential use of the land;
iii. Timing and sequence of development in relation to availability
of adequate levels of public facilities systems;
iv. Engineering studies specific to the development including,
but not limited to, impact fee studies, traffic impact studies,
drainage studies, fire protection consumption and irrigation
water needs, and solid or liquid waste collection or disposal;
v. Level of service and functionality of both on-site and off-site
public infrastructure improvements in serving the proposed
subdivision or development;
vi. Degree to which public infrastructure improvements necessary
to serve the proposed subdivision are supplied by other
developments;
vii. Anticipated participation by the City in the costs of necessary
public infrastructure improvements;
viii. Degree to which acceptable private infrastructure improvements
to be constructed and maintained by the applicant will
offset the need for public infrastructure improvements;
ix. Any reimbursements for the costs of public infrastructure improvements
for which the proposed subdivision is eligible;
and/or
Page 48
Article 10.300
x. Any other information relating to the impacts created by the
proposed subdivision or development on the City public facility
systems.
b. The City Manager and/or designee may require that the applicant, at
its expense, submit any information or studies that may assist in making
the proportionality determination.
c. Rough proportionality will be considered in conjunction with the development
application by City Council with a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. Determination
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider
the report concerning the proportionality of the exaction requirements
in making a decision on a plat application and may grant a waiver to
the requirements herein or make a decision to participate in the costs
of improvements.
b. The Administrative Official responsible for issuing a permit for which
an exaction requirement is imposed as a condition of approval shall
consider the report concerning the proportionality of the exaction requirements
in making its decision as to whether to grant the permit or
to modify or waive an exaction requirement.
4. Rough Proportionality Appeal
a. An applicant may file an appeal to contest any exaction requirement,
other than impact fees, imposed as a condition of approval or in
which the failure to comply is grounds for denying the application pursuant
to the regulations herein.
b. The purpose of a proportionality appeal is to assure that an exaction
requirement imposed as a condition of approval does not result in a
disproportionate cost burden on the applicant, taking into consideration
the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed
subdivision or development on the City public facility systems.
5. Appeals Procedure
a. An applicant shall file a written appeal with the City Secretary within
10 days of the date the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City
Administrative Officer responsible for issuing the permit takes action
applying the exaction requirement. This may include denial of the permit
or plat. The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the appeal.
b. A separate appeal form shall be submitted for each exaction requirement
for which relief is sought. The City Secretary shall forward the
appeal to the City Council for consideration.
c. The applicant may request postponement of consideration of the plat
application by the City Council pending preparation of the study and/
or appeal, in which case the applicant shall also waive any the statuPage
49
Article 10.300
tory period for acting upon the application for the time necessary for the
City Council to decide the appeal.
d. No Development Agreement may be executed by the City:
i. Until the time for appeal has expired unless the applicant
agrees in writing that the rough proportionality determination of
the is reasonable and accurate and that no appeal will be filed;
or,
ii. If an appeal is filed, until the City Council has made a determination
with respect to the appeal.
e. The appeal shall state the reasons that application of the exaction requirement
is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the
impact created by the proposed subdivision or development on the City
public facility systems and does not reasonably benefit the proposed
subdivision or development.
f. The appellant shall submit 15 copies of a study in support of the appeal
that includes, with respect to each specific exaction requirement appealed,
the following information within 30 days of the date of appeal,
unless a longer time is requested:
i. Total capacity of the City water, wastewater, roadway, drainage,
or park system, as applicable, to be utilized by the proposed
subdivision or development, employing standard
measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type
of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to
be consumed by the subdivision. If the proposed subdivision is
to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided
for the entire development, including any phases already
developed.
ii. Total capacity to be supplied to the city’s public facilities systems
for water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or parks, as
applicable, by the exaction requirement. This information shall
include any capacity supplied by prior exaction requirements
imposed on the development.
iii. Comparison of the capacity of the applicable City public facility
systems to be consumed by the proposed subdivision or development
with the capacity to be supplied to such systems by the
proposed exaction requirement. In making this comparison, the
impacts on the city’s public facilities systems from the entire
subdivision or development shall be considered.
iv. The amount of any City participation in the costs of oversizing
the public infrastructure improvements to be constructed by the
applicant in accordance with City requirements.
v. Comparison of the minimum size and capacity required by City
standards for the applicable public facility systems to be utilized
by the proposed subdivision or development with the size
Page 50
Article 10.300
and capacity to be supplied by the proposed exaction requirement.
vi. Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality
between the impacts. created by the proposed development
and the exaction requirement imposed by the City.
g. The City Manager and/or designee shall evaluate the appeal and
supporting study and shall make a recommendation to the City
Council based upon analysis of the information contained in the
study and utilizing the same factors considered by the engineer in
making the original proportionality determination.
6. City Council Decision of Appeal
a. The City Council shall decide the appeal within 30 days of the date
of final submission of any evidence by the applicant.
b. Upon receipt of the final submission of evidence from the applicant,
the City Secretary shall schedule a time and date for the City Council
to consider the appeal and shall cause the applicant to be notified
at the address specified in the appeal form of the time, date and location
at which the City Council shall consider the appeal.
c. The applicant shall be allotted time, not to exceed 30 minutes, to
present testimony at the City Council meeting.
d. The Council shall base its decision on the criteria listed herein and
may:
i. Deny the appeal and impose the exaction requirement in
accordance with the report and recommendation of the City
Manager and/or designee or the decision of the Planning
and Zoning Commission; or
ii. Grant the appeal, and waive in whole or in part an exaction
requirement to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality;
or
iii. Grant the appeal, and direct that the City participate in the
costs of acquiring land for or constructing the public infrastructure
improvement.
e. In deciding an appeal, the City Council shall determine whether application
of the exaction requirement is roughly proportional to the
nature and extent of the impact created by the proposed subdivision
on the City public facility systems for water, wastewater, roadway,
drainage, or park facilities, as applicable, and reasonably benefits
the subdivision. In making such determination, the Council shall consider:
i. The evidence submitted by the applicant;
ii. The City Manager and/or designee report and recommendation;
and
Page 51
Article 10.300
iii. If the property is adjacent to a state or county road, any recommendations
from the county or State.
f. The City Council may require the applicant or the City Administrative
Officers to submit additional information that it deems relevant in making
its decision.
g. The applicant shall not be deemed to have prevailed in the event that
the City Council modifies the exaction requirement.
7. Action Following Decision of City Council
a. If the City Council finds in favor of the applicant and waives the exaction
requirement as a condition of plat approval, or modifies the exaction
requirement to the extent necessary to achieve rough proportionality,
the applicant shall resubmit the plat application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Administrative Officer responsible for issuing
the permit within 30 days of the date the City Council takes action,
with any modifications necessary to conform with the City Council decision.
Failure to do so will result in the expiration of any relief granted by
the City Council.
b. If the City Council finds in favor of an applicant for any other permit and
waives the exaction requirement as a condition of permit approval, or
modifies the exaction requirement to the extent necessary to achieve
rough proportionality, the applicant shall resubmit the permit application
to the responsible official within 30 days of the date the City Council
takes action, with any modifications necessary to conform the application
with the City Council decision. Failure to do so will result in the expiration
of any relief granted by the City Council.
c. If the City Council denies the appeal and the applicant has executed a
waiver of the statutory period for acting upon a plat, the City shall place
the plat application on the agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission
within 30 days of the City Council decision.
d. If the plat application is modified to increase the number of residential
dwelling units or the intensity of non-residential uses, the City Manager
and/or designee may require a new study to validate the relief granted
by the City Council.
e. If the plat application for which relief was granted is denied on other
grounds, a new appeal shall be required on any subsequent application.
8. Appeal of City Council Decision
a. An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Council to the county
or district court of the county in which the development is located within
30 days of the date that the Council issues its final decision.
b. In the event that the applicant prevails in such action, the applicant will
be entitled to attorneys' fees and costs, including expert witness fees.
Page 52
THIS PAGE INT ENT IONALLY LEFT BLANK
Page 53
ARTICLE 10.400 DISTRICTS, LAND USES and NONCONFORMING USES ... 53
Section 10.401 General Procedures ..................................................... 54
Section 10.402 Design Standards ......................................................... 59
Section 10.403 Site Development ......................................................... 61
Section 10.404 Subdivision Layout ....................................................... 62
Section 10.405 Infrastructure in the Right-of-Way ................................ 64
Section 10.406 Utilities in the Right-of-Way .......................................... 67
ARTICLE 10.400
SITE DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Page 54
Article 10.400
Section 10.401 General Procedures
A. Engineering Requirements
1. Approved Preliminary Plat Required. An approved preliminary plat is required
prior to submitting an application for site development which is available
from the Department of Building and Development. Engineering Plans
and Construction Documents will be considered concurrently with the final
plat process.
2. Engineering Plans and Documents
a. Complete Application Required
An applicant must submit the completed application form, fee, engineering/
construction documents prepared in accordance with applicable
City regulations and Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction
Standards, and additional documents, if required, by the
City Manager and/or designee.
b. Engineering Plans/Construction Documents
Requirements for complete submittal are available on the appropriate
application available online at www.lakeworthtx.org or at City Hall.
c. Cost Estimates
Itemized cost estimates for public infrastructure facilities required.
d. Development Agreement
An applicant must submit an executed copy of the applicable agreement
required and as approved by City Council.
e. Rough Proportionality determination, if applicable, made by City Manager
and/or designee.
f. Off-site Easements and Dedications
i. The City will advise a subdivider of any potential on-site of offsite
requirement for oversized improvements. The City may
participate in the cost of any improvements required to serve
land areas and improvements outside the subdivision, including
oversized utility lines.
ii. All necessary off-site easements and dedications required for
city-maintained facilities and not shown on the plat must be conveyed
solely to the City prior to submitting an application for a
site development, such as by filing of a separate instrument, with
the proper signatures affixed. The original of the documents and
the appropriate fees for filing the documents at the county (per
Tarrant County requirements and the City submission guidelines,
as may be amended from time to time) shall be returned to
the City Secretary prior to approval and release of the engineering
plans.
Page 55
Article 10.400
B. Pre-Construction Procedures
1. Building and Construction Permit(s)
Approved engineering plans, associated documents, and the applicable permit
application(s) are required prior to the start of any construction on site
and/or any development that requires floodplain management, erosion control,
storm drainage, grading, and/or vegetation or tree removal.
2. Final Plans. The developer shall submit the final-approved engineering plans
prior to construction, as follows:
a. Three (3) full-size set of plans;
b. Half-size set(s), as requested, and
c. One (1) electronic version.
3. Inspection Fees
Payment of the inspection fees as specified and approved by the City Council
are required prior to scheduling the required pre-construction conference.
4. Pre-construction Conference
All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of
approved plans bearing the stamp of release of the City Manager and/or designee,
as appropriate. At least one (1) set of these plans shall remain on the
job site at all times.
C. Expiration After City Approval
Approved construction plans shall be valid for a period of 12 months after approval by
the applicable Approving Authority - Director of Building and Development Services
and the City Engineer. A one-time, 6-month extension may be granted by the above
prior to the date of expiration. Submit the request for extension 60 days prior to expiration.
D. Guarantee of Public Improvements
1. Development Agreement
a. The subdivider/developer shall guarantee the public improvements
will be constructed by executing the applicable Development Agreement,
as specified by the City Manager and/or designee.
b. The City Manager and/or designee may approve the applicable Development
Agreement when the total project cost is less than
$25,000.
2. Guarantee
a. The developer shall guarantee 125 percent of the estimated developer's
share of the cost of the required public improvements by one of
the methods discussed herein.
b. The developer shall provide a guarantee for maintenance for a period
of two (2) years in the amount of 125 percent of the actual cost of the
required public improvements by one (1) of the methods discussed
Page 56
Article 10.400
herein and as specified in the Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction
Standards.
c. Where City participation is necessary or agreed upon, the developer
shall guarantee 100 percent (100%) of the estimated City's share of the
cost of the required public improvements by one (1) of the methods discussed
herein.
3. Developer shall furnish a financial guarantee in one (1) of the following ways:
a. Payment and Performance Bond.
i. Furnish the City with a performance and payment bond executed
by a surety company authorized to do business in the State
of Texas.
ii. The bonds shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney
and must be executed by a corporate surety in conformance
with Texas law; or
b. Escrow or Interest-bearing Account
i. Assign an interest-bearing account, with a financial institution
which is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
or Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, in an
amount equal to the percentage discussed below.
ii. If an interest-bearing account is utilized, the developer shall
execute three (3) copies of a letter, approved by the City Attorney,
assigning the account to the City and authorizing the City
to withdraw funds and requiring authorization by the City before
the developer may withdraw funds.
iii. Any arrangement involving an interest-bearing account shall be
accepted in writing by the financial institution.
c. Letter of Credit
Deposit a certified check, Irrevocable Letter of Credit or cash with the
City in an amount equal to the percentage as discussed herein.
E. Inspection during Construction of Improvements
1. Periodic construction inspections, as required, shall be conducted by the City
Manager or designee. Said inspections shall ensure that construction is in accordance
with the approved engineering plans.
2. Upon completion of each inspection, a written report shall be forwarded to the
City Manager that fully documents the inspection conducted, the tests completed,
specific items that are in compliance or noncompliance, actions that must be
taken to bring the construction into compliance, and any other information required
by the City Engineer. The City of Lake Worth may either require reinspection
or conduct its own independent inspection as required by the City Manager
or designee.
3. The City will not deem required public improvements satisfactorily completed
until the applicant's engineer or surveyor provides certification to the City ManPage
57
ager or designee by submittal of detailed sealed as-built drawings which indicate
all public improvements and their locations, dimensions, materials and other information
required by the City Engineer, and until all required public improvements
have been completed in accordance with approved plans.
F. Improvements Required Prior to Acceptance
1. Provision of the following improvements, as applicable, designed and constructed
in accordance with the regulations herein and with Appendix B, Design Criteria
and Construction Standards, are required prior to acceptance by the City into
its public infrastructure system:
a. Streets,
b. Street lights,
c. Street signs,
d. Alleys,
e. Easements,
f. Required landscaping,
g. Monuments and markers,
h. Traffic control signs, and
i. Utility, water and wastewater, and storm drainage facilities.
2. Provision of Maintenance Guarantee
The subdivider/developer shall guarantee the required improvements will be
maintained for a 2-year period by providing the following as specified in the regulations
herein and/or by the City Manager and/or designee:
a. Applicable Development Agreement with the City designated as the beneficiary,
and
b. Acceptable form of financial guarantee as outlined in the regulations
herein and in Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
G. Acceptance of Improvements
1. The City shall inspect the installation of all required improvements to insure compliance
with City requirements and the approved engineering plans and/or construction
documents.
2. When all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, the City
shall either accept, in writing, the improvements as having been satisfactorily
completed, or shall issue a punch list to the developer denoting items remaining
to be completed.
3. The City shall not accept dedications of required improvements nor release a
performance bond or other guarantee, until:
a. All improvements have been satisfactorily completed in compliance with
the approved plans;
b. Approved "as built" plans have been submitted to and accepted by the
City;
Article 10.400
Page 58
c. The required maintenance guarantee surety as specified in the Design
Criteria and Construction Details has been provided;
d. Receipt of affidavit of payment, as required by City Manager and/or designee;
and
e. Any and all other requirements identified in this ordinance or other City
codes and ordinances have been satisfied.
4. Acceptance of the development shall mean that the developer transfers all
rights to all the public improvements to the City for use and maintenance.
5. Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the City Manager and/or
designee shall submit a certificate to the developer stating that all required public
improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
H. Withholding Services and/or Improvements
Until the subdivision construction is accepted, the City will withhold ALL CITY SERVICES
AND/OR IMPROVEMENTS of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of
streets, the furnishing of water, wastewater service and electric service.
I. Building Permit
1. Building Permit Required
No building permit may be issued for any building or structure on a newly subdivided
parcel of land until all the requirements of these subdivision regulations
have been met and public improvements have been installed and accepted,
including filing of final plat and all water, wastewater, storm drainage, sidewalks
and street improvements.
2. Exception
a. With the approval of the Development Review Committee, the Building
Official may release building permits for up to 10 percent of the lots
within the subdivision and/or development, provided that all public improvements
and utilities relating to said land are complete.
b. Final inspections or certificates of occupancy will not be issued until final
acceptance of the subdivision and the public improvements, and the
filing of the final plat.
J. Final Acceptance – New Subdivisions
1. When installation of the street, alley, storm drainage, water and wastewater improvements
provided by the developer have been completely performed on the
part of the contractor, the contractor shall notify the City that the improvements
are ready for final inspection.
2. If the work is satisfactory and in accordance with the approved final construction
plans, then the City will issue a letter of acceptance to the developer with a copy
to the contractor.
3. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the City nor shall any permanent
utility services be granted to the site unless all final inspections have been completed,
the “Letter of Acceptance’ has been written, and any required maintenance
bond has been filed with the City.
4. The City of Lake Worth may, at its sole discretion, disconnect any utility services
until the requirements of this ordinance have been met.
Article 10.400
Page 59
Section 10.402 Design Standards
City policy regarding the minimum design and construction requirements for public infrastructure
installed with development is specified herein. Both the regulations herein and Appendix
B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards are intended to be used for design of the subdivision
and public improvements.
A. Basis for Standards
1. Minimum Design Standards
The design standards established herein for development are in support of the
Comprehensive Plan and Master Thoroughfare Plan.
2. Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards
Design standards and technical standard details are specified in the appendix,
as adopted by City Council.
Amendments to the Appendix A, Concept Plan and Plat Requirements, and
Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards may be considered at
a regular meeting of the City Council.
B. Minimum Standards
It is the intent of these regulations that no development occurs until and unless these
minimum levels of service and/or standards are met. Therefore, each subdivision in the
City shall be required to dedicate, construct and/or upgrade required facilities and infrastructure
to a capacity that meets these minimum levels.
1. Conform with Adopted Plans
The minimum standards herein support the vision of the adopted Comprehensive
Plan, Master Thoroughfare Plan, and/or other adopted City plans, as provided
by the City Manager and/or designee.
2. Minimum Level of Service
Certain minimum requirements and sizes for utilities, roadways, and other facilities
are specified that have been determined by the City Council to be necessary
in order to protect or promote the public health, safety.
3. Minimum Standards for Public Infrastructure.
These minimum standards take into consideration the soil conditions and topographic
configuration of the City, the use and impact analyses of the North
Central Texas Council of Governments in developing standard specifications
for public works installation, and other historical use and performance metrics
associated with public infrastructure within the City.
C. Dedication Required
The City may require the dedication of easements and rights-of-way for or construction
of on-site or off-site public improvements and facilities to serve a proposed subdivision.
D. Adequacy of Public Facilities
1. Every subdivision of land shall be adequately served by improved streets, water
and wastewater facilities.
Article 10.400
Page 60
2. If adequate levels of public facilities and services cannot be provided concurrent
with the schedule of development proposed, the City may deny the subdivision
until the public facilities and services can be provided or may require that the development
be phased so that the availability and delivery of facilities and services
coincides with the demands for the facilities created by the development.
E. Additional Requirements
Whenever the City Council determines that levels of service in excess of these minimum
standards are necessary in order to promote the orderly development of the City, the
owner shall qualify for reimbursement for any costs in excess of the minimum levels of
service through City participation, to the extent funds are available through the determination
of proportionality outlined in Chapter 10.300 or other means adopted by the City.
Article 10.400
Page 61
Section 10.403 Site Development
A. General
The minimum criteria for the physical improvement of each site is established to provide
safe, orderly and sustainable growth.
B. Site Grading
The building pad and foundation elevation shall be graded to the most recent City
adopted Building Code Standards and conform with applicable restrictions in the floodplain.
C. Restrictions in the Floodplain
Site design shall conform to the regulations in Article 3.1600 of the Lake Worth Code of
Ordinances and in Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
D. Monument and Markers
Permanent Survey Markers. All boundary corners, block corners, etc., as established in
the process of creating a subdivision plat shall comply with the Texas Board of Professional
Land Surveying Practices Act and General Rules of Procedures and Practices,
(663.17 Monumentation).
E. Easements
1. Easements shall be provided on final plat and coordinated with the construction
plans (refer to Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards), and
may include, but are not limited to the following types of easements:
a. Utility,
b. Floodplain,
c. Fire Lane,
d. Drainage,
e. Detention and/or
f. Public Open Space.
2. Unless by agreement approved by the City Council, no building or structure
shall be constructed over or into an easement. If any building, structure of physical
improvement is within an easement, it shall be the sole responsibility of the
property owner to remove or abate the obstruction immediately at their sole
cost.
Article 10.400
Page 62
Section 10.404 Subdivision Layout
A. General
The minimum criteria for the design of each new subdivision is established to promote
access and connectivity and sustain community character.
B. Lots
The size shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the type and location of
the proposed development.
C. Building Lines
Building lines for each lot shall be shown on the final plat and shall be consistent with
the development standards specified in Chapter 14, Zoning in the Lake Worth Code of
Ordinances and in Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
D. Blocks
Generally, the length, width, and shapes of blocks shall:
1. Conform to the zoning requirements for lot size, setbacks and lot dimensions;
2. Provide an adequate building site suitable for the type of use;
3. Address site specific topographic conditions, and
4. Provide access, circulation, and control and safety of street traffic.
E. Access
Provide vehicular and pedestrian access in accordance with the Appendix B, Design
Criteria and Construction Standards.
F. Access Management
Joint and cross access easements/agreements promote connections between existing
and new development and manages traffic flow between businesses along a corridor.
The intent of the joint-access and cross-access provisions is to limit access connections
to arterials and collectors and to help meet the spacing guidelines between
driveways in accordance with the adopted Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction
Standards.
G. Driveways
Driveway design shall conform to the Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction
Standards.
H. Parking
1. Required to be On-site. All parking shall be off-street, meaning that all vehicle
maneuvering is done on the subject parcel and not in the street right-of-way.
Refer to Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
2. Conformance with Zoning Ordinance Required. Location and number of required
parking spaces must conform to the Chapter 14, Zoning of the Lake
Worth Code of Ordinances.
Article 10.400
Page 63
I. Planned Development
All proposed planned developments shall comply with the provisions relating thereto and
contained within Chapter 14, Zoning of the Lake Worth Code of Ordinances. All streets
not dedicated to the public shall be constructed in accordance with Appendix B, Appendix
B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards and shall be maintained by means of
the property owner(s) or other means as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Article 10.400
Page 64
Section 10.405 Infrastructure in the Right-of-Way
A. General
All public facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most current
adopted City regulations, technical specifications and standard details. Public facilities
typically located within the public right-of-way include sidewalks, driveways, street
lights, street signs, streets and alleys.
B. Sidewalks
1. Purpose
Proposed sidewalks shall provide safe and convenient pedestrian circulation and
shall be properly related to the Comprehensive Plan and the Master Thoroughfare
Plan.
2. General
a. Sidewalks shall be constructed for all lots adjoining dedicated streets,
along major thoroughfares where lots do not adjoin the street, across
power line easements, and in other areas where pedestrian walkways
are necessary.
b. Every new subdivision, or re-subdivision, shall be required to install
sidewalks, with appropriate barrier free ramps, within the public street
right-of-way.
i. All sidewalks shall conform to the latest ADA and Texas Accessibility
Standards (TAS) requirements.
ii. Barrier free ramps shall be provided for access across streets
per Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
c. Sidewalk construction may be delayed until development of lots but
must be constructed for each lot prior to completion of any primary
structure. In locations not adjacent to lots and across bridges and culverts,
the sidewalk shall be constructed with the other improvements to
the subdivision.
3. Required for Certificate of Occupancy
The City may withhold a Certificate of Occupancy for a commercial use and final
inspection approval for a residential structure if sidewalks are not properly installed,
inspected and accepted by the City Manager and/or designee.
C. Street Lights
A Street Lighting Plan shall be required by the City as a part of the plat application process.
Street light design shall conform to Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction
Standards.
D. Street Names and Signs
1. Street Names
a. New street names shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names
of existing streets.
Article 10.400
Page 65
b. New streets which are an extension of existing streets shall bear the
names of existing streets.
2. Street name signs shall be City approved and furnished and installed by the
Subdivider/Developer for all intersections within or abutting the subdivision and
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City requirements and
Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
E. Traffic Control Signs
Install the appropriate type and number of traffic control signs, as specified in Appendix
B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards, to promote vehicular and pedestrian
safety.
F. Streets
1. Purpose
Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular,
bicycle, and pedestrian circulation and shall be properly related to the
Master Thoroughfare Plan and/or Comprehensive Plan, and shall be appropriate
for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed subdivision or development
2. Conform to Master Thoroughfare Plan
Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for traffic
circulation; shall be properly related to the adopted Master Thoroughfare
Plan, road classification system, Comprehensive Plan and any amendments
thereto; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each
development.
a. The arrangement, character, extent and location of all streets shall be
considered in their relation to:
i. Existing and planned streets or driveways,
ii. Topographical conditions,
iii. Drainage constraints,
iv. Public safety, and
v. Existing and planned land use(s).
b. Amendment Required
Any land study or subdivision plat involving a change to a proposed
alignment shown on the Master Thoroughfare Plan must be approved
through the amendment process.
c. When a street is not shown on the Master Thoroughfare Plan, the arrangement
of streets in a subdivision shall:
i. Provide for continuation or appropriate projection of existing
streets in surrounding areas,
Article 10.400
Page 66
ii. Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted
by the City to meet a particular situation where topographical
or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing
streets impracticable,
iii. Provide for future access to adjacent vacant areas which will
likely develop under a similar zoning classification.
iv. Not conflict in any way with existing or proposed driveway
openings.
v. Allow for the appropriate dedication and/or improvement on
each plat application to meet the minimum street construction
and right-of-way standards.
3. Responsibility
The property owner shall assure that the subdivision is adequately served by
improved streets and thoroughfares and shall be responsible for the costs of
rights-of-way and street improvements, in accordance with the following policies
and standards, and may be required to participate in the cost of provision
of oversized facilities.
G. Pavement Types and Markings
1. Pavement construction standards shall comply with Appendix B, Design Criteria
and Construction Standards.
2. Pavement Markings: Pavement markings shall conform to the Texas Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD) and Appendix B, Design Criteria
and Construction Standards.
Article 10.400
Page 67
Section 10.406 Utilities in the Right-of-Way
A. General
1. All subdivision plats and engineering plans shall provide location and design of
public utilities prepared in accordance to franchise requirements and Appendix
B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
2. All distribution lines, cables, etc. for utilities other than those specified below
shall be installed below ground within the subdivision.
3. Transmission lines or major cables to provide utilities such as electric, telephone,
and cable television to the area as a whole may be located above
ground on the perimeter of the subdivision being served. The installation of
these utilities shall conform to commonly accepted construction standards
and be subject to review by the City Manager and/or designee.
B. Utility Services
1. Design and Location. Utility services, such as electrical, gas, telephone, and
cable TV utility lines shall be shown on the final plat and the engineering plans.
2. Review. All easements shown on the final plat will be reviewed by both the
utility companies and the City prior to granting final approval for all residential
subdivisions affected by this section
3. Approval. Acceptance of easement locations and widths shall be provided prior
to final plat approval.
4. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any existing facilities in
place prior to the effective date of this section to be placed underground.
C. Electric, Telephone and Cable Services
1. Utility lines for electric service, telephone service and cable television service
shall be installed underground in any new subdivision platted after approval of
this Ordinance.
2. Service to all street light poles shall be underground.
D. Water and Wastewater Facilities.
1. Design. Water and wastewater facilities shall be shown on the engineering
plans.
2. Review. Easements for water and wastewater facilities shown on the final plat
will be reviewed by prior to granting approval of the final plat and/or engineering
plans.
3. Approval.
a. Acceptance of easement locations and widths shall be provided prior
to final plat approval.
b. Acceptance of installed facilities shall be provided prior to filing of the
final plat.
Article 10.400
Page 68
Article 10.400
4. Extension of all utilities shall be as follows:
a. When adjacent to an existing subdivision, the utilities shall extend along
the entire frontage of the subdivision adjacent to the street or thoroughfare.
b. If the subdivision is not adjacent to a thoroughfare, the extension of utilities
shall be accomplished in a manner to allow future connection to new
subdivisions. If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a developing
subdivision due to physical constraints, the City Manager and/or
designee may waive the requirement for adjacent utility line construction.
E. Storm Drainage Facilities
1. Design and Location
Storm drainage improvements shall be designed in accordance with the Chapter
14, Zoning of the Lake Worth Code of Ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan and
Appendix B, Design Criteria and Construction Standards, and for the ultimate
development of the area within the watershed, whether inside or outside the subdivision
or addition, since the runoff tends to increase in direct proportion to the
amount of impervious area such as sidewalks, pavements, buildings, etc.
2. Review
Easements for storm drainage facilities shown on the final plat will be reviewed by
prior to granting approval of the final plat and/or engineering plans.
3. Approval
a. Acceptance of easement locations and widths shall be provided prior to
final plat approval.
b. Acceptance of installed facilities shall be provided prior to filing of the final
plat.
Page 69
Article 10.400
THIS PAGE INT ENT IONALLY LEFT BLANK

APPENDIX A
To Chapter 10,
Subdivision Regulations
PLAN AND PLAT REQUIREMENTS

APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 1 Requirements for Construction Documents
and Engineering Plans ....................................................... A-1
Chapter 2 Requirements for Plat Documents .............................................. A-3
Preliminary Plat .................................................................................... A-3
Final Plat .............................................................................................. A-8
Minot Plat ........................................................................................... A-10
Replat ................................................................................................. A-10
Amending Plat .................................................................................... A-10
Vacating Plat ...................................................................................... A-10
Page A-1
CHAPTER 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS and ENGINEERING PLANS
A. Plan Set Order
A civil construction plan submittal shall meet the following general sheet requirements and
order.
1. Cover Sheet with Vicinity Map
2. General Notes
3. Final Plat
4. Site Layout
5. Dimensional Control Plan
6. Paving Plan and Profile
7. Grading Plan
8. Drainage Area Map
9. Storm Sewer Layout
10. Storm Sewer Plan and Profile
11. Channel and/or Culvert Plan and Profile
12. Retaining Wall
13. Water Layout
14. Water Plan and Profile
15. Sanitary Sewer Layout
16. Sanitary Sewer Plan and Profile
17. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (Erosion Control Plan)
18. Traffic Control Plan and Details including pavement markings and signage
19. Standard Construction Details
B. Sheet Size
1. The Construction Plans shall be submitted on standard 22”x34” sheets or on a
size as specified by City Manager or designee.
2. Half-size plans may be required for inspection(s) or as specified by City Manager
or designee.
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-2
C. Sheet Layout
Each sheet of the Construction Plans shall include the following:
1. Date
2. North arrow
3. Scale
(Scale shall be 1 inch equal 20, 40 or 50 feet horizontally and 1 inch equal 2, 4,
or 5, feet vertically.)
4. Date
5. Benchmark description to sea level datum
6. Seal and signature of the Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas
who prepared the plans
7. Title block, including space for the notation of revisions
(This space is to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall
clearly note the nature of the revision and the date that the revision was made.)
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-3
CHAPTER 2 REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT DOCUMENTS
(Information and items required to be shown on the face of the document.)
A. PRELIMINARY PLAT
All preliminary plats shall be submitted in a legible format and drawn to a minimum scale of oneinch
equals one- hundred feet or larger (1” =100’). The required copies or prints, as specified on
the application shall, at a minimum, show the following information:
1. Names and contact information for the applicant, property owner, land planner, engineer
and/or surveyor.
2. Location of subdivision on vicinity map.
3. Scale, north arrow, date and other pertinent data oriented to the bottom or right side of the
sheet.
4. Proposed name of the subdivision.
5. Title Block including:
a. Total number of units per acre,
b. Total number of lots per phase or for the entire development, and
c. Number of dwelling units, the acreage, and the gross residential density by housing
type.
6. Boundaries and property lines of proposed subdivision, including abstract lines, survey
lines and corporate boundaries with bearings and distances sufficient to locate the exact
area proposed for the subdivision.
7. Layout of the subdivision within the entire tract of land, including remainder tracts, in accordance
with the approved Concept Plan.
8. Proposed phases of development.
9. Location and dimension of any existing structures, fences, paved areas, cemeteries, or
other existing features within the proposed subdivision.
10. Location of all existing or abandoned oil or gas wells, oil or gas pipelines and other appurtenances
associated with the extraction, storage, production and distribution of natural
gas or petroleum products, and all related easements on the site or on immediately adjacent
property.
11. Name, zoning, and location of all adjacent properties and property owners, including existing
adjoining developments and tracts of land.
12. Existing lot and block numbers and date recorded.
13. Proposed arrangement of individual lots, including dimensioned property lines, lot area, lot
and block number, and building lines.
14. Minimum finished floor elevations of building foundations shall be shown for lots.
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-4
Section 10.503 SF-0, Single Family Zero
15. Proposed location, dimensions, area and arrangement of all parcels to be set aside for
public or private parks, playgrounds or other common use of property, including area set
aside for common use by the home owners association.
16. Existing sewer or water mains, gas mains or other underground structures, easements of
record or other existing features within the area proposed for subdivision.
17. A declaration confirmed by engineering analysis (if required by the City Engineer) and
prepared by an engineer professionally licensed in the State of Texas, stating that the
existing utility main(s) serving a proposed subdivision is adequate.
18. The applicant shall also provide copies of letters from applicable local utility companies
stating that the utility company has reviewed the plat and stated any requirements.
19. Location and width of all proposed and existing streets, alleys, rights-of-ways, sidewalks
and easements providing access to and within the proposed subdivision.
20. Proposed and existing street names and block numbers.
21. Proposed on-site and off-site dedications of land or rights-of-way for public improvements
for each proposed phase of the subdivision.
22. Any proposed supplemental transportation systems, showing the layout and dimensions
of walkways, sidewalks, bike trails, and other related improvements.
23. Typical cross-section of proposed street improvements and rights-of-way.
24. Contours at five-foot intervals and except on terrain with less than a two percent grade, in
which event, contours at two-foot intervals are required. The source of contour information
will be placed on the plat. Contours are to be based on the Texas North Central
Zone (4202) State Plane Coordinates (SPC). All easements or rights-of-way necessary
for drainage within or without the boundaries of the subdivision shall be reflected upon
the preliminary drainage plan.
25. Location and size of all physical features pertinent to drainage:
a. Natural topographical and drainage features, such as water courses and waterbodies;
b. Floodplains according to Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) information,
floodways, and flood hazard areas;
c. Army Corps of Engineers flowage easement(s) requirements;
d. Drainage area in acres or area draining into the proposed subdivision; and
e. Outline of major wooded areas, stands of trees, or the location of significant individual
trees.
26. Locations proposed for drainage discharge from the site shall be shown by directional
arrows.
27. Notes on the Face of the Plat:
a. Special Notice (Required): Selling a portion of this addition by metes and
bounds is a violation of city ordinance and state law and is subject to fines and
withholding of utilities and building permits.
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-5
b. Access easements (to be used if applicable):
The undersigned does covenant and agree that the access easement may
be utilized by any person or the general public for ingress and egress to other
real property, and for the purpose of general public vehicular and pedestrian
use and access, and for fire department and emergency use in, along, upon
and across said premises, with the right and privilege at all times of the City
of Lake Worth, its agents, employees, workmen and representatives having
ingress, egress, and regress in, along, upon and across said premises.
c. Drainage Easement Restriction (to be used if applicable):
No construction or filling, without the written approval of the City of Lake
Worth shall be allowed within a drainage easement. Then only after detailed
engineering plans and studies show that no flooding will result; that no obstruction
to the natural flow of water will result; and subject to all property
owners of the property affected by such construction becoming a part of the
request may any construction take place. Where construction is permitted,
all finished floor elevations shall be a minimum of two (2) feet above the ultimate
100-year flood elevations based on land use.
d. Drainage and Detention Easement (Above Ground Detention)
This plat is hereby adopted by the Owners and approved by the City of Lake
Worth (Called "City") subject to the following conditions which shall be binding
upon the Owners, their heirs, grantees, successors and assigns: The area
or areas shown on the plat as "Drainage and Detention Easement" shall
remain accessible at all times and shall be maintained by Owners of the lot or
lots that are traversed by, or adjacent to the Drainage and Detention Easement.
The City will not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of
the drainage facilities within the Drainage and Detentions Easement or for
any damage to private property or person that results from conditions within
the Drainage and Detention Easement. No obstruction to the natural flow of
storm water run-off shall be permitted by construction of any within the Drainage
and Detention Easement, unless approved by the City Manager and/or
designee. Each property owner shall keep the portion Drainage and Detention
Easement traversing or adjacent to their property clean and free of debris,
silt, and any materials which would result in unsanitary conditions or obstruct
the flow of water. The City shall have the right of ingress and egress for
the purpose of inspection and supervision of maintenance work by the property
owner. The City shall not be held liable for any damages of any nature
resulting from failure of facilities within the Drainage and Detention Easement.
The City shall have the right to enter upon the Drainage and Detention
Easement at any point, or points, to investigate, survey, construct and maintain
any drainage facility deemed necessary for drainage purposes. The minimum
finished floor elevation for each lot shall be as shown on the plat.
e. Drainage and Detention Easement (Underground Detention)
This plat is hereby adopted by the Owners and approved by the City of Lake
Worth (Called "City") subject to the following conditions which shall be binding
upon the Owners, their heirs, grantees, successors and assigns:
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-6
the area or areas shown on the plat is called "Drainage and Detention Easement
shall remain accessible at all times and shall be maintained by the Owners of the
lot or lots that are traversed by, or adjacent to the Drainage and Detention Easement.
The City will not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the
drainage facilities within the Drainage and Detention Easement or for any damage
to private property or person that results from conditions within the Drainage and
Detention Easement. No obstruction to the natural flow of storm water run-off
shall be permitted by construction of any type within the Drainage and Detention
Easement, unless approved by the City Manager and/or designee. Each property
owner shall keep the Drainage and Detention Easement traversing or adjacent to
their property clean and free of debris, silt, and any materials that would result in
unsanitary conditions or obstruct the flow of water, The City shall have the right of
ingress and egress for the purpose of inspection and supervision of maintenance
work by the property owner. The City shall not be held liable for any damages of
any nature resulting from the failure of facilities within the Drainage and Detention
Easement. The City shall have the right to enter upon the Drainage and Detention
Easement at any point, or points, to investigate, survey or construct and maintain
any drainage facility deemed necessary for drainage purposes.
f. Fire lanes (to be used if applicable):
That the undersigned does hereby covenant and agree that he (they) shall construct
upon the fire lane easements, as dedicated and shown hereon, a hard surface
in accordance with the City of Lake Worth paving standards for fire lanes,
and that he (they) shall maintain the same in a state of good repair at all times
and keep the same free and clear of any structures, fences, trees, shrubs, or other
improvements or obstruction, including but not limited to the parking of motor
vehicles, trailers, boats or other impediments to the accessibility of fire apparatus.
The maintenance of paving on the fire lane easements is the responsibility of the
owner, and the owner shall post and maintain appropriate signs in conspicuous
places along such fire lanes, stating "Fire Lane, No Parking." The local law enforcement
agency(s) is hereby authorized to enforce parking regulations within
the fire lanes, and to cause such fire lanes and utility easements to be maintained
free and unobstructed at all times for the Fire Department and emergency use.
g. Floodway Easement (to be used if applicable):
No construction or filling, without the written approval of the City of Lake Worth
shall be allowed within a floodway easement. Then only after detailed engineering
plans and studies show that no flooding will result; that no obstruction to the
natural flow of water will result; and subject to all property owners of the property
affected by such construction becoming a part of the request may any construction
take place. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor elevations shall
be a minimum of two (2) feet above the ultimate 100-year flood elevations based
on land use.
h. Public Open Space Easement (POSE)/Visibility Triangle:
No structure, object, or plant of any type may obstruct vision from a height of 30
inches to a height of ten (10) feet above the top of curb, including, but not limited
to buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in the public
open space easement as shown on the plat.
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-7
i. Utility easements (to be used if applicable):
Any public utility, including the City of Lake Worth, shall have the right to
move and keep moved all or part of any building, fences, trees, shrubs, other
growths or improvements which in any way endanger or interfere with the
construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of
the easements shown on the plat; and any public utility, including the City of
Lake Worth, shall have the right at all times of ingress and egress to and from
and upon said easements for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, inspection,
patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of its
respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission
of anyone.
28. The following shall be included on the plat. Examples are provided herein:
a. Owner’s Dedication. An executed and notarized statement that the applicant
legally owns the area as described in the legal description.
b. Legal Description. An accurate legal description, such as by metes and
bounds, by bearings and distances (including necessary curve and line data),
accurate to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, for all boundary, block and lot
lines, with descriptions correlated to a permanent survey monument.
c. Surveyor’s Certificate: A statement, signed and sealed, certifying the plat was
prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor (RPLS) in the State of
Texas.
29. Plat approval:
Approval date and signatures of the Chair of the Commission and the Mayor of the
City of Lake Worth, attested by the City Secretary signifying approval of the plat.
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-8
B. FINAL PLAT
The final plat shall include only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider
proposes to record and then develop, provided, however, that such portion conforms to
all the requirements of these criteria and specifications.
All final plats shall be submitted in a legible format and drawn to a minimum scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet or larger (1” =100’). The required copies or prints, as specified on
the application shall, at a minimum, show the following information:
1. All information that is required for a preliminary plat shall be shown on the final plat,
except physical features, such as topography, buildings, utility structures, water bodies
and tree cover.
2. The final plat shall contain a title block in the lower right corner of the page. The
words “Final Plat”, the name of the addition or subdivision, the name of the owners,
their address and telephone number, and the address and legal description of the
project shall be shown in the title block.
3. Provide a place for the County Clerk of Tarrant County to stamp the date and location
where the plat will be filed in the lower right-hand corner of all sheets of the plat
drawing near the title block:
4. Instrument No.____________ , Date ____________ in the lower right-hand corner
of all sheets of the plat drawing near the title block.
5. The final plat shall provide the name of the engineer/surveyor, date of preparation
and date of revisions. The plat shall be signed and sealed.
6. All aspects of the final plat shall conform to the standards of Tarrant County for plats
with respect to clarity, sheet size, lettering size and reproducibility, and the county's
formatting requirements for same shall control if different from this ordinance. It is the
applicant's responsibility to be familiar with the county's standards for filing plats and
to comply with same.
7. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be indicated by a distinct bold solid
line and corner markers by individual symbols.
8. Special Notes regarding Flood Plain Restrictions:
a. If a flood plain easement is required or proposed, the following full statement
of restriction shall be placed in the dedication instrument on the subdivision
plat.
FLOOD PLAIN RESTRICTION
No construction shall be allowed within the flood plain easement, without the
prior written approval of the City. In order to secure approval, detailed engineering
plans and/or studies for the improvements, satisfactory to the City,
shall be prepared and submitted by the party or parties wishing to construct
within the flood plain. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor elevations
shall be a minimum of two (2) feet above the 100-yearultimate floodplain.
Any construction approved within the flood plain shall not increase the
100-year design frequency storm elevation.
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-9
b. The following statement shall be required when an unlined improved drainage
channel, in a drainage easement, or when a floodplain easement is proposed.
FLOODPLAIN/DRAINAGEWAY MAINTENANCE
The existing creeks, streams, or ponds (drainage ways) traversing along or
across portions of this addition, will remain unobstructed at all times and will be
maintained by the individual lot owners, homeowner’s association or approved
maintenance entity whose lots are traversed by or adjacent to the drainage ways.
The City of Lake Worth will not be responsible for the maintenance, erosion control,
and/or operation of said drainage ways. Property owners shall keep the adjacent
drainage ways traversing their property clean and free of debris, silt or other
substances which would result in unsanitary conditions, and the City shall have
the right of entry for the purpose of inspecting the maintenance work performed
by the property owners. The drainage ways are occasionally subject to storm
water overflow and/or bank erosion that cannot be defined. The City of Lake
Worth shall not be liable for any damages resulting from the occurrence of these
phenomena, nor the failure of any structure(s) within the drainage ways. The
drainage way crossing each lot is contained within the flood plain easement lines
as shown on the plat.
c. If a floodway easement is required or proposed, the following full statement of
restriction shall be placed in the dedication instrument of the subdivision plat.
FLOODWAY RESTRICTION
No encroachment, including fill, new construction or improvements shall be allowed
within the floodway easement.
9. The following shall be included on the plat. Examples are provided herein:
a. Owner’s Dedication. An executed and notarized statement that the applicant
legally owns the area as described in the legal description.
b. Legal Description - An accurate legal description, such as by metes and bounds,
by bearings and distances (including necessary curve and line data), accurate to
the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, for all boundary, block and lot lines, with
descriptions correlated to a permanent survey monument.
c. Surveyor’s Certificate: A statement, signed and sealed, certifying the plat was
prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor (RPLS) licensed in the
State of Texas.
10. Plat approval: Date of approval and signatures of the Chair of the Commission and the
Mayor of the City of Lake Worth, attested by the City Secretary signifying approval of the
plat.
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Page A-10
C. MINOR PLAT
All minor plats shall be submitted on sheets no larger than eighteen inches by twenty-four
inches (18” x 24”) and to a scale of not less than one hundred feet to the inch (1” = 100’) or
larger. Where more than one sheet is required to encompass the subdivision, eighteen inches
by twenty-four inches (18” x 24”) shall be filed showing the entire subdivision together with the
complete dedication, attests, dates, titles and seals, on one (1) sheet.
The face of the minor plat shall include all the requirements for a final plat.
D. REPLAT
All replats shall be submitted on sheets no larger than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches
(18” x 24”) and to a scale of not less than one hundred feet to the inch (1” = 100’) or larger.
Where more than one sheet is required to encompass the subdivision, eighteen inches by
twenty-four inches (18”x24”) shall be filed showing the entire subdivision together with the
complete dedication, attests, dates, titles and seals, on one (1) sheet.
The face of the replat shall include all the requirements for a final plat, and the items below:
Any replat which adds or deletes lots must include the original subdivision boundaries.
The title on the face of the plat shall identify the document as
Lot No(s). _____________, being a replat of Lots_____________ of Block ____________
of the ______________________________________________ Subdivision.
E. AMENDING PLAT
All amending plats shall be submitted on sheets no larger than eighteen inches by twenty-four
inches (18” x 24”) and to a scale of not less than one hundred feet to the inch (1” = 100’) or
larger. Where more than one sheet is required to encompass the subdivision, eighteen inches
by twenty-four inches (18” x 24”) shall be filed showing the entire subdivision together with the
complete dedication, attests, dates, titles and seals, on one (1) sheet.
The face of the amending shall include all the requirements for a final plat.
F. VACATION PLAT
All vacating plats shall be submitted on sheets no larger than eighteen inches by twenty-four
inches (18” x 24”) and to a scale of not less than one hundred feet to the inch (1” = 100’) or
larger. Where more than one sheet is required to encompass the subdivision, eighteen inches
by twenty-four inches (18” x 24”) shall be filed showing the entire subdivision together with the
complete dedication, attests, dates, titles and seals, on one (1) sheet.
The face of the vacating plat shall include all the requirements for a final plat.
APPENDIX A PLAT AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS

APPENDIX B
To Chapter 10,
Subdivision Regulations
DESIGN CRITERIA
AND
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
(DCCS)

APPENDIX B
DESIGN CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
APPENDIX B DESIGN CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Chapter 1 General Terms and Conditions ............................................. B-1
Chapter 2 Requirements for Plan Documents....................................... B-4
Chapter 3 General Terms and Conditions ............................................. B-5
Section 3.1 Site Grading........................................................... B-5
Section 3.2 Monument Markers ............................................... B-5
Section 3.3 Easements............................................................. B-6
Section 3.4 Lots ........................................................................ B-9
Section 3.5 Building Lines ...................................................... B-10
Section 3.6 Blocks .................................................................. B-11
Section 3.7 Access ................................................................. B-11
Section 3.8 Access Management ........................................... B-12
Section 3.9 Driveways ............................................................ B-14
Section 3.10 Off-Street Parking .............................................. B-17
Chapter 4 Requirements for Plan Documents..................................... B-18
Section 4.1 General Requirements ........................................ B-18
Section 4.2 Sidewalks ........................................................... B-18
Section 4.3 Street Lights ........................................................ B-19
Section 4.4 Street Name and Signs ....................................... B-20
Section 4.5 Traffic Control Signs ............................................ B-20
Section 4.6 General Street Design ......................................... B-20
Section 4.7 Design Criteria by Street Type ............................ B-25
Section 4.8 Pavement Types by Street Classification ............ B-29
Section 4.9 General Criteria for Public Facilities .................... B-29
Section 4.10 Electric, Telephone and Cable Services ........... B-30
Section 4.11 Water Facilities .................................................. B-30
Section 4.12 Wastewater Facilities ........................................ B-41
Section 4.13 Storm Drainage Facilities .................................. B-52
Section 4.14 Development in the Floodplain
Chapter 5 Construction Requirements and Standard Details ............. B-70
Page B-1
APPENDIX B DCCS
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
A. Purpose
The following Design Criteria and Construction Standards are intended to provide the minimum
specifications for design of development with the City and will primarily be used by the
design engineer. There may be special circumstances which dictate requirements in excess
of those outlined. In most cases, these exceptions will be requested by City staff during the
review process and will also be apparent to the design engineer while preparing the Construction
Plans and Specifications for the subdivision.
B. Compliance Required
No final plat shall be approved by the City Council, and no completed improvements shall
be accepted by the City or its representatives, unless and until such improvements conform
to the Lake Worth Design Criteria and Construction Standards, and all other applicable
standards, as prescribed by the City of Lake Worth. All improvements, including, but not
limited to streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, drainage ways, water and sewer lines and
improvements shall be designed, placed and constructed in accordance with the Design
Criteria and Construction Standards herein.
Design and construction of all public improvements shall conform to the following:
1. City of Lake Worth Subdivision Regulations as specified in Chapter 10, Subdivision
of the Lake Wroth Code of Ordinances,
2. City of Lake Worth Zoning Regulations as specified in Chapter 14, Zoning of the
Lake Worth Code of Ordinances, and
3. North Central Texas Council of Government Standard Specification for Public Works
Construction.
The latest version of "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North
Central Texas" of the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG), with
all amendments thereto, shall govern and shall constitute the technical specifications
for all improvements to be dedicated to the City of Lake Worth except as
amended by the Lake Worth Design Criteria and Construction Standards and is
made a part thereof, but is not physically bound within this document.
4. Any and all applicable, as may be amended, Federal law and US Federal regulatory
agencies, including, but not limited to Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) and United States Army Core of Engineers (USACE).
C. Construction by Developer
1. The improvements, whether on-site or off-site, including streets, water lines, sanitary
sewer lines, drainage, sidewalks, traffic signals (if warranted by a developer
funded traffic engineering study), street lighting (by arrangement by the developer
with the electric company), street signs (by payment to the City for installation cost),
and all other required improvements for the subdivision, shall be installed by the
developer at no cost to the City, unless otherwise provided herein, and
2. Shall be in accordance with the subdivision regulations and all specifications and
regulations of the City, and the engineering plans as approved by the City Manager
or designee or his agent.
3. The developer shall submit three (3) sets of final-approved engineering plans prior
to construction.
Page B-2
APPENDIX B DCCS
D. Construction Contractor
1. The developer shall employ a construction contractor that meets the following:
a. City and statutory requirements for being bonded and insured;
b. Acceptable prior work experience approved by the City Manager or designee,
c. Has financial resources which would enable the contractor to be capable
of performing the work; and
d. Is qualified in all respects to bid on public projects and do work on public
streets.
2. The developer shall notify the City Manager or designee of the contractor selected
and provide a copy of the signed contract bid, along with all supporting documents.
3. The improvements shall be installed within all applicable time frames agreed to
by the City.
E. Civil Engineer
The developer shall employ a civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas for
the design and preparation of the plans and specifications (hereinafter referred to as the
“engineering plans”) for the construction of the improvements. The engineering plans
shall include any engineering studies, plan/profile sheets, and other construction documents
for the improvements.
F. Preconstruction Conference
Construction of the improvements shall not be initiated until a pre-construction conference
has been conducted regarding the proposed construction. Further, the developer
will give a minimum of 48 hours written notice to the City Manager or designee, indicating
the time and date that construction will commence.
G. Inspection by the City
1. The developer shall not backfill or cover any sanitary sewer, storm drain, or water
pipes unless a City inspector is present and gives his consent to proceed.
2. Further, no service lines of water or sewer mains shall be connected to any
building until the water and sewer mains have been completed, inspected, and
accepted by the City.
3. The developer will reimburse the City for overtime worked by City personnel in
performing project inspection.
H. Review by City Manager or designee
Construction of all public improvements shall be subject to routine review by the City
Manager or designee to evaluate conformance with the engineering plans, project specifications,
and City standards. However, such review and evaluation shall not relieve the
developer, its engineer, and/or agent of responsibility for the design, construction, and
maintenance of the improvements. Refer to definition of City Engineer in Article 10.200,
Definitions.
Page B-3
APPENDIX B DCCS
I. Final Walk Through
A final walk through is required. A punch list will be prepared by the City and all items
shall be addressed prior to final acceptance. A final walk through will not be scheduled
until the City performs an initial review of the site/development/improvements to ensure
that the majority of the items are complete.
J. As-Built Plans or Record Drawings
Upon completion of construction of the improvements that are required by this contract
and the subdivision regulations, the developer shall deliver to the City the following
items of as-built construction plans for the improvements constructed or engineered by
the developer.
1. One (1) set of as-built plans;
2. One (1) electronic version of all sheets in plans, and
3. One (1) set of as-built reproducible plans.
K. Construction Bonds
Prior to initiating any construction of the improvements, the developer’s contractors
shall provide the City with one (1) original and one (1) quality copy of a construction and
maintenance guarantees in accordance with Article 10.400 of Chapter 10, Subdivision
Regulations and shall name the City (or developer as noted) as beneficiary.
L. Where specific topographic or other conditions make variance from these standards
necessary in order to achieve the best overall design, these standards may be modified
by the City Manager, upon recommendation from the Director of Public Works and/or
City Manager or designee.
M. Where the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially injured,
the City Manager, after consultation with the City Manager or designee, may in specific
cases, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize waivers to the
specifications herein in order to permit reasonable development and improvement of
property where literal enforcement of these values would result in an unnecessary hardship.
Waivers require approval by the City Council. More information is provided in
Chapter 3 of the Subdivision Regulations.
N. Interruption of Services.
1. The developer and/or a representative of the developer shall provide a minimum
of 72-hour notice to the City with required plans and/or documentation
prior to interruption of service, such as utilities and road closure. The City may,
it is discretion, require a meeting prior to disruption of services.
2. In the event that existing utility service is to be interrupted during construction,
official notice as well as meeting with the City and all other applicable parties
shall be held 72 hours prior to interruption.
Page B-4
APPENDIX B DCCS
CHAPTER 2 REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAN DOCUMENTS
A. Plan Set Order
A civil construction plan submittal shall meet the following general sheet requirements
and order.
1. Cover Sheet with Vicinity Map
2. General Notes
3. Final Plat
4. Site Layout
5. Dimensional Control Plan
6. Paving Plan and Profile
7. Grading Plan
8. Drainage Area Map
9. Storm Sewer Layout
10. Storm Sewer Plan and Profile
11. Channel and/or Culvert Plan and Profile
12. Retaining Wall
13. Water Layout
14. Water Plan and Profile
15. Sanitary Sewer Layout
16. Sanitary Sewer Plan and Profile
17. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (Erosion Control Plan)
18. Traffic Control Plan and Details (including pavement markings and signage)
19. Standard Construction Details (Appendix B-6)
B. Sheet Size
1. The Construction Plans shall be submitted on standard 22” x 34” sheets or on
a size as specified by City Manager or designee.
2. Half-size plans may be required for inspection(s) or as specified by City Manager
or designee.
C. Sheet Layout
Each sheet of the Construction Plans shall include the following:
1. Date
2. North arrow
3. Scale (Scale shall be 1 inch equal 20, 40 or 50 feet horizontally and 1 inch
equal 2, 4, or 5, feet vertically.)
4. Benchmark description to sea level datum
5. Seal and signature of the Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas
who prepared the plans
6. Title block, including space for the notation of revisions
(This space is to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly
note the nature of the revision and the date that the revision was made.)
Page B-5
APPENDIX B DCCS
CHAPTER 3 DESIGN STANDARDS – SITE DEVELOPMENT
City policy regarding the minimum design for subdivisions and the construction requirements for
public infrastructure installed with development is specified herein, Article 10.400, Site Development
Procedures – Public Improvements, of Chapter 14, Subdivision Regulations, of the City
Code of Ordinances, and North Central Texas Council of Government Standard Specification
for Public Works Construction, as amended.
SECTION 3.1 SITE GRADING
SECTION 3.2 MONUMENT MARKERS
A minimum of two (2) at prominent locations (block corners, boundary corners,
etc.) within a subdivision shall have Texas North Central Zone (4202) State Plane
Coordinates (SPC) in U.S. Survey Feet noted on the subdivision plat. The Texas North
Central Zone (4202) State Plane Coordinate (SPC) shown on the subdivision plat shall
have the appropriate metadata listed.
1. Lot markers shall be iron pins not less than one-half inch (1/2”) in diameter and
no less than 18 inches long and shall be set flush with the ground at each lot
corner.
2. All lot corners shall be set prior to the acceptance of public improvements and
shall be marked in a way that is traceable to the responsible registrant or associated
employer.
Page B-6
APPENDIX B DCCS
EASEMENTS
1. Where not adjacent to a public right-of-way, easements at least 15 feet wide
for utility construction, service, and maintenance shall be provided where necessary
in locations approved by the City Council.
2. Easements at least 15 feet wide for utility construction, service, and maintenance
shall be provided for lots, which have frontage along state highways.
3. Easements of at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided on each side and
rear lot lines, where necessary, for utilities such as electric, telephone, and
gas.
4. Easements having greater width dimensions may also be required along or
across lots where engineering design or special conditions make it necessary
for the installation of utilities outside public rights-of-way.
5. The following statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument:
Utility Easement Restriction
Any public utility, including the City of Lake Worth, shall have the right to move
and keep moved all or part of any building, fence, tree, shrub, or growths or
improvements which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction,
maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of the easements
shown on the plat; and any public utility, including the City of Lake Worth, shall
have the right at all times of ingress and egress to and from and upon said
easements for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, inspection, patrolling,
maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems
without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone.
Lane Easement
1. Emergency access and fire lane easements shall be provided in locations required
by the Chief of the Lake Worth Fire Department.
2. These easements shall have a minimum width of 24 feet and a minimum
height clearance of 15 feet.
3. Any emergency access and fire lane easement more than 100 feet in length
shall either connect at each end to a dedicated public street or be provided
with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of 80 feet with an additional distance
of ten (10) feet on all sides clear of permanent structures.
4. These easements shall be constructed in accordance with the criteria and
standards herein for concrete street sections as shown in the Construction
Details (Appendix B-6) and approved by the City Manager and/or designee.
5. These easements shall be maintained by means of a Homeowner's Association,
the property owner granting the easement or other means, as approved
by the City.
Page B-7
APPENDIX B DCCS
Public Open Space Easement (POSE)/Sight Visibility
1. The POSE shall be shown on the plat and/or plan as follows:
2. A triangular POSE is required on corner lots at the intersection of two (2)
streets in accordance with the following table (in feet):
3. Visibility triangles shall meet American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) requirements.
4. The City will review each site layout to review sight distances, clearances,
stopping sight distances, and obstructions.
-- = Not permitted
* As required by TXDOT
Note: The above table is provided by guidance only.
Alley Local Collector Arterial Freeway
Alley
25 ft x 25 ft 15 ft x 15 ft -- -- --
Local
20 ft x 20 ft 20 ft x 20 ft 25 ft x 25 ft 25 ft x 25 ft --
Collector
-- 20 ft x 20 ft 25 ft x 25 ft 25 ft x 25 ft --
Arterial
-- 25 ft x 25 ft 25 ft x 25ft 45 ft x 45 ft --
Freeway -- -- -- * *
Page B-8
APPENDIX B DCCS
5. The following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument
or on the face of the plat:
Public Open Space Easement
No structure, object, or plant of any type may obstruct vision from a height of 30 inches to
a height of ten (10) feet above the top of the curb, including, but not limited to buildings,
fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in the public opens space easement
shown on the plat.
Drainage and Detention Easements
1. Floodway easements shall be provided along natural drainageways and lakes or
reservoirs. Floodway easements shall encompass all areas beneath the water
surface elevation of the base flood, plus such additional width as may be required
to provide ingress and egress to allow maintenance of the banks and for
the protection of adjacent property, as determined and required by the City Manager
or designee.
2. The following applicable statement(s) of restriction(s) shall be placed in the dedication
instrument of the subdivision plat:
Drainage and Detention Easement (Above Ground Detention)
This plat is hereby adopted by the Owners and approved by the City of Lake
Worth (Called "City") subject to the following conditions which shall be binding
upon the Owners, their heirs, grantees, successors and assigns: The area or
areas shown on the plat as "Drainage and Detention Easement" shall remain
accessible at all times and shall be maintained by Owners of the lot or lots that
are traversed by, or adjacent to the Drainage and Detention Easement. The City
will not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the drainage facilities
within the Drainage and Detentions Easement or for any damage to private
property or person that results from conditions within the Drainage and Detention
Easement. No obstruction to the natural flow of storm water run-off shall be
permitted by construction of any within the Drainage and Detention Easement,
unless approved by the City Manager and/or designee. Each property owner
shall keep the portion Drainage and Detention Easement traversing or adjacent
to their property clean and free of debris, silt, and any materials which would
result in unsanitary conditions or obstruct the flow of water. The City shall have
the right of ingress and egress for the purpose of inspection and supervision of
maintenance work by the property owner. The City shall not be held liable for
any damages of any nature resulting from failure of facilities within the Drainage
and Detention Easement. The City shall have the right to enter upon the Drainage
and Detention Easement at any point, or points, to investigate, survey, construct
and maintain any drainage facility deemed necessary for drainage purposes.
The minimum finished floor elevation for each lot shall be as shown on the
plat.
Drainage and Detention Easement (Underground Detention)
This plat is hereby adopted by the Owners and approved by the City of Lake
Worth (Called "City") subject to the following conditions which shall be binding
upon the Owners, their heirs, grantees, successors and assigns:
Page B-9
APPENDIX B DCCS
The area or areas shown on the plat is called "Drainage and Detention Easement shall
remain accessible at all times and shall be maintained by the Owners of the lot
or lots that are traversed by, or adjacent to the Drainage and Detention Easement.
The City will not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the
drainage facilities within the Drainage and Detention Easement or for any damage
to private property or person that results from conditions within the Drainage
and Detention Easement. No obstruction to the natural flow of storm water
run-off shall be permitted by construction of any type within the Drainage and
Detention Easement, unless approved by the City Manager and/or designee.
Each property owner shall keep the Drainage and Detention Easement traversing
or adjacent to their property clean and free of debris, silt, and any materials
that would result in unsanitary conditions or obstruct the flow of water, The City
shall have the right of ingress and egress for the purpose of inspection and
supervision of maintenance work by the property owner. The City shall not be
held liable for any damages of any nature resulting from the failure of facilities
within the Drainage and Detention Easement. The City shall have the right to
enter upon the Drainage and Detention Easement at any point, or points, to
investigate, survey or construct and maintain any drainage facility deemed necessary
for drainage purposes.
3. Maintenance Required
a. Existing creeks, lakes, reservoirs, or drainage channels traversing
along or across portions of this addition, will remain as an open channel
at all times and will be maintained by the individual owners of the
lot or lots that are traversed by or adjacent to the drainage courses
along or across said lots.
b. The City of Lake Worth will not be responsible for the maintenance and
operation of said drainageways or for the control of erosion.
c. Each property owner shall keep the natural drainage channels traversing
or adjacent to his property clean and free of debris, silt, or any substance
which would result in unsanitary conditions and the City shall
have the right of ingress and egress for the purpose of inspection and
supervision of maintenance work by the property owner to alleviate any
undesirable conditions which may occur.
4. The natural drainage channel, as in the case of all-natural drainage channels,
are subject to storm water overflow and natural bank erosion to an extent that
cannot be definitely defined. The City of Lake Worth shall not be liable for damages
of any nature resulting from the occurrence of these natural phenomena,
nor resulting from a failure of any structure(s) within the natural drainage channels.
Page B-10
APPENDIX B DCCS
3
Page B-11
APPENDIX B DCCS
The
was granted, the date and case number of the variance shall also be
listed on the face of the plat.
Width
The width of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to
property corner measured along the property line of the block face between intersecting
streets, and shall be the side with one of the following criteria:
1. The block face with the least dimension, or
2. The block face with the fewest number of lots.
Block
1. The length of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property
corner to property corner measured along the property line of the
block face:
a. The block face with the greatest dimension, or
b. The block face with the greatest number of lots.
2. Where an existing plat or connection to existing streets controls, the
block lengths shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length.
3. Where no existing plat or subdivision layout controls, the blocks shall a
minimum of 500 feet and a maximum of 1,600 feet in length.
4. In cases where physical barriers or property ownership creates conditions
where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length
may be increased or decreased to meet the existing conditions having
due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety
as determined by the City Manager and/or designee(s).
Block
The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the type of use;
2. Zoning requirements for minimum lot size and dimensions;
3. Provision of adequate access and circulation;
4. Control and safety of street traffic; and
5. Limitations and/or opportunities of topography.
Page B-12
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 3.7 ACCESS
Access.
1. When new development or redevelopment occurs on a platted lot within ¼
mile of a school, park or shopping center, the City Council may require a public
walkway to be constructed to provide pedestrian access to the development.
2. Location. The access may be provided:
3. If required, the concrete walkway shall not be less than five (5) feet nor more
than ten (10) feet in width, through the block from sidewalk to sidewalk, or
curb to curb, or if no street, to the property line adjacent to school, park, or
shopping center and shall meet barrier free requirements in accordance with
ADA and Texas Accessibility Standards.
access to subdivisions shall be by means of a public street constructed
to standards and specifications herein.
2. One- and Two
Page B-13
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 3.8 ACCESS MANAGEMENT
and
Development
Requirements
Required
Page B-14
APPENDIX B DCCS
construction
Page B-15
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 3.9 DRIVEWAYS
Process Applicability
of construction plans and issuance of a building permit.
Number and
The number of driveways allowed per lot is limited according to functional street classification
and the traffic volume generated by the development proposal. The number and
location of driveways shall be located in accordance to the type of development and the
street classification as specified on the Master Thoroughfare Plan map:
1. Residential Development
a. Local Street
One driveway is permitted per residential use/lot from local streets.
Two driveways may be permitted if the lot width is greater than the minimum
as specified for the zoning district and with approval by City Manager
and/or designee.
b. Collector Street
Residential driveway access to Collector Streets will only be allowed
when design conditions do not permit any other possibility as determined
by the City Manager or designee.
c. Arterial and TXDOT Facilities
No new residential driveways may access Arterials or Freeways as
identified on the Master Thoroughfare Plan map.
2. Non-residential Development
a. TXDOT Facilities
i. All driveways and access proposed to connect to a TXDOT
facility shall conform to the current TXDOT Access Management
Manual, TXDOT Roadway Design Manual and the adopted
City Design Criteria and Construction Standards.
ii. Any driveway proposed to connect to TxDOT facilities must be
permitted through TxDOT and a copy of the signed permit will
be required prior to issuance of a building permit.
b. Arterials
Driveways off of arterial streets shall be located at an existing or proposed
median opening. Median openings shall be planned such that
driveways on opposite sides of an arterial street are served by the
same median opening.
Page B-16
APPENDIX B DCCS
c. Collectors and Local Streets
If medians are proposed on collector, local or private streets, the separation
between the driveway at the median opening and the next
driveway shall be located to discourage drivers from attempting a
wrong- direction entry or exit.
3. Additional driveways shall only be permitted in accordance to the following:
a. An approved traffic impact analysis (TIA), and/or
b. As a recommendation of a trip generation report.
4. Where a site is served by two (2) streets (corner lot), access shall be from the
lesser of the two (2) streets, with the following permittable exceptions:
a. Infill development/redevelopment
A lot may be permitted to access the higher classified roadway if the
lesser classified street serves exclusively as an entry point into an
existing single-family subdivision. This provision is made to
acknowledge existing travel patterns.
b. New development
Where connectivity to neighborhood services is important, consideration
shall be given to design such that neighborhood uses access the
lesser classified street.
Design of Driveways and Approaches
1. General Design
a. The driveway shall begin at the street curb and extend to the right-ofway
line or to a point ten (10) feet from the face of curb, whichever is
greater.
b. The angle of the driveway approach with the curb line shall be 90 degrees.
c. Driveways shall be kept at a minimum of five (5) feet away from obstructions
such as street light poles, fire hydrants, traffic signal poles,
etc.
2. Width
a. Residential driveway approaches shall not be less than 11 feet in
width, nor more than 18 feet wide measured at the property line.
b. Commercial and industrial driveway approaches shall not be less than
24 feet in width, nor more than 35 feet wide measured at the property
line.
3. Parking
a. Residential driveways shall provide a minimum of 18 feet between the
property line and any garage door, gate, or other obstruction to provide
for safe parking or stack space out of the public right-of-way and
completely on the property.
Page B-17
APPENDIX B DCCS
b. Nonresidential driveway approaches shall not be constructed or designed
for parking of vehicles or for use as angle parking and shall be located entirely
within the frontage of the premises they serve except for driveways
serving joint and/or cross access.
4. Construction Standards
a. The driveway shall be 6-inch thick, Class A (per NCTCOG) concrete, reinforced
with #3 steel bars on 18-inch centers each way.
b. The drive approach at the right-of-way line, with a normal ten (10) foot
parkway, shall be 0.2 feet higher than the top of curb as per the City
Standard Details. The elevation at this location may be lower provided that
barrier free ramps are provided to bring the sidewalk down to the driveway
grade.
c. Driveways shall be graded at a 2% maximum longitudinal slope in areas
where sidewalks cross, so that the sidewalk crossing is at a 2% maximum
cross slope.
d. Radius
i. Residential driveways shall be constructed with return curbs
having a rolled face disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the
street curb with a minimum 5-foot radius and a maximum 10-
foot radius.
ii. Commercial and industrial driveways shall have a minimum 25-
foot radius and a maximum 30-foot radius.
Connection Spacing
1. Measurement
a. Driveway connection spacing shall be defined as the distance between
connections or between driveways and roadways.
b. Spacing is measured from the closest edge of pavement of the first connection
to the closest edge of pavement of the second connection along
the edge of the traveled roadway.
2. Spacing shall conform to the most current TXDOT Manual Access Management
Manual.
3. Deviation from these guidelines will be considered only for cases where not granting
the deviation would deny reasonable access to the property.
4. The following table details the minimum connection spacing criteria along Collector
and Arterial roadways.
POSTED SPEED (mph) MINIMUM SPACING (between driveways)
= 30 200 feet
35 250 feet
40 305 feet
45 360 feet
= 50 425 feet
Page B-18
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 3.10 OFF-STREET PARKING
The following outlines the minimum construction standards for off-street parking:
Parking lots shall be constructed of a minimum of 3,600 pounds per square inch
(psi) reinforced concrete with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches or four (4)
inches of Type “B” and 2 inches of type “D” HMAC.
The subgrade thickness and content shall be determined from a geotechnical
report sealed by a Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas provided
by the Developer.
Standard curb and gutter as shown in Construction Standards shall be placed
around all landscaping areas and the external boundary of the parking lot.
All off-street parking areas shall be stripped in accordance with the latest version
of the Manual for a Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) published by the Texas Department
of Transportation.
E. The following minimum dimensions apply for off-street parking:
Parking
Width Length
Maneuvering
Page B-19
APPENDIX B DCCS
CHAPTER 4 DESIGN STANDARDS – PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
SECTION 4.1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES
Page B-20
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.2. SIDEWALKS
1. Sidewalks shall be constructed for all lots adjoining dedicated streets, along
major thoroughfares where lots do not adjoin the street, across power line
easements, and in other areas where pedestrian walkways are necessary.
2. Every new subdivision, or re-subdivision, shall be required to install sidewalks,
with appropriate barrier free ramps, within the public street right
a. All sidewalks shall conform to the latest ADA and Texas Accessibility
Standards (TAS) requirements.
b. Barrier free ramps shall be provided for access across streets per the
Design Criteria and Construction Standards
but
constructed
4. Required
5. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance to detail included herein.
At a minimum, sidewalks shall be constructed of Class A (per Item 303 of
NCTCOG) concrete reinforced with #3 reinforcing steel at 18-inch centers
each way and shall have a width of not less than five (5) feet and a minimum
thickness of four (4) inches.
Page B-21
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.3 STREET LIGHTS
A. Poles
1. Street light poles shall be installed within the parkway between the back of
curb and the sidewalk at the property line.
2. Poles must be approved by the City or by a public electric utility holding a City
franchise and by the
3. Poles shall be contracted and paid for by the developer during the construction
phase of the development and before building permits are issued.
4. Poles not purchased through a public electric utility holding a City franchise,
shall be certified by a Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas as
meeting the specifications as required by a public utility company holding a
City franchise, and shall be approved by the
prior to purchase.
B. Location
The location of street lights shall be as follows:
1. At all intersections;
2. Where a new street intersects an existing street;
3. In proximity to fire hydrants, whenever possible;
4. Every 300 feet or mid-block, whichever is the shortest distance;
5. If more than one (1) mid-block street light is required, spacing of installed street
lights shall create an equal balance of light throughout the entire block length;
and/or
6. At the end of the cul-de-sac block if the street is 400 feet or longer.
C. Illumination
Street light illumination levels shall conform to the agreement with ONCOR, and the
AASHTO Roadway Lighting Design Guide, as amended. LED lighting is preferred.
SECTION 4.4 STREET
A. Street Names
1. New street names shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of
existing streets.
2. New streets which are an extension of existing streets shall bear the names
B. Street name signs shall be City approved. The developer shall furnish and install signs
at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision in accordance with the regulations
herein.
Page B-22
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.5 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS
Stop signs,
Street name signs,
Speed limit signs,
Slow children at play signs,
Weight limit 6 tons signs, and
Other as determined by the layout of the development.
SECTION 4.6 GENERAL STREET DESIGN
Purpose
Proposed shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular,
bicycle, and pedestrian circulation and shall be properly related to the Master Thoroughfare
Plan and Comprehensive Plan and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic
characteristics of each proposed subdivision or development.
Conform to Master Thoroughfare Plan
Proposed streets shall a safe, convenient and functional system for traffic circulation
and shall be properly
1. The
subdivision shall:
Page B-23
APPENDIX B DCCS
Design Criteria
Page B-24
APPENDIX B DCCS
General
General
Page B-25
APPENDIX B DCCS
shall be extended through the tract to the tract boundary to provide
future connection with adjoining unplatted lands. In general, these extensions
should be at such intervals as necessary to facilitate internal
vehicular circulation with adjoining unplatted lands.
Street intersections should be laid out so as to intersect at right angles
and shall not vary by more than 5 degrees.
Horizontal curves are required for deflection angles of 1 degree or more.
At an intersection, the vertical profile of the higher classification roadway
(or roadway that will carry more traffic) shall be smooth and continuous
through the intersection. The cross slope of the intersecting street shall
Street Classification
Minimum
Design Speed
(MPH)
Maximum
Percent
Grade
Minimum
Percent
Grade
Minimum
Centerline
Radius
(without superlelevation)
Local 20 10 0.6 200 ft
Collectors 30 8 0.6 450 ft
Arterials 45 6 0.6 1,100 ft
Page B-26
APPENDIX B DCCS
transition from its normal crown section to match the longitudinal vertical
profile of the street which it intersects. The length of this crossslope
transition shall be designed per AASHTO criteria based on design
speed, cross slope grade differential, width of rotated section,
and number of lanes rotated.
Corner radii at the intersection of two Local roadways shall be twentyfive
(25) feet radius minimum. Larger radii may be required for intersections
of higher classification roadways per AASHTO design criteria.
A 5-foot x 5-foot minimum triangular right-of-way corner clip dedication
is required at roadway intersections to be able to accommodate sidewalk
barrier free ramps (see Standard Details). This corner clip may
need to be increased for larger intersection corner radii and at skewed
intersections.
Roadway profiles shall be designed so that they are graded at 2%
maximum where crosswalks are (or will be) located.
The intersection sight distance for all street intersections shall be analyzed
by the design engineer per the latest edition of the AASHTO
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. The approach and departure
sight triangles shall be plotted on the construction plans in order
to ensure that no obstructions are constructed within these areas.
Public Open Space Easement. All street intersections shall comply
with the POSE easement standards established herein.
Page B-27
APPENDIX B DCCS
e. Impact Analysis (TIA) will be required for developments which
include and/or generate:
i. 50 or more dwelling units; or
ii. 500 or more one-way trips per day; or
iii. Collector or Arterial Streets not included in the City adopted
Comprehensive Plan.
from a previously platted property where:
The plat of such property is being modified by an amending
plat.
The plat .
as a result of the replat.
Page B-28
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.7 DESIGN CRITERIA BY STREET TYPE
A. Public Streets
The property owner shall assure that the subdivision is adequately served by improved
streets and thoroughfares and shall be responsible for the costs of rights-of-way and
street improvements, in accordance with the following policies and standards, and may
be required to participate in the cost of provision of oversized facilities.
Streets
All streets not dedicated to the public shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards herein and shall be maintained by means of the property owner
(s) or other means as approved by the Commission.
Any request to dedicate a private street as a public street shall be approved
only if arrangements are made to bring the street into conformity with all City
standards and regulations in effect at the time of dedication at the cost of affected
property owners.
All private streets that intersect with public streets shall be constructed with
standard drive approaches. In cases where an unusual condition exists, the
City Manager or designee may approve standard intersection approaches
when requested prior to the preparation of the plans.
property owner(s).
C.
Alleys are not encouraged by the City and will only be approved on a case by case
basis by the City Manager.
Alleys, where provided, shall be dedicated on the plat for public ingress and egress.
The minimum distance between an alley/street intersection and a street/street
intersection shall be the width of at least one (1) lot.
Alleys should intersect streets at right angles or radially to curved streets.
Maximum alley length between access points to a street shall be 600 feet. A
length of between 600 feet and 1,600 feet without access to a public street
may be approved by the City Council if it finds unusual conditions or limiting
factors. In no case shall an alley length exceed 1,600 feet between street access
points.
Private and dead–end alleys are prohibited.
Alleys shall not intersect streets that are designated as Collectors or Arterials
as designated on the Master Thoroughfare Plan.
In cases where two (2) alleys intersect or turn a sharp angle, lot corners shall
be platted so that a triangular area of 25 feet x 25 feet or greater, is dedicated
as part of the alley for the purpose of providing a minimum radius of 30 feet to
the inside edge of the alley paving.
Page B-29
APPENDIX B DCCS
Grading. Alley paving should have a minimum grade of 0.5% and a maximum
grade of 10.0%.
Design by Type of Development
a. Commercial and Industrial
i. Alleys, or loading courts, may be provided in lieu of off-street
loading space.
Ii. Alleys must have a minimum paved width of 20 feet.
b. Residential
Alleys are not required in residential areas except as extended from an
existing development with alleys.
c. Single-Family and Duplex
Alleys serving single family residential and duplex areas shall
have a minimum right-of-way width of 20 feet.
Alleys shall have a minimum width of 12 feet exclusive of any
curbs.
Alley turnouts shall be paved to the right-of-way of the street in
which the alley intersects and shall be 12 feet wide at that
point.
A uniform transition in alley pavement widths shall be made for
a minimum distance of 20 feet.
Half streets shall be prohibited, except divided Arterial streets where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, and where the Planning and Zoning Commission
finds it will be reasonable to require the dedication of the other half
when the adjoining land is subdivided. The other half of the street shall be platted
within the adjacent tract at the time it is platted.
Construction of
a. When essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in
conforming with the requirements of this ordinance and the Master
Thoroughfare Plan, and
b. Where the City finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the
other one
If the owner or subdivider is responsible for one-half (1/2) of the street, the owner
or subdivider shall escrow the amount of the construction cost of the facility,
unless the City participates in the construction of the facility.
Whenever a partial street has been previously platted along a common property
line, the other portion of the street shall be dedicated.
Improvements
Page B-30
APPENDIX B DCCS
E.
The cul-de-sac shall be measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to
the centerline of cul-de-sac turnaround.
Streets designated to be dead-ended permanently shall be platted and constructed
with a paved cul-de-sac.
A street ending permanently in a cul-de-sac shall not be longer than 600 feet unless
a turnaround with a minimum outside roadway diameter of 80 feet is provide.
and a street property line diameter of at least 100 feet.
If necessary, the City may draw from the surety in order to construct the permanent
cul-de-sac prior to the term of the filed surety expiring.
Temporary
a. A street ending in a temporary cul-de-sac to allow for subsequent phasing
of the development or continuation of a road at a later date may be used.
b. The dead end shall have a temporary turnaround outside roadway diameter
of at least 80 feet with the roadway base, materials and design thickness
to be approved by the City Manager or designee.
c. Proper easements and/or dedications shall be in place to allow for the
public usage of the temporary cul-de-sac.
d. The developer shall provide surety in the amount to cover a standard culde-
sac design meeting the standard specifications of the City for a permanent
F. Dead Streets
a. To provide access to adjacent land areas, and
b. Shall be
feet,
shall have a hard-surfaced turning area 80 feet in diameter for a cul-desac.
b. Where adjacent property contains an existing dead-end street over 250
feet in length without a cul-de-sac which abuts the proposed
and
which are intended for future extension across these rights-of-way, shall
be constructed in the right-of-way for half the distance across the rights-ofway.
b. Streets which dead end at railroad rights-of-way shall not be required to
be constructed over the railroad right-of-way by the subdivider
Page B-31
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.8 PAVEMENT TYPES BY STREET CLASSIFICATION
1. Alleys and Driveways
Six (6) inches of reinforced concrete on eight (8) inches of lime or cement
stabilized subgrade.
2. Private Streets
Six (6) inches reinforced concrete on a minimum of eight (8) inches of lime or
cement stabilized subgrade.
3. Local Streets
Six (6) inches reinforced concrete on a minimum of eight (8) inches of
lime or cement stabilized subgrade is preferred.
Asphalt pavement may be used upon the approval of the City Manager.
4. Collector Streets
Seven (7) inches of reinforced concrete on eight (8) inches of lime or cement
stabilized subgrade.
5. Arterial Streets
Eight (8) inches of reinforced concrete on ten (10) inches lime or cement stabilized
subgrade
6. TXDOT Streets, including Freeways
As per approved by TXDOT according
Pavement Markings
Pavement markings shall be thermoplastic and shall conform to the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD) and the adopted criteria and specifications
herein, unless otherwise directed by City Manager or designee.
Page B-32
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.9 GENERAL CRITERIA FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES
All subdivision plats and engineering plans shall provide location and design of public
utilities prepared in accordance to franchise requirements and the adopted standards
herein.
Additional utility easements may be required beyond the right-of-way based on the
design of the subdivision.
SECTION 4.10. ELECTRIC, TELEPHONE AND CABLE SERVICES
Refer to Article 10.400 of the Subdivision Regulations and the standards and specifications
herein.
SECTION 4.11. WATER FACILITIES
1. This section pertains to general design requirements for water distribution system
construction in the City of Lake Worth.
2. All water lines shall be sized and designed in accordance with the City of Lake
Worth Water Distribution System Master Plan or as determined by the City
Manager or designee. In the absence of specific standards, all water supply,
distribution, pumping, and storage improvements shall be designed in accordance
with the most current standards of the American Water Works Association,
the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction of the North
Central Texas Council of Governments, and criteria adopted by the Texas Administrative
Code, Chapter 290, "Water Hygiene".
3. Water lines for multi-family, commercial and industrial fire protection lines shall
be private and isolated from the public system by a double detector check
placed at the property line. All water lines shall be 6 inches minimum diameter
and looped when possible. Dead end lines shall not exceed 50 feet on multifamily,
commercial, or industrial sites. All public water lines located on private
property shall be centered in a 15-foot minimum easement. Larger easements
may be required by the City Manager or designee to provide adequate space
Page B-33
APPENDIX B DCCS
for maintenance. Water lines shall not be located under paved surfaces where
possible.
Multi-family developments may be supplied fire protection and domestic service
by the same water line provided that a fire-rated master meter is used along with
a double detector check at the looped end of the water line.
If residential developments require fire suppression systems, the developer is
responsible for the design and specification of said fire suppression system.
4. The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense,
water distribution facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision.
The water system shall provide individual service to every lot in the subdivision.
All water mains constructed within a proposed subdivision shall be extended
to the perimeter of the proposed subdivision to allow for future extension
of the water system into adjacent properties. The water system shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the specifications contained in these
Standards.
5. All components of the water system must comply with ANSI/NSF Standard 61.
Water Line Sizing
1. Standard water line diameters are as follows:
a. Six (6) inch (minimum),
b. Eight (8) inch,
c. Twelve (12) inch, and
d. Sixteen (16) inch diameter.
Other sizes must be approved by the City Manager or designee.
2. All water lines shall be looped except in cul-de-sacs.
3. Dead end lines shall not exceed 50 feet on multi-family, commercial, or industrial
sites.
Water Line Location
1. Water lines shall be located in the parkway.
2. Along State Highways, water lines are required to be constructed on both sides
of roadway.
3. New water lines crossing existing streets shall be placed by boring.
4. A casing shall be required under major and minor collector roadways.
5. Open cut excavation will not be allowed to cross existing streets, unless approved
by the City Manager or designee.
6. All public water lines located on private property shall be centered in an easement.
7. Water lines shall not be located under paved surfaces where possible.
8. Easements for water line construction shall meet the following requirements:
Page B-34
APPENDIX B DCCS
a. The easement width shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
b. If the water line is less than 12 feet deep, the outside diameter of the
water line shall be located a minimum distance of 6 feet from the edge
of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement,
the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance
of 3 feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities.
c. If the water line is greater than 12 feet deep, the outside diameter of the
water line shall be located a minimum distance of 9 feet from the edge
of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement,
the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance
of 6 feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities.
9. All piping with mechanical couplings, push-on, or similar joints subject to internal
pressure shall be designed with blocking, anchors, and restraining harnesses to
preclude separation of joints.
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe
1. PVC pipe shall be designed, manufactured, and tested in accordance with the
applicable requirements of AWWA C-900 (6 inch through 12 inch water pipe),
AWWA C-905 (16 inches and larger water pipe), and AWWA M-23.
2. All PVC water pipe shall be blue in color.
3. 6 inch through 12 inches water pipe shall be pressure class 150, DR 18. Pressure
class 200, DR 14 pipe may be required by the City Manager or designee in
areas of high distribution system pressure.
4. Fittings
a. Fittings shall be ductile iron in accordance with AWWA C110 or AWWA
C153.
b. Fittings: ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11, except gaskets shall be neoprene
or other synthetic rubber and factory installed. Natural rubber will not be
acceptable.
c. All buried metal shall be wrapped in polyethylene Tube Wrap: ANSI/
AWWA C105/A21.5
Installation
1. General
a. All installations shall conform to the latest NCTCOG Specifications, as
amended by these standards.
b. Separations – Water line installations shall conform with the separation
criteria outlined in the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290.44,
“Water Distribution.”
c. Cover
i. All 6-inch and 8-inch water pipe shall be installed with a minimum
of 42 inches of cover over top of pipe.
Page B-35
APPENDIX B DCCS
ii. All 12-inch water pipe shall be installed with a minimum of
48 inches cover.
iii. All pipe 16 inches and larger water pipe shall be installed
with a minimum of 60 inches of cover over top of pipe.
d. The amount of trench excavation shall not exceed 200 feet from the
end of the pipe laying operations, and no more than 300 feet of total
open trench will be allowed.
e. At the end of each work day, all trench excavation shall be backfilled
to the end of the pipe laying operation.
f. Backfill must contain no large rocks or clumps larger than three (3)
inches in diameter.
g. Barricades and lights will be required around any open trench left
overnight.
h. All connections to existing water mains shall be made under pressure
unless dry connections will not cause any loss of service.
i. Under special conditions connections that cause an interruption of
service may be performed with approval of the City Manager or designee.
j. Coated tracer wire shall be installed in the embedment material
above the PVC pipe with the tracer wire terminating outside valve
boxes accessible by City Staff. Install a test station. Blue underground
water line tape of a minimum 4-inch width shall be installed
above the embedment material.
k. Density tests shall be taken every 150 feet. The density reports shall
be submitted daily to the City's inspector.
l. All density reports shall be completed and delivered to the City's inspector
before paving is allowed to begin.
2. PVC Water Pipe
PVC water pipe and appurtenances shall be installed as specified in AWWA
Manual M-23 and in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations.
3. Fittings
a. Fittings shall be installed in accordance with AWWA C-600.
b. All mechanical joint bends, tees, and reducers which require blocking
shall be additionally restrained with EBAA megalug retainer
gland or approved equal.
c. All fittings that are concrete blocked must be polyethylene wrapped.
Page B-36
APPENDIX B DCCS
Fire Hydrants
1. Location by Type of Development
a. Commercial and Industrial
Locate fire hydrants at street intersections and/ not more than 300 feet
apart.
b. Residential
Locate fire hydrants at street intersections and not more than 400 feet
apart.
c. Multifamily
Locate fire hydrants at street intersections and/ not more than 300 feet
apart.
2. Materials
a. Fire hydrants shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C-
502, Dry-Barrel Fire Hydrants.
b. Hydrants shall be manufactured such that all maintenance and adjustments
can be performed without excavation and such that hydrants
may be faced in any direction in relation to base.
c. The hydrant nozzle arrangement shall be three-way, consisting of two
2½ inch hose nozzles and one 4 inch pumper nozzle. The two hose
nozzles are 180 degrees apart with the pumper nozzle in between and
HOSE NOZZLE PUMPER NOZZLE
Nominal Size of Coupling Waterway 2 ½”, 4”
Number of Threads Per Inch 7 ½”, 4”
Thread Designation (NH = Fire 2.5-7.5 NH 4 – 4 NH
Approximate Outside Diameter of
External Thread
3 1/16”, 5”
Length of Nipple 1’, 1 ¼”
Length of Pilot to Start of Second
Thread
¼”, 7/16”
Depth of Coupling 15/16”, 1 3/16”
Diameter of Gasket Seat in Coupling
3 3/16”, 5 1/8”
Length of Coupling Internal Thread 11/16”, 7/8”
From Face of Coupling to Start of
Second Thread
3/16”, 3/8”
Page B-37
APPENDIX B DCCS
on the same horizontal plane. Centerline of outlet nozzle shall be a
minimum of 18 inches above the ground/hydrant bury line.
d. Outlet nozzles shall be fastened into the nozzle section by threads or
mechanical means and secured in place by a pin, a set screw or other
acceptable method to prevent the nozzle from turning or backing out.
Connecting the nozzle to hydrant by leading is not acceptable.
e. Nozzle cap harnessing and gaskets shall be furnished.
f. Threads on hose and pumper nozzles shall meet the requirements of
National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 1963, “Standard for Screw
Threads and Gaskets for Fire Hose Couplings” as follows:
3. Shut off:
a. The hydrants shall be of the compression type, with the main valve
opening against the pressure and closing with the pressure.
b. The valve action shall provide positive shut-off at minimum closing
torque.
c. Wedge action closing gates shall not be used.
d. All hydrants shall open by turning the operating-stem nut to the RIGHT
(CLOCKWISE). A clearly visible CURVED ARROW and the word
“OPEN” shall be cast in relief on the top of the hydrant to indicate the
direction of opening.
e. The fire hydrant operating nut shall be square in shape. The square
nut shall measure 1 inch at the base, and 7/8 inch at the top with all
faces tapered uniformly. The nut shall be so designed as to protect the
working mechanism from the moisture and dirt.
4. Bury Length
The standard fire hydrant bury length from ground to bottom of the connecting
pipe shall be 3 feet 6 inches. The hydrant shall be of a design that will permit
extensions without disturbing the bottom section of the hydrant.
5. Hub Type
Inlet connection shall be mechanical joint unless otherwise specified and shall
be for 6-inch ductile iron pipe. The nominal diameter of the fire hydrant main
valve opening is to be 5¼ inches.
6. Hydrant Body
The body of the hydrant between the elbow and the top cap must be made in
two parts connected by a swivel flange, or breakable flange which will permit
facing of the nozzles in any desired direction in increments of 45 degrees or
less. The complete hydrant shall be of such design that when the hydrant barrel
is broken through traffic collision or otherwise, it may be replaced without
disturbing the bottom section of the hydrant. Extension sections, where required,
shall include barrel extension section, extension rod with connectors
provided for lengthening the complete unit. These units shall be available in
increments of six (6) inches in length.
Page B-38
APPENDIX B DCCS
7. The fire hydrant body shall be painted a high gloss alkyd fire hydrant red.
8. Ballards shall be placed around fire hydrants in high traffic areas.
The ballards shall be placed at 45-degree angles to the fire hydrant with a
minimum spacing of 30 inches.
9. Location Markers
A location marker shall be placed in the center of the roadway opposite the fire
hydrant. If the fire hydrant is located near the intersection of at least two
streets a marker shall be placed on all streets. The installation of this reflector
shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. Location
markers shall be Stemsonite 1-88-55A or approved equal.
10. Manufacturers
Approved fire hydrants manufacturers are as follows:
a. Mueller (Super Centerion 200)
b. M&H (Model 129)
Valves
1. Resilient seated gate valves shall be used for 6 inch through 16 inch water
lines. Butterfly valves shall be allowed for 16 inches and larger water lines
when approved by the City Manager or designee.
2. Valves of approved design shall be installed at the intersections of all water
mains so as to provide for proper maintenance and operation of the system
and to provide a means of shutting off the supply to portions of the system for
repairs. Valves shall be spaced such that only one fire hydrant is out of service
at any one time. Three (3) valves shall be used on a four-way water line
intersection and a minimum of two (2) valves shall be used on a three-way
intersection.
3. Materials
a. Resilient Seated Gate Valves
i. Resilient seated gate valves 3 inches through 16 inches shall
meet or exceed the latest revisions of AWWA C509 and shall
meet or exceed the requirements of these standards.
ii. Resilient seated gate valves for buried service shall be furnished
with a square 2 inch operating nut. The valve box
shall be Tyler Pipe 6850 series or approved equal. The valve
box lid shall be painted safety blue. The paint shall be Glidden
or approved equal.
b. Butterfly Valves
Butterfly valves shall meet or exceed the latest revision of AWWA
Standard C504 for Class 150B butterfly valves and shall meet or exceed
the requirements of this specification. All valve components
shall conform to Underwriters Laboratories classification in accordance
with ANSI/NSF Standard 61.
Page B-39
APPENDIX B DCCS
4. Installation
a. Valves shall be furnished with extensions, such that the working nut is a
maximum of 48 inches below grade.
b. Adjustable valve boxes shall be furnished and set on each valve in accordance
with these standards. Valves that are deeper than 48 inches, AWWA
C900 PVC pipe shall be used for stacks, as long as the adjustable valve
box is used at the top.
c. After the final clean-up and alignment has been complete, the contractor
shall cast in place a concrete block, 24 inches by 24 inches around all valve
box tops at the finish grade. See Construction Details in Appendix B-6.
d. Valves located within a right-of-way shall be indicated on the face of the
curb, or where curbs do not exist, on a conspicuous location adjacent to the
valve location. Markings are to be the stamping of a four (4) inch high letter
"V" with the point of the "V" pointing towards the valve location. Once
stamped, the “V” shall be painted blue.
e. Valve markers shall be provided in rural areas.
5. Manufacturers
a. Approved manufacturers of 3 inch through 12-inch resilient seated gate
valves are as follows:
i. Mueller
ii. M & H
iii. U.S. Pipe
iv. CLOW
v. American Flow Control
b. Approved manufacturers of 16 inches resilient seated gate valves are as
follows:
i. Mueller
ii. M & H
iii. American Flow Control
c. Approved manufacturers of 16" and larger butterfly valves are as follows:
i. Dezurik
ii. Clow
iii. Keystone
6. Air Release and Flushing Valves
a. Adequate air relief, and flushing valves shall be provided for flushing, disinfection,
daily operation requirements, and repairs when required by the City
Manager or designee. Air release valves shall be required on 12 inches
and larger water lines. Water lines shall be designed so that each section
of the water line can be flushed at its lowest and highest points.
Page B-40
APPENDIX B DCCS
b. All dead-end lines shall have a fire hydrant installed for flushing purposes
and a sampling station. Sampling station shall be an Eclipse No. 88
or approved equal.
c. A fire hydrant shall be required at high points on water lines smaller than
12 inches for air relief and flushing.
d. Air release valves and air/vacuum valves shall meet or exceed the latest
revision of AWWA C512.
Tapping Sleeve
A tapping sleeve and valve shall be used when connecting a new water line to an existing
line. A resilient seated gate valve shall be flanged to the tapping sleeve. The tapping
sleeve shall be a Smith-Blair type 664-665 stainless steel tapping sleeve or approved
equal.
Water Service
1. The water meter box and water service shall be in accordance with Detail W-5. If
no curb is present, the water service shall be located at the property line, no
more than 12 inches deep, covered with a meter box in place at grade. Along
roadways without a curb the water service line shall be constructed at a minimum
of 18 inches below the ditch flow line. All water services crossing beneath
streets must be encased in four (4) inches diameter PVC casing.
a. Casing needs to be installed at least to the meter box or 12 inches behind
curb.
b. Casing needs to be sealed to prevent debris to enter piping.
c. One (1) water service per casing.
2. Meter and service sizes will be determined by the developer prior to requesting
service from the City. The minimum water service size between the water main
and the meter shall be one (1) inch and the minimum meter size shall be one (1)
inch.
3. Water services on undeveloped lots shall be located at the property line. Each
service shall be one (1) inch minimum. Each lot shall have its own service and
meter.
4. Backflow
All installations shall conform with the backflow regulations outlined in the Texas
Administrative Code, Chapter 290.44(h), “Backflow, Siphonage” as well as City
of Lake Worth ordinances.
5. Materials
a. Service saddle shall be double strap bronze with brass body or stainless
-steel double bolt wide straps with stainless steel body. Minimum size
tap shall be one (1) inch diameter.
b. Service lines shall be one (1) inch minimum diameter, Type K copper as
specified in ASTM B88.
c. Corporation and Curb Stops
Page B-41
APPENDIX B DCCS
i. Corporation stop shall be a ball type, size to be determined
based upon service type, with compression outlet fitting, designed
for a minimum working pressure of 200 pounds per
square inch (psi).
ii. Curb stop shall be set with compression inlet fitting and lock
ring.
d. See Standard Construction Details (Appendix B-6) for meter box for
meters two (2) inches and smaller.
6. Installation
a. General
i. All water service shall be installed in accordance with these
standards.
ii. Each individual service location shall be saw cut into the face of
the curb with a four (4) inch high blue "W" painted by the Contractor.
iii. If no curb exist a similar mark should be placed in the pavement
near the edge of the roadway.
b. Residential Meters
All residential meters shall be manufactured by Badger Meters with latest
technology.
c. Commercial Meters (3 inches and larger)
i. See Standard Construction Detail.
ii. The developer shall purchase from the manufacturer a Badger
Meter (model to be specified by the City).
iii. The meter shall be installed by a utility contractor or plumber.
iv. All meters in this size class are required to have a strainer prior
to the meter.
7. Acceptable Manufacturers for Corporation Stops, Curb Stops, and Service Saddles:
a. Ford
b. Mueller
c. Smith-Blair
Flushing Valves
1. Corporation stop shall be 2-inch ball type with compression outlet fitting, designed
for a minimum working pressure of 200 pounds per square inch (psi).
2. Two (2) inch curb stop shall be ball type with compression inlet fitting with tee
head shut off.
3. Pipe shall be two (2) inches diameter, Type K copper as specified in ASTM B88.
Page B-42
APPENDIX B DCCS
Water Line Bore
1. Casing
a. Minimum casing thickness shall be one-quarter (1/4) inch.
b. Casings shall be required under collectors and major thoroughfares,
highway crossings, and railroad crossings.
c. Casings may also be required were deemed necessary by the City
Manager or designee.
d. The construction bore pit shall be located at a minimum distance of
four (4) feet behind the back of curb or edge of pavement where no
curb is present.
e. Bores need to be marked to identify locations, either in curb line
marking or fiber glass stakes.
f. Trace wire to be installed on bores.
2. The design engineer shall design the water line pipe casing for the following
loading conditions and applicable combinations thereof:
a. Cooper's E-80 Railway loading or AASHTO HS20 loading as applicable
b. Earth loading with the height of fill above the casing as shown on the
plans
c. Loads applied during jacking, including axial load from jacking
d. All other applicable loading conditions, including loads applied during
transportation and handling.
3. Materials
a. Steel Casing Pipe - Steel casing pipe shall be new (or used if approved
by the City Manager or designee) and suitable for the purpose
intended and shall have a minimum yield strength of 35,000 pounds
per square inch (psi). Casing shall meet ASTM A-36, ASTM A-570,
ASTM A-135, ASTM A-139, or approved equal. Pipe shall be coated
with coal tar epoxy (15 mils min.) in accordance with AWWA C-210.
Pipe joints shall be welded in accordance with AWWA C-206. After
pipe is welded, coating shall be repaired.
b. Cement Mortar - Cement mortar shall consist of one (1) part cement
to two (2) parts clean sand with sufficient water to make a thick, workable
mix.
c. Pressure Grout Mix - Grout shall be comprised of 1 cubic foot of cement
and 3.5 cubic feet of clean fine sand with sufficient water added
to provide a free-flowing thick slurry. If desired to maintain solids in
the mixture in suspension, one cubic foot of commercial grade bentonite
may be added to each twelve to fifteen cubic feet of the slurry.
d. Casing Insulators (Spacers) - Use casing insulators for any type of
carrier pipe. Insulators shall be high density polyethylene. Insulators
Page B-43
APPENDIX B DCCS
shall fit snug over the carrier pipe and position the carrier pipe approximately
in the center of the casing pipe to provide adequate clearance between
the carrier pipe bell and the casing pipe. Insulators shall be manufactured
by "Recon" and be Racci Type or approved equal.
4. Installation
a. Excavation and Backfill of Access Pits
i. Do not allow excavation over the limits of the bore or tunnel as
specified. Trench walls of access pits adjacent to the bore or tunnel
face shall be truly vertical. Shore the trench walls as necessary
to protect workmen, the public, structures, roadways, and other
improvements.
ii. Excavations within the right-of-way and not under surfacing shall be
backfilled and consolidated by mechanical methods as specified in
these standards for compaction of trenches under roadways. Surplus
material shall be removed from the right-of-way and the excavation
finished to original grades. Backfill pits immediately after the
installation of the carrier pipe is completed. If carrier pipe is not
installed immediately after casing pipe installation, the City may
require the access pits be temporarily backfilled until installation of
carrier pipe.
iii. Where seeding or sodding is disturbed by excavation or backfilling
operations, such areas shall be replaced by seeding or sodding as
specified.
Page B-44
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.12 WASTEWATER FACILITIES
General
1. This section pertains to general design requirements for wastewater collection
system construction in the City of Lake Worth. All sewer lines shall be sized and
designed in accordance with the City of Lake Worth Wastewater System Master
Plan or as determined by the City Manager or designee. In the absence of specific
standards, all collection, treatment, and disposal systems shall be designed in
accordance with the most current criteria adopted by the Texas Administrative
Code, Chapter 317, "Design Criteria for Sewerage Systems".
2. All sewers shall be designed with consideration for serving the full drainage area
subject to collection by the sewer in question; the drainage area may be modified
with the concurrence of the City Manager or designee because of the projected
rate of development or the financial feasibility of the proposed extension.
3. Sewers should be designed with straight alignment whenever possible. When
horizontal curvatures must be used, the maximum joint deflection should be in
accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations.
4. The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense,
wastewater collection facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision.
The wastewater collection system shall provide individual service to
every lot in the subdivision. All sewer mains constructed within a proposed subdivision
shall be extended to the perimeter of the proposed subdivision to allow for
future extension of the wastewater collection system into adjacent properties.
The wastewater collection system shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the specifications contained in these Standards.
5. All sewers shall be designed with hydraulic slopes sufficient to give mean velocities,
when flowing full or half full, of no less than two (2) feet per second on
Kutter's or Manning's formulas using an "n" value of 0.013. Slopes shall also
conform to TAC Chapter 317, Sewage Collection System.
6. When a 150 pounds per square inch (psi) rated sewer line is required due to its
proximity to a water line, the 150 pounds per square inch (psi) rated pipe shall
terminate at a manhole on each end. The pipe shall be extended to the interior
wall of the manhole. No external boot connection will be allowed.
Sanitary Sewer Line Sizing
1. Standard sewer line sizes are:
a. Six (6) inches,
b. Eight (8) inches,
c. Twelve (12) inches,
d. Fifteen (15) inches, and
e. Eighteen (18) inches in diameter;
f. Other sizes must be approved by the City Manager or designee.
2. Sewer lines shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter.
Page B-45
APPENDIX B DCCS
Sanitary Sewer Line Location
1. Sewer lines shall be constructed at a minimum depth of 4 feet. They shall be
located in the parkway and are required to be constructed on both sides of a
State Highway. No sewer lines will be allowed to cross a State highway.
2. Easements for sewer line construction shall meet the following requirements:
a. The easement width shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
b. If the sewer line is less than 12 feet deep, the outside diameter of the
sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of six (6) feet from the
edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same
easement, the outside diameter of the sewer line shall be located a minimum
distance of three (3) feet from the outside diameter of the other
utilities.
c. If the sewer line is greater than 12 feet deep, the outside diameter of
the sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of nine (9) feet from
the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same
easement, the outside diameter of the sewer line shall be located a minimum
distance of six (6) feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities.
Sanitary Sewer Line Materials
1. All sanitary sewer pipes shall be PVC pipe type SDR-26.
2. PVC pipe will not be allowed for depths greater than 24 feet unless approved by
City Manager or designee.
3. If service connections are needed on sewer pipe constructed below 15 feet in
depth, a parallel line shall be constructed at a shallower depth, specifically for
service connections.
4. All PVC sanitary sewer pipe shall be green in color.
5. PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to the current ASTM Designation D
3034 for four (4 ) inches through 15 inches and ASTM Designation F 679 for
greater than 15 inches.
Installation
1. General
a. All installations shall conform to ASTM Designation D2321, and the latest
NCTCOG Specifications as amended by these standards.
b. Sewer lines shall not be installed within nine (9) feet horizontally of any
water main or fire hydrant.
c. Construction shall begin at the downstream end of project and continue
upstream with the bell facing upstream.
d. No upstream piping shall be installed before downstream piping unless
approved by the City Manager or designee.
Page B-46
APPENDIX B DCCS
e. All concrete and clay lines will be brought up to current design standards
which are located inside the developer’s scope of work.
2. Excavation and Backfill
a. When PVC pipe is used, green marker tape with the wording "Buried
Sanitary Sewer" shall be installed in the backfill material no more than
12 inches above the top of the pipe.
b. The amount of trench excavation shall not exceed 200 feet from the
end of the pipe laying operations, and no more than 300 feet of total
open trench will be allowed.
C. At the end of each workday, all trench excavation shall be backfilled to
the end of the pipe laying operation. Backfill must contain no large
rocks or clumps larger than three (3) inches in diameter.
c. Barricades and lights will be required around any open trench left
overnight.
d. Density tests shall be taken every 150 feet. The density reports shall
be submitted daily to the City’s inspector.
e. All density reports shall be completed and delivered to the City's inspector
before paving is allowed to begin.
Inspection
1. All air tests and flow tests will follow NCTCOG Standards.
2. All sanitary sewer lines shall be inspected using television inspection methods
prior to acceptance by the City.
a. The Contractor is responsible for cleaning the sewer pipe. If the inspection
shows debris or evidence that the line has not been properly
cleaned, the review will cease, and the tape will be returned to the
Contractor.
b. A City representative shall be present during the television inspection,
unless otherwise authorized in writing.
c. The televised inspection shall commence only after the line has
passed both air and mandrel test.
3. Televised Inspection Criteria
a. All sanitary sewer mains must be flushed with water just prior to televised
inspection. Water is to be provided at the Contractor’s expense.
A City representative shall be present during the flushing of the main.
b. All television equipment used shall have a minimum of 220 lines of
horizontal resolution. The picture shall be in color.
c. All video shall be digitally recorded and placed on a DVD or detachable
storage drive.
Page B-47
APPENDIX B DCCS
d. As a title heading on the tape and during the televising, the operator
must:
i. Note the project name and Contractor name.
ii. Note the name of the company and the operator performing
the video inspection.
iii. Note line size and material, joint type and length.
iv. Line segment to be televised including beginning and ending
station numbers.
v. Note page of plans used and year plans were stamped.
vi. Note date and time of inspection.
vii. A footage counter must be displayed on the tape during the
filming.
viii. Show the above title block before and after each line segment.
Show the title block at 100-foot intervals while filming
the line segment.
ix. All defects should be shown on film for a minimum of 10 seconds
before proceeding with the televising.
e. The Contractor shall supply a log sheet used in conjunction with the
DVD or digital storage device. All written information gathered must be
legible and clearly understandable.
i. Note the project name, Contractor name and contract number.
ii. Note the name of the company and the operator performing
the video inspection.
iii. Note pipe size and material, joint type and length between
joints.
iv. Note the video footage counter, start to end.
v. Note line segment to be televised, station numbers from and
station numbers to length of line segment as indicated on
plans.
vi. Note page of plans used and year plans were stamped.
vii. Note date and time of inspection.
viii. Indicate by sketch the line segment to be videoed in relation
to surrounding road intersections and street addresses. Identify
manhole station numbers. Show direction of flow with arrows
and direction the camera is going. Indicate direction of
north on the sketch.
ix. Note the water depth at the beginning, every 50-foot station,
every change in grade, and at the end of the line segment.
Page B-48
APPENDIX B DCCS
x. Identify the clock location, direction, size and type of laterals
entering main. Indicate laterals as saddles, punched, or glued
fittings.
xi. Indicate final footage videoed at end of the log sheet.
f. One (1) video per visual televised inspection project shall be furnished
to the City Manager or designee.
g. All videos and run sheets shall be submitted to the City. All videos and
log sheets shall become the property of the City.
4. Criteria for Repair
a. The Contractor shall make repairs if the inspection reveals any deficiency
in the sewer line. If repairs are required, another television inspection
shall be made after the repairs are complete on a new tape from manhole
to manhole at the Contractor’s expense.
b. Repairs shall be made to the satisfaction of the City Manager or designee
and City Manager or designee.
Manholes
1. Manholes shall be located at all intersections of sewer lines and at intermediate
spacing along the line. Generally, the maximum spacing should not exceed 500
feet.
2. Manholes should be located at all changes in grade and at the ends of all sewer
lines that will be extended.
3. A manhole is required at the junction of sewer lines with different inside pipe
diameters.
4. A drop of at least 0.1 feet is required through the manhole when a change in
flow direction occurs.
5. The flow line into a manhole should not be greater than six (6) inches above the
flow line out of the manhole. Where the flow line in is greater than two (2) feet
above the flow line out, a drop manhole is required.
6. Minimum manhole inside diameter is four (4) feet.
7. Drop-connection manholes shall have a minimum inside diameter of five (5) feet,
with an interior drop connection if line size is greater than eight (8) inches.
8. Minimum cast in place manhole wall thickness is eight (8) inches. For depths
greater than 12 feet add an extra four (4) inches of thickness for each additional
six (6) feet of depth.
9. Minimum pre-cast wall thickness is five (5) inches.
10. A manhole is required where a sanitary sewer line enters and exits private property.
11. All manholes shall be constructed of concrete.
Page B-49
APPENDIX B DCCS
12. No new connection to brick manholes will be allowed. Brick manholes must be
brought to current standards.
13. All brick manholes will be replaced to new standards that are inside the developer’s
scope of work.
14. Installation
Use the following table to determine sanitary sewer manhole sizes:
Note: 1. If the proposed design requires the sewer line to be placed at depths
greater than shown above, the design will require approval by the City Manager
or designee.
15. Cast-in-place
a. Cast-in-place manholes shall accommodate the City’s specified manhole
cover.
b. The manhole foundation shall be poured on undisturbed soil and shall have
a minimum thickness of eight (8) inches.
c. The inlet and outlet pipes shall be poured into the foundation of the manhole.
The pipe shall extend one and one-half (1½) inches into the manhole.
When straight through flow occurs, the pipe shall not be laid continuously
through the manhole.
d. The invert shall be shaped and smoothed so that no projections will exist,
and the invert shall be self-cleaning. The invert floor shall have a minimum
slope of one (1) inch per foot.
e. Concrete work shall conform to all requirements of ACI 301, Standard
Specification for Structural Concrete, published by the American Concrete
Institute, except as modified herein.
f. Detailing of concrete reinforcement and accessories shall be in accordance
with ACI Publication 315.
g. Portland Cement shall be Type II, low-alkali and conform to ASTM Designation
C-150.
Pipe Sizes Depth of Cover
(feet)
Minimum
Diameter of
Manhole
(feet)
Number of Pipe
Connections
Allowed in Manhole
Under 12 inches <12 4 3
>12-20 5 3
12 in to 18 in <12 5 3
>12-20
(See Note #1)
6 4
Page B-50
APPENDIX B DCCS
h. The manhole shall not be backfilled within 12 hours after the concrete
placement.
i. The face of curb shall be sawed with an "MH" to mark the location of all
manholes. The “MH” shall be painted green. The location of the stamp
shall be a line that intersects the center of the manhole cover and the
curb perpendicular to the centerline of the street. For manholes located
in intersections, the curb shall be stamped at the closest location to the
manhole. If no curb exist a similar mark should be placed in the pavement
near the edge of the roadway.
16. Precast Manhole
a. All precast manholes shall accommodate the City’s specified manhole
covers.
b. Manhole base shall have a spread footing and be placed on a minimum
of twelve (12) inches of crushed rock.
c. The face of curb shall be sawed with an "MH" to mark the location of all
manholes. The “MH” shall be painted green. The location of the stamp
shall be a line that intersects the center of the manhole cover and the
curb perpendicular to the centerline of the street. For manholes located
in intersections, the curb shall be stamped at the closest location to the
manhole. If no curb exist a similar mark should be placed in the pavement
near the edge of the roadway.
17. Manufacturers. Approved precast manhole manufacturers are as follows:
a. Hydro-conduit
b. Gifford Hill American
18. Manhole Frame and Cover
a. Cover-shall be per the City’s specified manhole cover in the Standard
Construction Details in Appendix B-6.
b. Materials. All manhole covers shall conform to the Standard Specifications
for Grey Iron Castings, ASTM A-48, Class 30 B.
c. Installation
i. All manhole covers shall be 30 inches in diameter.
ii. All manhole covers shall have two (2) integrally cast pick bars.
19. Manufacturers-see Standard Construction Details in Appendix B-6.
20. Frames-see Standard Construction Detail in Appendix B-6.
a. Materials. All manhole frames shall conform to the Standard Specifications
for Grey Iron Castings, ASTM A-48, Class 30 B.
b. Installation. All manhole frames shall accommodate the City’s manhole
cover.
c. Manufacturers-see Standard Construction Detail
Page B-51
APPENDIX B DCCS
21. Extension Ring-see Standard Construction Detail
a. Materials. All precast reinforced concrete extension rings shall conform
to ASTM C-478.
b. Installation
i. The number of extension ring sections shall be kept to a minimum
(i.e. use 1-12-inch extension ring instead of 2-6 inch extension
rings).
ii. A 1-inch by 3 1/2-inch bitumastic gasket shall be used to seal
the extension ring at both joints.
iii. No more than a twelve (12) inch rise can be installed.
22. Rain Pan
a. Materials. Rain pans shall be high density polyethylene plastic.
b. Manufacturers. Knutson or approved equal.
Sewer Service
1. No sewer service line (lateral) shall be less than four (4) inches in nominal diameter.
2. Commercial sewer laterals shall be 6 inches minimum diameter. Where the 6 -
inch line connects to the system, a manhole shall be provided.
3. Sewer laterals shall be located at the center of the lot and extended to the property
line and be a minimum of 10 feet downstream of the water service.
4. Sewer service laterals shall have no more than six (6) feet of cover at the property
line.
5. A cleanout shall be located on the service lateral at the right-of-way line.
6. Materials
a. All lateral sewer service lines shall be PVC pipe type SDR-26.
b. All PVC sanitary sewer pipe used for lateral services shall be green in
color.
7. All service laterals shall be installed in accordance with the sanitary sewer embedment
and backfill standards.
8. Sanitary sewer service locations shall be indicated by a stamped “S”, painted
green.
Cleanouts
1. All cleanouts are to be constructed of PVC pipe type SDR-26.
2. All PVC sanitary sewer pipe shall be green in color.
3. PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to the current ASTM Designation D 3034
for four (4) inches through 15 inches and ASTM Designation F 679 for greater than
15 inches.
Page B-52
APPENDIX B DCCS
Main Line Cleanouts
Main line cleanouts shall be located on dead end sewer mains at a distance no greater
than 250' from the preceding manhole. If the distance is greater than 250', a manhole
shall be installed at the end of the line.
Aerial Sewer
1. The piers for the aerial crossing shall be designed in accordance with the
guide lines of the Ductile Iron Pipe Research Association.
2. Aerial sewer crossing shall be located in areas where the sewer line cannot
be constructed with the appropriate minimum cover. The design engineer
shall design the aerial crossing in accordance with these standards and as
approved by the City Manager or designee.
3. Pier placement and spacing shall be determined according to soils analysis
performed by a geotechnical engineer. Piers shall be placed at a maximum
span distance as indicated by the design engineer's calculations.
4. Pier placement and spacing along with a soils report shall be submitted to the
City Manager or designee.
5. All above ground sewer installations shall be ductile iron, minimum Class
150, utilizing restrained joints and shall have a wall thickness required for the
size and span as designed. The pipe shall have an internal polyurethane
coating.
6. The aerial pipe shall be connected to the sanitary sewer pipe by means of a
manhole on each side of the aerial crossing.
7. Piers to be constructed with a minimum of Class A (per Item 303 NCTCOG)
reinforced concrete.
8. The design engineer shall submit a pipe design for approval by the City Manager
or designee.
9. The design engineer shall submit a pier design for approval by the City Manager
or designee.
Sewer Line Boring
1. The design engineer shall design the sewer line pipe casing for the following
loading conditions and applicable combinations thereof:
a. Cooper's E-80 Railway loading or AASHTO HS20 loading as applicable.
b. Earth loading with the height of fill above the casing as shown on the
plans.
c. Loads applied during jacking, including axial load from jacking.
d. All other applicable loading conditions, including loads applied during
transportation and handling.
e. Bore will be marked to show location of bore.
Page B-53
APPENDIX B DCCS
2. Materials
a. Steel Casing Pipe - Steel casing pipe shall be new (or used if approved by
the City Manager or designee) and suitable for the purpose intended and
shall have a minimum yield strength of 35,000 pounds per square inch
(psi). Casing shall meet ASTM A-36, ASTM A-570, ASTM A-135, ASTM A
-139, or approved equal. Pipe shall be coated with coal tar epoxy (15 mils
min.) in accordance with AWWA C-210. Pipe joints shall be welded in accordance
with AWWA C-206. After pipe is welded, coating shall be repaired.
b. Cement Mortar - Cement mortar shall consist of one (1) part cement to two
(2) parts clean sand with sufficient water to make a thick, workable mix.
c. Pressure Grout Mix - Grout shall be comprised of 1 cubic foot of cement
and 3.5 cubic feet of clean fine sand with sufficient water added to provide
a free-flowing thick slurry. If desired to maintain solids in the mixture in
suspension, one cubic foot of commercial grade bentonite may be added
to each twelve to fifteen cubic feet of the slurry.
d. Casing Insulators (Spacers) - Use casing insulators for any type of carrier
pipe. Insulators shall be high density polyethylene. Insulators shall fit
snug over the carrier pipe and position the carrier pipe approximately in
the center of the casing pipe to provide adequate clearance between the
carrier pipe bell and the casing pipe. Insulators shall be manufactured by
"Recon" and be Racci Type or approved equal.
3. Installation
a. Tolerances
i. All bores shall be installed at a grade no less than the minimum
indicated by TAC, Chapter 317 for the desired pipe size.
ii. All bores shall maintain grade enough to ensure desired clearance
distances between existing utilities and bore.
b. Excavation and Backfill of Access Pits
i. Bore pits must be a minimum of four (4) feet from the back of curb
when located for boring under roadways.
ii. Do not allow excavation over the limits of the bore or tunnel as
specified.
iii. Trench walls of access pits adjacent to the bore or tunnel face
shall be truly vertical. Shore the trench walls as necessary to protect
workmen, the public, structures, roadways, and other improvements.
iv. Excavations within the right-of-way and not under surfacing shall
be backfilled and consolidated by mechanical methods as specified
in these standards for compaction of trenches under roadways.
v. Surplus material shall be removed from the right-of-way and the
excavation finished to original grades.
Page B-54
APPENDIX B DCCS
vi. Backfill pits immediately after the installation of the carrier pipe is
completed. If carrier pipe is not installed immediately after casing
pipe installation, the right-of-way Owner may require the access
pits be temporarily backfilled until installation of carrier pipe.
vii. Where seeding or sodding is disturbed by excavation or backfilling
operations, such areas shall be replaced by seeding or sodding,
as specified.
Lift Stations
1. Minimum requirements, plans and specs submitted for approval by City Manager
or designee. Lift Stations must be designed in accordance with 30 TAC, 317.3.
2. Instrumentation and Control
a. The voltage supplied for pump operation shall be 3 phase, 480 volts.
Converting single phase power to three phase power using additional mechanical
equipment shall not be allowed.
b. Wet-well level control shall be achieved through the use of an ultrasonic
level indicating transmitter.
c. A main disconnect shall be installed on power supply between the meter
and control panel.
d. All lift stations dedicated to the City of Lake Worth shall have SCADA telemetry
equipment installed, at the expense of the Developer, that interfaces
with the City’s SCADA system and meets the City’s protocol and
specifications.
e. Submersible pumps shall be provided with moisture and motor overtemperature
sensors.
3. Site Requirements
a. A concrete pad will be required at the front of the control cabinet. The pad
shall provide a 3-foot working area away from the face of the cabinet and
extend the width of the enclosure mounting structure. Pad depth shall be
a typical 4 inches.
b. A 1-inch minimum potable water service is required. The water service
may be set in a standard 18-inch galvanized water meter box with a 1-inch
brass angle stop.
c. The site shall be graded to drain away from the station to prevent stormwater
inflow or infiltration into the wet-well.
d. The site shall be located outside of the 100-year floodplain.
e. The site shall not be located within 100 feet of an existing or proposed
residence, if possible.
f. If applicable the lift station site driveway shall include driveway area for
maintenance vehicles to park off public roadway while performing maintenance,
the minimum driveway length shall be 15 feet.
g. A concrete driveway turning area is required where access drives extend
more than 20 feet from main roads. The driveway area shall be "T"
shaped with the applicable turning radius. The minimum driveway width
shall be 15 feet.
Page B-55
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.13 STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES
A. General
The purpose of this Section is to establish standard principles and practices for the design
and construction of storm drainage facilities within the City of Lake Worth. The
design factors, formulas, graphs, and procedures described in the following pages are
intended to serve as guidelines for the design of the storm drainage facilities provided
for developments within the City. Responsibility for the actual design remains with the
design engineer. Deviation from the requirements of this Criteria must be approved by
the City Council.
All materials, construction, and testing shall be in conformance with the City of Lake
Worth Design Standards and the NCTCOG Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction.
B. Hydrology
a. Drainage Area Delineation
i. The size and shape of each watershed and associated sub-basins (onsite
and off-site) shall be determined for each drainage facility. The
determination should be based on topographic maps, at a scale of 1
inch = 200 feet (1 in = 200 ft) or greater.
ii. Inlet placement should also be taken into account during the delineation
of drainage areas. Each proposed inlet shall have an independent
drainage area.
b. Rainfall
The Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) curve shows anticipated rainfall rates
for storm durations from five (5) minutes to 24 hours.
This curve has been prepared using the information derived from Technical
Paper No. 40 (Soil Conservation Service, May 1961).
c. Storm Frequency
The drainage system shall provide overflow at all low points and identify the
overflow path on the plans and on the plat as applicable. The term "positive
Drainage Facility Design Recurrence Interval
Closed Storm Sewer
Systems
10-year
with 100-year positive overflow for inlets on grade in streets
such that the depth of flow in the street does not exceed the
top of curb. For inlets at low points or in a roadway sag, the
100-year flow must be captured within the curb.
Culverts and Bridges 100-year
Concrete-lined Chan- 100-year
Earthen Channels 100-year
Detention Facilities 100-year
Page B-56
APPENDIX B DCCS
overflow" means that when the inlets do not function properly or when the design
capacity of the conduit is exceeded, the excess flow can be conveyed
overland along a grassed or paved course. Normally, this would mean along
a street or alley. If not, the excess flow path shall require the dedications of
drainage easements on private property.
The following guidelines shall be followed to determine the storm frequency to
be used to design a storm drainage system.
C. Runoff Calculations
1. Methodology
a. The selection of method to be used to calculate runoff depends upon
the size of the contributing drainage area at the most downstream
point of the project.
b. The Rational Method is acceptable for designing projects with drainage
areas of less than 100 acres.
c. A Unit Hydrograph method is required for projects with larger drainage
areas.
d. Regardless of the method used, runoff computations shall be based
upon fully developed conditions in accordance with the ultimate land
use assumption in the current Comprehensive Land Use Plan for the
City of Lake Worth. The design engineer shall size drainage facilities
by disregarding the detention effects of upstream properties and calculating
runoff as if the off-site property was developed without any
detention. If an approved regional detention/retention facility is in operation,
the design engineer may size downstream drainage facilities
based on consideration of the detention effects of the regional facility.
2. Procedure for drainage areas less than 100 acres
a. Methodology
The Rational Method is based on the principle that the maximum rate
of runoff from a given drainage area for an assumed rainfall intensity
occurs when all parts of the area are contributing to the flow at the
point of discharge. Therefore, the duration of the storm used is equivalent
to the time of concentration of the basin.
The formula for calculation of runoff by the Rational Method is:
Q = CIA
where, Q = the maximum rate of discharge (cfs)
C = Coefficient of runoff, based on topography, soil, land use, and
moisture content of the soil at the time the rainfall producing
runoff occurs
I = Intensity of rainfall for the time period it takes for flow from the
most hydraulically distant point of the drainage area to reach the
point of design (in/hr)
A = Drainage area contributing to the runoff at the specified concentration
point/outfall (acres)
Page B-57
APPENDIX B DCCS
b. Runoff Coefficient
The runoff coefficient "C" in the Rational Method equation is dependent
on the character of the soil and the degree and type of development
in the drainage area. Normally, as a drainage area develops
the amount of runoff increases in proportion to the amount of
impervious area. The runoff coefficient shall be based on the ultimate
land use as recommended in the current City of Lake Worth
Comprehensive Plan.
c. Time of Concentration
The time of concentration is the longest time, without interruption of
flow by detention devices, for a drop of water to flow from the most
hydraulically distant point of the drainage area to the point of concentration
(point of design) of the basin. Note that this is not necessarily
the point at the longest physical distance from the point of
concentration, but the point from which it will take runoff the longest
time to reach the concentration point.
SCS methodology is recommended to determine the time of concentration
(Tc). This method separates the flow through the watershed
into three regimes: sheet flow, shallow concentrated flow, and
open channel flow.
i. Sheet Flow
Sheet flow is flow over plane surfaces. It occurs in the uppermost
area of the defined basin. The time of concentration
in minutes for sheet flow is determined using the following
equation:
where, D = distance along the flow path (feet)
V = velocity (feet per second)
Tc = time of concentration (minutes)
The longest flowpath for the water is determined for each basin
begins at the most hydraulically distant point in the basin and
ends at the concentration point for the basin. The sheet flow
length is then measured along this flowpath from the uppermost
part of the basin for a length no more than three hundred (300)
feet (At a maximum distance of three hundred (300) feet, sheet
flow typically changes to shallow concentrated flow).
A slope should be estimated along this length of flow. A velocity
corresponding to this slope was determined using the upland
method graph found in Appendix B-1.
V
D
T
cSheetFlow = 60
Page B-58
APPENDIX B DCCS
iii. Shallow Concentrated Flow
Shallow concentrated flow typically begins where sheet flow
ends. A projected slope should be established along the flowline
for the shallow concentrated flow length. A velocity corresponding
to this slope is determined from the shallow concentrated
flow graph in Appendix B-1. The time of concentration in
minutes for shallow concentrated flow is determined by the following
equation:
where, D = distance along the flow path (feet)
V = velocity (feet per second)
Tc = time of concentration (minutes)
iii. Open Channel Flow
Open channel flow is applicable for large channel sections (and
closed storm sewers in some cases). In most cases, it is not
applicable for the Rational Method (since large channels indicate
large watersheds where a Unit Hydrograph Method is applied
in the City of Lake Worth). The time of concentration for
open channel flow is determined using the following equations:
where, D = distance along the flow path (feet)
V = velocity (feet per second)
Tc = time of concentration (minutes)
Where V is estimated using a combination of the continuity
equation and Manning’s equation:
where, n = Manning’s “n”
R = A/P = hydraulic radius (feet)
A = area (square feet)
P = wetted perimeter (feet)
S = slope (ft/ft)
V
D
T
cShallowConcentratedFlow = 60
V
D
T
cChannelFlow = 60
( ) ( ) 2
1
3
1.486 2
R S
n
V =
Page B-59
APPENDIX B DCCS
iv. Resulting Time of Concentration
The time of concentration is the sum of the sheet flow, shallow
flow, and open channel flow segments.
v. Resulting Time of Concentration of Inlets.
When designing inlets and laterals, the time of concentration is
equal to the inlet time. The design engineer shall compare the
specified inlet times in the table below to the actual calculated
inlet time by computing the flow time overland and along the gutter
to the first inlet. In no case shall a shorter inlet time or time of
concentration be used than the times specified in the table below.
The following table includes the values for coefficient of runoff
and minimum inlet time for different land uses in the City.
vi. Travel Time
The travel time in a conduit or channel from the inlet to the point
of design shall be determined through the use of Manning's
equation. When attempting to determine offsite fully developed
flow for a currently undeveloped area, or single-family flow for
the proposed on-site detention design, travel time can be estimated
by assuming an average flow velocity of six (6) feet per
second from the inlet to the point of concentration.
Land Use "C"
Inlet Time
(min)
Park Areas – No Developed 0.30 15
Developed Park Sites 0.40 15
Single Family Residential 0.55 15
Duplex 0.60 15
Multiple Family 0.80 10
Schools 0.70 10
Churches 0.70 10
Neighborhood Commercial 0.80 10
Office Commercial 0.80 10
Commercial 0.90 10
Industrial 0.90 10
c cSheetFlow cShallowConcentratedFlow cChannelFlow T = T + T + T
Page B-60
APPENDIX B DCCS
d. Procedures for Drainage Areas greater than 100 acres
i. Methodology
A Unit Hydrograph Method is required for drainage areas in excess
of 100 acres. The use of a unit hydrograph calculation will
be based upon standard and accepted engineering principles
subject to the approval of the City Manager or designee. The
recommended Unit Hydrograph models are HEC-1 or HECHMS.
ii. Rainfall
When using a Unit Hydrograph Method to determine the peak
runoff of a basin, a 24-hour storm duration is to be used with a
SCS Type II distribution. Rainfall values can be determined
using the City of Lake Worth IDF curve, found in Appendix B-1.
iii. Loss Rate
To determine the loss rate of the basin, the SCS Curve Number
(CN) method shall be used. CN values shall be taken from TR-
55 and should in general correspond with the C factors used in
the Rational Method.
iv. Time of Concentration
The time of concentration for use in Unit Hydrograph applications
shall be developed using SCS methods. That methodology
is described in the Rational Method section of this Ordinance.
v. Routing
The method used for routing of the Unit Hydrograph through the
system depends on the system in question. For artificial channels
and storm drainage systems, stream routing can be performed
using the Muskingum Cunge method. That method uses
the Manning's coefficient, reach length, channel slope, and
shape of the channel to determine the storage of the channel
reach.
In ponds and natural channels, the Modified Puls Routing method
should be used. The Modified Puls method uses a stagestorage-
discharge method to determine the storage necessary
in a channel reach to produce a given discharge.
Page B-61
APPENDIX B DCCS
D. Detention
1. Definition
Storm water detention basins are used to temporarily detain storm water, thereby
reducing peak discharge rates. Detention basins in the City of Lake Worth are
required to provide adequate volume and discharge to reduce the 100-year peak
discharge rate from newly developed areas one acre or larger to that of a single
family development of the same size (C = 0.55) to satisfy the following requirements:
compliance with City ordinances, preservation of existing floodplains along
major creeks, prevention of overloading inadequate downstream storm drainage
facilities, and prevention of erosive conditions in water courses. Either regional
detention/retention ponds or on-site detention/retention ponds may be used to
provide the required detention.
2. Methodology
Basins without upstream regional detention ponds or upstream private detention
ponds routed through the site and with drainage areas 100 acres or less can be
designed using the Modified Rational Method. Routed Unit Hydrographs must be
used in the design of basins with drainage areas greater than 100 acres or basins
where the Modified Rational Method may not be applied. The hydrograph routings
through the detention basin are to be done using the Modified Puls Method.
3. Criteria
a. The 100-year inflow and allowable outflow will be determined using the
methodology described in the "Hydrology" section of these standards.
b. A maintenance plan, approved by the City Manager or designee and the
Director of Public Works, is required for all detention facilities and shall
meet the standards given in this section.
c. The minimum amount of storage volume of the detention basin shall be
that volume required to reduce the 100-year runoff rate to an equivalent
single-family rate. In addition, detention basins are required to include
one (1) foot of freeboard.
d. An emergency spillway or overflow area shall be provided at the maximum
100-year pool level. From the spillway, a conveyance path must be
provided to the nearest right-of-way or drainage channel.
e. The outflow structure shall discharge flows into natural streams or unlined
channels at a non-erosive rate.
f. Detention basins shall provide positive drainage throughout the pond with
a minimum pond bottom slope of 0.30%. The maximum side slope permitted
around the detention pond is 4(H):1(V).
g. The Developer/Owner shall use low maintenance vegetation for vegetative
cover, as approved by the Director of Public Works prior to planting.
The selection of materials shall comply with the current ground cover listing
for North Central Texas furnished through the Texas Agricultural Extension
Service.
h. A pilot channel shall be used within detention ponds with a bottom width
five (5) feet or greater
Page B-62
APPENDIX B DCCS
i. The design of detention facilities shall include provisions for collecting and
removing sediment deposited after collecting and releasing storm water.
j. The City does not assume maintenance for private detention ponds. All
detention ponds must be placed in a private drainage easement dedicated
on the final plat. Public storm sewer infrastructure draining to or away
from a private detention must be placed in a public drainage easement.
In cases where a private detention pond will be used by owners platting
separate lots, a Joint Detention Agreement must be in place between the
property owners and must be accepted by the City prior to the property
being final platted.
k. Detention is allowed in parking lots. Detention in parking lots may not be
deeper than six (6) inches in depth at any location. The exception to the
six (6) inch depth is a nine (9) inch maximum in areas designated as truck
parking only. Parking spaces inundated by detained storm water may not
be counted toward required parking ratios for the development. Warning
signs must be placed on the site designating that the area may be inundated
in an extreme storm event.
l. Detention facilities shall be designed to empty in less than 48 hours, unless
it is also serving as a sediment control facility.
m. Detention facilities shall not be counted as an erosion control measure
unless:
n. the basins are designed to empty a minimum of 24 hours from the storm
event, and
o. adequate sediment storage areas in the basin have been set aside and
are maintained.
p. The property owner shall maintain all detention facilities. A maintenance
plan must be included on the final construction plans outlining these minimum
measures:
q. Facilities shall be mowed at least twice a year to control weeds and discourage
woody growth.
r. Debris, litter, and accumulated sediment shall be removed from detention
facilities at least twice a year. Particular attention should be given to removal
of debris, litter, and sediment around outlet structures.
s. Conformance with the maintenance plan as approved by the City Manager
or designee is the responsibility of the owner of the detention facility.
t. An example of the calculations for sizing a detention pond using the Modified
Rational Method can be found in Appendix B-5.
u. Erosion control measures shall be installed in detention ponds to prevent
erosion and displacement of sediment to downstream facilities. Erosion
control measure shall remain in place until the Director of Public Works
determines a vegetative cover is established in the detention pond. Sediment
control measures shall be approved by the Director of Public Works.
Page B-63
APPENDIX B DCCS
E. Hydraulics
1. Refer also to Section 3.2.
2. Property shall be developed so that the rate of runoff created by the development
as it leaves the property does not exceed the rate of runoff that would have been
created if the property had been developed as a single-family residential property.
Detention shall be designed in accordance with the “Detention” section of this
document.
3. Runoff calculations must be based on the proposed lot grading for the development.
Runoff contributed from off-site sources must be considered in the calculations.
All off-site drainage must be calculated at the proposed ultimate land use
(fully developed conditions) according to the current City of Lake Worth Comprehensive
Land Use plan. Each on-site inlet shall have one contributing drainage
area. The terms “ultimate” and “fully developed” are interchangeable with respect
to the drainage sections of this Ordinance.
4. All drainage systems must be sized for ultimate conditions without the effects of
detention facilities. If an approved regional detention facility is in operation, the
design engineer may size drainage facilities based on consideration of the detention
effects of the regional facility.
5. All drainage systems shall provide for positive overflow at all low points. Positive
overflow means that when the inlets do not function properly or when the design
capacity of the conduit is exceeded, the excess flow can be conveyed overland.
Additional guidelines for positive overflow are included in the “Hydrology” section.
6. When adjacent to the floodplain, the finished floor (FF) elevation of commercial
buildings shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year fully-developed
water surface elevation (WSE) of the adjacent floodplain. The FF elevation of
residential buildings shall be a minimum of two (2) feet above the 100-year fullydeveloped
WSE of the adjacent floodplain.
F. Open Channel
1. General Criteria
a. Open channels may be used instead of enclosed systems when the
drainage area of the contributing flow is greater than one hundred (100)
acres. Open channels shall not be permitted when the drainage area is
less than 100 acres. An exception to this guideline is a development
draining directly to a receiving creek or open channel.
b. Improved open channels shall provide a cross section which reduces all
velocities to six (6) feet per second or below for grass-lined channels.
c. For channel sections with velocities ranging from six (6) to 15 feet per
second, a lined section must be specified for the channel. Lining types
such as concrete and gabions may be used upon approval of the City
Manager or designee. Channel velocities greater than 15 feet per second
will not be permitted.
d. The Developer/Owner shall use low maintenance vegetation for vegetative
cover, as approved by the Director of Public Works prior to planting.
The selection of materials shall comply with the current ground cover listPage
B-64
APPENDIX B DCCS
ing for North Central Texas furnished through the Texas Agricultural Extension
Service.
e. A pilot channel shall be used in open channels with a bottom width five (5)
feet or greater.
f. In cases when the property boundary follows the centerline of the channel
or incorporates only a portion of the channel cross sections, the Developer/
Owner shall construct all improvements required on their property for
the ultimate channel design. If channel lining is required, the Developer/
Owner shall coordinate with adjacent owners in order to construct these
features in their entirety at the time of the channel improvements.
g. At the discretion of the City Manager or designee, fencing and/or guardrails
shall be provided for the benefit of public safety along open channels,
creek sections, and detention ponds.
h. Flumes and curb cuts are not recommended. Use of curb cuts and flumes
may not be within a public drainage easement. Flumes on private property
must be designed to limit erosion at the end of the flume.
2. Design Methodology
a. Major channels or channels where backwater effects occur must be modeled
using a standard backwater model. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineer's
HEC-RAS model is preferred. Other models may be used that
meet FEMA and standard engineering criteria, if approved by the City
Manager or designee.
b. For collector channels and swales, Manning's equation can be used to
determine water surface elevations and velocities, where backwater effects
from major channels or creeks are deemed to be negligible.
3. Hydraulic Design Criteria
a. Improved channels must be designed to convey the 100-year ultimate flow
within the channel banks with one (1) foot of freeboard. In bends in the
channel, the superelevation of the water must be estimated and added to
the freeboard of the channel on the outside of the bend. Calculations to
determine the superelevation in the channel can be found in Appendix B
2.
b. All channels must be designed to have subcritical flow. The maximum
allowable Froude number for channel flow is 0.86. The calculation to determine
the Froude number in the channel can be found in Appendix B-2.
Hydraulic jumps are to be avoided, except at bridges and culverts. When
a hydraulic jump is predicted at a bridge or culvert, the channel bottom
and side slopes must be protected from erosion with a channel lining.
c. The preferred channel shape is a trapezoidal section. Unless shown to be
feasible in a soils report sealed by a Licensed Professional Engineer in the
State of Texas, and approved by the City Manager or designee, improved
channels shall have side slopes no steeper than:
i. Four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical for earthen, grasslined
side slopes.
Page B-65
APPENDIX B DCCS
ii. 1.5 feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical for concrete-lined side
slopes.
d. All unpaved channels shall have sufficient gradient to avoid ponding in
low flow conditions. A minimum slope of 0.40% is required for all unpaved
channels and swales except those used as part of a wetlands
area. A concrete pilot channel shall be included in all improved major
earthen channels.
e. All channel radii shall be a minimum of three (3) times the top width of
flow. If the natural channel radius is smaller than three (3) times the top
width, care should be provided in the design to protect any structures
from channel migration or flooding.
G. Bridges
Design Criteria
1. One (1) foot of freeboard is required between the 100-year water surface elevation
and the low chord of the bridge. Exceptions to this requirement must be approved
by the City Manager or designee in writing.
2. The skew of the bridge piers and abutments shall be oriented parallel to the normal
or flood direction of flow, resulting in an angle of skew as close to zero degrees
as possible.
3. Bridges shall be designed using standard methods. If the bridge is located
across a major channel or a channel where backwater effects occur, the bridge
must be included in the standard backwater model of the channel. If the HEC-2
backwater model is used, the normal bridge option shall be used for bridges without
interior piers. The special bridge option shall be used for bridges with interior
piers, and for situations where pressure flow and/or weir flow occurs.
H. Culverts
Design Criteria
1. One (1) foot of freeboard is required between the 100-year water surface elevation
and the top of road elevation. Exceptions to this requirement must be approved
by the City Manager or designee.
2. Culverts shall be designed in accordance with the Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA) HDS-5 manual. Standard charts from that manual are provided in
Appendix B-4. Standards in the City of Lake Worth will take precedence over the
FHWA manual in cases of conflict.
3. The culverts shall be oriented such that the impacts due to the flood and normal
flow angles of skew on the structure are minimized.
4. Culverts can be designed in supercritical flow for hydraulic efficiency. However,
the outlet of the culvert shall be evaluated for erosion concerns, and the hydraulic
jump must be forced at the outlet of the culvert, whether by design grades or an
energy dissipater.
5. The maximum allowable velocity of flow through a culvert shall be fifteen (15) feet
per second. The maximum allowable discharge velocity for a storm sewer system
shall not exceed the permitted velocity of the receiving channel or conduit to
Page B-66
APPENDIX B DCCS
prevent erosion. The maximum outfall velocity of a conduit in partial flow shall be
computed for partial depth and shall not exceed the maximum permissible velocity of
the receiving channel unless controlled by an appropriate energy dissipater (e.g.
stilling basins, impact basins, and/or riprap protection). Minimum flow within a culvert
during a design event is two (2) feet per second.
I. Storm Sewer Systems
1. Materials
All storm sewer conduits within dedicated public drainage easements or public right
-of-way are to be constructed using reinforced concrete pipe. Other materials are
not permitted unless prior approval is obtained from the City Manager or designee.
2. Storm Sewer Design
a. Storm Frequency - Closed storm sewer systems shall be sized as designated
in the “Hydrology” section of these guidelines.
b. Velocities and Grades in Storm Sewers
i. The minimum allowable velocity in a storm sewer conduit shall be
2.5 feet per second.
ii. The maximum allowable velocity in a storm sewer conduit is 12.5
feet per second.
iii. The maximum allowable discharge velocity for a storm sewer system
shall not exceed the permitted velocity of the receiving channel
or conduit to prevent erosion. The maximum outfall velocity of a
conduit in partial flow shall be computed for partial depth and shall
not exceed the maximum permissible velocity of the receiving channel
unless controlled by an appropriate energy dissipater (e.g.
stilling basins, impact basins, and/or riprap protection).
iv. The minimum slopes for various pipe sizes that will maintain the
minimum velocity are given in Appendix B-3.
v. A minimum of two (2) feet of separation is required (outside of pipe
to outside of pipe) between storm sewer and other public utilities,
except as required by TCEQ regulations. Separation closer than
two (2) feet requires concrete or steel encasement of the water or
sanitary sewer line.
c. Hydraulic Gradient of Storm Sewers
i. The Hydraulic Grade Line (HGL) shall be established for all storm
drainage design and included in the profile of the storm sewer. The
10-year and 100-year HGLs must be shown on the profiles of public
storm sewer systems.
ii. When performing hydraulic analyses for storm drainage system
design, the starting HGL elevation shall be based on the following
criteria:
• When the ratio of the drainage area of the receiving creek
(at the confluence location) to the drainage area of the sysPage
B-67
APPENDIX B DCCS
tem being designed is 15:1 or greater, the 10-year water surface
of the receiving creek shall be used as the starting 100-
year HGL elevation for HGL calculations.
• When the ratio of the drainage areas is less than 15:1, the
100-year elevation on the receiving creek shall be used as the
starting water surface for design calculations.
iii. If a system is discharging into an existing downstream storm drain, the
HGL shall be tied into the HGL for the 10-year or 100-year event (as
applicable) in the downstream storm drain. It is the design engineer's
responsibility to evaluate all data employed in the analysis, including
any data used from existing plans or provided by the City. If the existing
downstream system is undersized, downstream flooding cannot be
increased (this may require additional detention than that required by
these guidelines) and the proposed system should be designed to
accommodate future downstream drainage improvements.
iv. Computation of the hydraulic grade line shall proceed from downstream
to upstream in a manner consistent with typical engineering
methods.
v. If at any time the storm sewer system enters partial flow, the HGL at
the next most upstream structure (wye, manhole, etc.) will begin again
at the top of pipe elevation.
vi. Friction head loss throughout the system during pressure flow shall be
determined by direct application of Manning's Equation. A Manning's
'n' value of 0.013 is to be used for these calculations when concrete
storm sewer is used.
vii. The design event flow (cfs), velocity (fps), velocity head (ft), and hydraulic
slope (ft/ft) for each portion of the storm drainage system in
pressure flow is to be shown on the profile of the system. The design
event flow, velocity, depth of flow (ft), and flow capacity of the system
for each portion of the storm drainage system in partial flow is to be
shown on the profile of the system.
viii. In addition to friction losses, minor head losses at points of turbulence
shall be calculated and included in the computation of the hydraulic
gradient. The following minor losses shall be accounted for in the
storm sewer system design. Equations to determine these head losses
are located in Appendix B-2.
• Entrance Losses – Entrance losses to a closed storm sewer
system from an open channel, pond, or inlet shall be calculated.
The resulting hydraulic grade line shall be compared to
inlet control conditions for the storm sewer. The higher of the
two values shall be used as the controlling upstream hydraulic
grade line.
• Expansion and Contraction Losses – For locations within the
storm sewer system where the flow area available increases
or decreases, expansion and contraction head loss shall be
calculated.
Page B-68
APPENDIX B DCCS
• Manhole and Bend Losses – Head losses associated with
manholes used for pipe direction changes and bends in
pipes of equal diameter shall be calculated.
• Junction Losses – Head losses associated with wye connections
or manholes with branch laterals entering the
main line shall be calculated.
d. Inlet Design
i. Inlet Placement
• Storm sewer inlets shall be located along paved streets at
intervals that do not allow the 100-year storm to exceed
the top of curb elevation and allow the roadway to meet
the required lane opening criteria.
• Inlets shall be generally placed upstream of intersections.
A maximum of five (5) cfs will be allowed to cross intersections
of residential streets in the 100-year event.
However, only one street shall be crossed with surface
drainage at any one intersection, and this street shall be
the lower classified street. No surface drainage will be
permitted to cross a Collector or Arterial roadway.
• When an alley intersects a street, inlets shall be placed in
the alley to prevent flow from that alley from causing the
capacity of the intersecting street to be exceeded.
• When a driveway (residential or commercial) intersects a
street, a maximum of five (5) cfs will be allowed to be discharged
into the street. Inlets shall be placed in the
driveway whenever flow down that driveway would cause
the capacity of the intersecting street to be exceeded.
ii. Inlet Capacity and Size
• The minimum inlet size shall be five (5) feet. Curb inlets
shall be five (5), ten (10), fifteen (15), and twenty (20) feet
in length. No more than twenty (20) feet of inlet shall be
placed along a gutter at any one location.
• The minimum lateral pipe size shall be eighteen (18)
inches for use with five (5) foot inlets, 21-inch laterals for
use with ten- and fifteen-foot and drop inlets, and 24-inch
laterals for use with 20-foot inlets. Where laterals tie into
trunk lines, place the laterals on a 60-degree angle with
the trunk line and connect them so that the longitudinal
centers intersect.
• Curb inlets may not be utilized as junction boxes.
• At sags, the flow into a curb inlet shall be one (1) cfs per
linear foot of inlet.
• Additional inlet sizing equations can be found in Appendix
B-2.
Page B-69
APPENDIX B DCCS
iii. Design
• City standard curb inlets are required on all public storm
sewer systems.
• Slotted drains and combination inlets are not allowed
unless approval is obtained from the City Manager or
designee.
• Drop (wye) and grate inlets may be used in specific situations
with the prior approval of the City Manager or designee.
• All storm drain inlets shall be sized in accordance with
the State of Texas Department of Highways and Public
Transportation Hydraulic Design Manual Chapter 10 –
Storm Drains
e. Outfall Design
i. The flow lines of storm sewer conduits that discharge into open
channels shall match the flow line of the channel unless the outfall
is submerged beneath the normal water surface elevation or
the channel is fully lined.
ii. Flumes are not permitted to convey discharge to the flow line of
earthen creeks.
iii. Pipes may intersect with major creeks at angles not to exceed 60
degrees.
iv. Pipes may intersect with minor creeks at angles not to exceed 90
degrees only if the City Manager or designee deems that an angle
of intersection greater than 60 degrees will not cause an erosive
condition, otherwise the angle may not exceed 60 degrees.
f. Access
i. Access points to a storm drain shall be no greater than 600 feet
apart in storm drains less than 24 inches in diameter and no
greater than 1200 feet apart in larger conduits.
ii. Manhole structures shall be rectangular and as specified in the
construction details of these standards (Appendix B-6).
Page B-70
APPENDIX B DCCS
J. Roadway Drainage
1. Design Storm Frequencies – Street sections must be designed to contain the 100-
year storm event within the curb.
2. Permissible Spread of Water – The spread of water on the roadway shall be limited
to prevent the street from losing its effectiveness as a traffic carrier, which is
an important concern in the case of emergency vehicles which may not be able to
traverse an inundated roadway. The following table lists the allowable encroachment
limits.
3. Calculation of Flow Depth in Gutters – The flow of storm water in curb and gutter
sections is classified as open channel flow. As such, the design calculations are
based on a modified form of Manning's equation. The modified Manning's equation
to determine gutter discharge is included in Appendix B-2.
4. Alley Flows
a. The flow created by the 100-year storm shall be contained within the limits
of pavement of all paved alleys.
b. Curbs are required for at least ten-feet on either side of an inlet in an alley.
c. Design flow in alleys shall be calculated by using the same equation to
calculate gutter flow for a straight crown calculated in two triangular sections.
K. Residential Grading and Drainage
3.
above the 100-
year fully-developed WSE of the adjacent floodplain.
Street Classification
Allowable Encroachment
(during the 100-yr event)
Local Maximum depth of six (6) inches or top of curb.
Collector One twelve (12) foot lane must remain open.
Thoroughfare One twelve (12) foot lane of traffic in each direction
must remain open.
Page B-71
APPENDIX B DCCS
SECTION 4.14 DEVELOPMENT IN THE FLOODPLAIN
A. Development within the Fully Developed Floodplain
1. All development near the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shall require
the approval of the City Manager or designee.
2. The City Manager or designee should be contacted for information on
approved floodplain hydraulic models for fully developed watershed conditions
for the channels in the City. If a hydraulic model is not available
from the City, then it must be provided by the developer of the property.
3. Prior to the approval for preliminary grading for proposed development
near the FEMA regulated floodplain, a floodplain study must be submitted
to and approved by the City. The floodplain study must verify the 100-
year existing and ultimate floodplain limits, as well as the proposed alterations
to the floodplain. The floodplain study shall demonstrate that the
improvements will not increase the 100-year fully developed floodplain e
elevation at any location along the channel. No development within the
floodway or floodplain will be allowed unless approved by the City Manager.
This report must contain the following items:
a. Written report describing the project and summarizing the effects
of the floodplain study. This narrative should contain tables comparing
the pre-and post-project flood elevations.
b. A hydraulic model of the existing condition of the floodplain. This
model should be produced using the United States Army Corps
of Engineers HEC-RAS modeling program. The City will accept
any version of HEC-RAS that is accepted by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA). The cross sections within
the modeling must be based on FEMA datum (NGVD 29).
c. A hydraulic model of the proposed condition of the floodplain.
This model shall take into consideration any changes that are
proposed to take place within the floodplain.
d. Stream profiles and cross sections generated by the hydraulic
modeling software.
e. Existing and proposed conditions floodplain work maps. These
work maps shall be based on a minimum of 2-foot topographic
contours. The topographic contours should be based on FEMA
vertical datum. The proposed condition floodplain work map must
include the proposed grading to take place within the floodplain
and the limits of the proposed development within the floodplain.
f. If the 100-year fully developed flow is not available from the City,
or if the Developer wishes to update the 100-year fully developed
flow for the channel, the report must document the generation of
the fully developed peak flow value. The methodology required to
Page B-72
APPENDIX B DCCS
determine these flows is the same as that describe in the “Hydrology”
section of this manual.
B. Development within the FEMA Floodplain
1. Development within the FEMA Floodplain is not allowed unless the design
engineer can demonstrate that the FEMA floodplain is not accurate, and the
development will be located outside the 100-year fully developed floodplain.
2. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) submittal to FEMA must be submitted to the
City upon completion of the construction. This submittal must follow the criteria
set forth by FEMA. The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) guidelines
65.3 and associated references are hereby incorporated by reference.
3. A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) may be required for developments
that do not encroach upon the FEMA floodway at the City Manager or
designee's discretion. If a CLOMR has been required by the City, then the City
will not grant a building permit for the subject tract until, at a minimum, the
CLOMR has been approved by the City.
4. The CLOMR and LOMR must have properly completed FEMA forms that
specify that the City will not perform maintenance within the floodplain.
5. Any development within the floodplain shall only operate with an approved US
Army Corps of Engineers jurisdictional determination USACE AJD).
Page B-73
APPENDIX B DCCS
CHAPTER 5 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARD DETAILS
SECTION 5.1 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
2.
to interruption.
SECTION 5.2 STANDARD DETAILS
Refer to Appendix B-6, Standard Construction Details
APPENDIX B DCCS
Page B-74

Page B-76
APPENDIX B DCCS



APPENDIX B-2 Hydraulic Equations



APPENDIX B DCCS
APPENDIX B-3 Hydraulic Tables



APPENDIX B DCCS
APPENDIX B-4 Hydraulic Figures



APPENDIX B DCCS
APPENDIX B-5 Sample Detention Calculations



APPENDIX B DCCS
APPENDIX B-5 Sample Detention Calculations



APPENDIX B DCCS
APPENDIX B-6 Standard Construction Details
PAVING DETAIL DETAIL NO. REVISION DATE
CONCRETE STREET SECTIONS P-1 MAY 2006
STEEL LAYOUT PLAN P-2 MAY 2006
INTERSECTION JOINT SPACING P-3A MAY 2006
CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINTS P-3B MAY 2006
CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINTS P-3C MAY 2006
STANDARD CURB AND GUTTER P-4 MAY 2006
LAYDOWN CURB AND RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY P-5A MAY 2006
LAYDOWN CURB AND COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY P-5B MAY 2006
STREET HEADER P-6 MAY 2006
TYPICAL ALLEY SECTION P-7 MAY 2006
WHEELCHAIR RAMP P-8 MAY 2006
CONCRETE SIDEWALK P-9 MAY 2006
MANHOLE AND WATER VALVE BOXOUT P10-A MAY 2006
MANHOLE AND WATER VALVE BOXOUT P10-B MAY 2006
CURB AND GUTTER, SIDEWALK, AND DRIVEWAY TYPICAL
JOINT LAYOUT
P-11 MAY 2006
MEDIAN NOSE P-12 MAY 2006
LEFT TURN LANE IN MEDIAN P-13 MAY 2006
RIGHT TURN LANE WITHOUT CHANNELIZATION P-14 MAY 2006
RIGHT TURN LANE WITH CHANNELIZATION P-15 MAY 2006
CONCRETE VALLEY P-16 MAY 2006
DEAD END BARRICADE P-17 MAY 2006
METAL BEAM GUARDRAIL P-18 MAY 2006
STANDARD WOODEN FENCE P-19 MAY 2006
STANDARD MASONRY FENCE P-20A MAY 2006
STANDARD MASONRY FENCE P-20B MAY 2006
Minor Update - City Staff or City Engineer to update page numbers in Appendices B-1 through B-6, detail sheet
numbers and dates for all tables once updated regulations are approved.
WATER DETAIL DETAIL NO. REVISION DATE
STANDARD WATER LINE EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL
W-1A May 2006
STANDARD WATER LINE EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL
W-1B May 2006
FIRE HYDRANT INSTALLATION W-2 May 2006
GATE VALVE INSTALLATION W-3 May 2006
AIR RELEASE VALVE ASSEMBLY (TYPE 1) W-4A May 2006
AIR RELEASE VALVE ASSEMBLY (TYPE 2) W-4B May 2006
1 INCH THROUGH 2 INCH WATER SERVICE ASSEMBLY
W-5 May 2006
FLUSHING VALVE INSTALLATION W-6 May 2006
HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL (DOWNWARD)
THRUST BLOCKING
W-7 May 2006
VERTICAL THRUST BLOCK W-8 May 2006
CONCRETE CRADLE AT VERTICAL BENDS W-9 Deleted in December
2001
TYPICAL RING CONNECTION W-10 May 2006
WATER LINE BORE AND CASING DETAIL W-11 May 2006
3 INCH AND LARGER METER VAULT W-12 May 2006
BLOW-OFF SUMP MANHOLE INSTALLATION W-13 May 2006
SERVICE LINE ENCASEMENT W-14 May 2006
CONCRETE ENCASEMENT W-15 May 2006
SANITARY SEWER DETAIL DETAIL NO. REVISION DATE
STANDARD SANITARY SEWER EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL
S-1A May 2006
STANDARD SANITARY SEWER EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL S-1B May 2006
PRECAST SANITARY SEWER MANHOLE S-2 May 2006
CAST-IN-PLACE SANITARY SEWER MANHOLE S-3 May 2006
DROP SANITARY SEWER MANHOLE S-4 May 2006
MANHOLE FRAME AND COVER S-5 May 2006
EXTENSION RING INSTALLATION S-6 May 2006
4 INCH SANITARY SEWER SERVICE S-7 May 2006
SANITARY SEWER MAIN LINE CLEANOUT S-8 May 2006
ABANDONMENT OF EXISTING MANHOLE S-9 May 2006
CONCRETE ENCASEMENT S-10 May 2006
SANITARY SEWER LINE BORE AND CASING S-11 May 2006
STORM SEWER DETAIL DETAIL NO. REVISION DATE
STORM SEWER EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL D-1 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL D-2 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL D-3 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER SUBSURFACE DRAIN D-4 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER INLET GENERAL NOTES D-5 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CURB INLET D-6 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER RECESSED CURB INLET D-7 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CURB INLET D-8 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER DROP INLET D-9 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER STORM DRAIN MANHOLE D-10 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER REINFORCED CONCRETE COLLAR D-11 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CURBED FLUME AND PILOT CHANNELS
D-12 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CONCRETE RIPRAP D-13 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER SLOPING HEADWALL D-14 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER VERTICAL HEADWALL D-15 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CULVERT SAFETY END TREATMENTS
D-16A MAY 2006
STORM SEWER SAFETY END TREATMENT RUNNERS
D-16B MAY 2006

APPENDIX B-1: HYDROLOGY
PRELIMINARY DRAFT
APPENDIX B-1
APPENDIX B-1.1
Tc Graph for Sheet Flow (Upland Method)
Tc Graph for Shallow Concentrated Flow
Lake Worth IDF Curve
SCS Curve Numbers
APPENDIX B-1
APPENDIX B-1.2
APPENDIX B-1.3
APPENDIX B-1.4
APPENDIX B-1.5
APPENDIX B-1.6
APPENDIX B-1.7
APPENDIX B-1.8
APPENDIX B-1.9
APPENDIX B-2: HYDRAULIC EQUATIONS
PRELIMINARY DRAFT
APPENDIX B-2
APPENDIX B-2.1
Manning's Equation
Gutter Discharge
On Grade Curb Inlet Capacity
Grate Inlet Capacity
Height of Superelevation of Water in a Bend
Minor Head Loss Equations
Froude Number Calculation
APPENDIX B-2
APPENDIX B-2.2
The following is the Manning's Equation:
2 3 1 2 1.486
S
n
=
where,
Q = Total Discharge (cfs)
n = Coefficient of roughness (Manning's n)
A = Cross Section area of flow (SF)
R = A/P = Hydraulic radius of the flow (ft)
P = Wetted perimeter (ft)
Sf = Slope of the frictional gradient (ft/ft)
When combined with the continuity equation (Q = VA), the Manning's Equation can solve for
velocity:
2
1
3
1.486 2
S
n
=
For streets with straight crowns, the gutter section will resemble a triangular channel. The equation
to determine gutter discharge is as follows:
1 2 1 2 0.56 S
n
=
where,
Q = Gutter Discharge (cfs)
Z = Reciprocal of the crown slope (ft/ft)
n = Coefficient of roughness (Manning's n)
S = Longitudinal street or gutter slope (ft/ft)
Y = Depth of flow at curb (ft)
The following table includes values for Manning's 'n' for use in the gutter discharge equation:
Concrete gutter with asphalt pavement
rough
0.015
Concrete pavement broom finish 0.016
APPENDIX B-2.3
To determine the capacity of a curb inlet on grade, first determine the ratio of the flow in the locally
depressed gutter section to the total flow in the road.
??
??
?
??
??
?
? ?
?
?
? ?
?
?
- ?
??
?
? ??
?
-
= + +
-1
2.67
1
1
1/ 1 1
S S
S
S
o
where,
Eo = Ratio of flow in the depressed gutter to the total flow
Sw = Gutter cross slope (ft/ft)
Sx = Roadway cross slope (ft/ft)
T = Width of flow in roadway (ft)
W = Width of depressed gutter section (ft)
Then calculate the equivalent cross slope at the depressed curb inlet opening.
o
a
S =S +
where,
Se = Equivalent cross slope (ft/ft)
Sx = Roadway cross slope (ft/ft)
a = Gutter Depression Depth (ft)
W = Width of depressed gutter section (ft)
Eo = Ratio of flow in the depressed gutter to the total flow
Then calculate the inlet length required to capture 100% of the gutter flow.
0.6
0.42 0.3 1
60 . 0 ? ?
?
?
? ?
?
?
=
nS
S
where,
LT = Required length of inlet (ft)
Q = Total flow in the roadway (cfs)
SL = Roadway longitudinal slope (ft/ft)
n = Manning's 'n' value
Se = Equivalent cross slope (ft/ft)
APPENDIX B-2.4
The efficiency of a curb inlet opening shorter than LT is:
1.8
1 1 ? ?
?
?
? ?
?
?
= - -
where,
E = Inlet Efficiency
L = Length of the curb inlet opening (ft)
LT = Required length of inlet to capture 100% of the roadway flow (ft)
The total flow captured by the curb inlet is:
=
where,
Qi = Flow capture by inlet (cfs)
E = Inlet Efficiency
Q = Total flow in the roadway (cfs)
A grate inlet in a sag will either act as a weir or an orifice, depending upon the depth of ponding at
the grate. The total flow captured by a grate inlet is equal to the lesser total of these two equations.
1.5 =3.0
where,
Qiw = Flow captured by inlet (cfs)
P = Perimeter of the grate (2W+2L-width of bars in grate) (ft)
d = Depth of ponding at the grate (ft)
0.5 0.67 2gd g =
where,
Qio = Flow captured by inlet (cfs)
Ag = Clear opening of the grate (SF)
P = Perimeter of the grate (ft)
d = Depth of ponding at the grate (ft)
The smaller of these two flow values shall be used to determine the flow captured by a grate inlet.
Whichever equation is used, the flow value shall be halved, to take potential grate blockage into
account.
APPENDIX B-2.5
An equation that can be used to determine the height of the superelevation of the water in a bend is:
2
=
where,
Hs = height of superelevation of the water around a bend (ft)
c = Coefficient, see table below
V = Velocity around the bend (fps)
w = Top width of flow (ft)
g = Gravity constant, (32.2 ft/s/s)
r = Radius in the bend (ft)
Tranquil Rectangular Simple Circular 0.5
Tranquil Trapezoidal Simple Circular 0.5
Rapid Rectangular Simple Circular 1.0
Rapid Trapezoidal Simple Circular 1.0
Rapid Rectangular Spiral Transitions 0.5
Rapid Trapezoidal Spiral Transitions 1.0
Rapid Rectangular Spiral Banked 0.5
APPENDIX B-2.6
2g
2
= 1
where,
HL = Head loss (feet)
V1 = Velocity in the downstream pipe (fps)
Ke = Head loss coefficient
g = Gravitational acceleration (32.2 ft/sec/sec)
2g
1 2
1
2
2 2
1 -
=
where,
HL = Head loss (feet)
V1 = Velocity in the upstream pipe (fps)
D1 = Upstream pipe diameter (ft)
D2 = Downstream pipe diameter (ft)
g = Gravitational acceleration (32.2 ft/sec/sec)
Head losses associated with bends in pipes of equal diameter shall be calculated using:
g
b
2
2
= 2
where,
HL = Head loss (feet)
Kb = Head loss coefficient
V2 = Velocity in the downstream pipe (fps)
g = Gravitational acceleration (32.2 ft/sec/sec)
APPENDIX B-2.7
2g 2g
2
1
2
= 2 -
where,
HL = Head loss (feet)
V1 = Velocity in the upstream pipe (fps)
V2 = Velocity in the downstream pipe (fps)
Kj = Head loss coefficient
g = Gravitational acceleration (32.2 ft/sec/sec)
The Froude Number can be calculated using the following equation:
1 2
Fr =
where,
Fr = Froude number
V = Velocity (fps)
g = Gravitational acceleration (32.2 ft/sec/sec)
y = Depth of flow (ft)
The Froude Number is used to define the flow regime. The following table gives regime type based
on the Froude Number and range for design purposes.
Subcritical Fr<1 Fr<0.86
Critical Fr=1 NA
Supercritical Fr>1 NA
APPENDIX B-2.8
APPENDIX B-3: HYDRAULIC TABLES
PRELIMINARY DRAFT
APPENDIX B-3
APPENDIX B-3.1
Minimum Slopes in Concrete Pipes
Maximum Permissible Velocities in Conduits Flowing
Full and Channels
Entrance Loss Coefficients
Junction or Structure Loss Coefficients
Head Loss Coefficients due to Sudden Expansions and
Contractions
Head Loss Coefficients due to Obstructions
APPENDIX B-3
APPENDIX B-3.2
to produce a velocity of 2.5 fps or greater (in partial flow conditions)
18 .180 42 .056
21 .150 45 .052
24 .120 48 .048
27 .110 51 .045
30 .090 54 .041
33 .080 60 .036
36 .070 66 .032
39 .062 72 .028
Culverts 15
Inlet Laterals 10
Storm Sewers 12.5
Earthen Channels 6
Lined Channels 15
APPENDIX B-3.3
2g
2
= 1
Projecting from fill, socket-end (groove-end) 0.2
Projecting from fill, square cut end 0.5
Headwall or headwall and wingwalls
Socket end of pipe (groove-end) 0.2
Square-edge 0.5
Rounded (radius = 1/12D) 0.2
Mitered to conform to fill slope 0.7
End-section conforming to fill slope 0.5
Beveled edges, 33o to 45o bevels 0.2
Side- or slope-tapered inlet 0.2
Projecting from fill (no headwall) 0.9
Headwall or headwall and wingwalls square
edged
0.5
Mitered to conform to fill slope, paved or
unpaved slope 0.7
End-section conforming to fill slope 0.5
Beveled edges, 33o to 45o bevels 0.2
Side- or slope-tapered inlet 0.2
Headwall parallel to embankment (no wingwalls)
Square-edged on 3 edges 0.5
Rounded on 3 edges to radius of 1/12 barrel
dimension or beveled on 3 sides 0.2
Wingwalls at 30o to 75o to barrel
Square-edged at crown 0.4
Crown edge rounded to radius of 1/12 barrel
dimension, or beveled top edge 0.2
Wingwall at 10o to 25o to barrel
Square-edged at crown 0.5
Wingwall parallel (extension of sides)
Square-edged at crown 0.7
Side- or slope-tapered inlet 0.2
APPENDIX B-3.4
Inlet on Main Line 0.50
Inlet on Main Line with Lateral 0.25
Manhole on Main Line with 22-1/2o Lateral 0.75
Manhole on Main Line with 45o Lateral 0.50
Manhole on Main Line with 60o Lateral 0.35
Manhole on Main Line with 90o Lateral 0.25
45o Wye Connection or Cut-In 0.75
60o Wye Connection or Cut-In 0.70
Inlet or Manhole at Beginning of Line 1.25
90
o
60
o
45
o
22.5
o
Pipe Radius = Diameter 0.50 0.43 0.35 0.20
Pipe Radius = 2x to 8x Diameter 0.25 0.21 0.18 0.10
Pipe Radius = 8x to 20x Diameter 0.40 0.34 0.28 0.16
2/D1*
1.2 0.08
1.4 0.18
1.6 0.25
1.8 0.33
2.0 0.36
2.5 0.40
3.0 0.42
4.0 0.44
5.0 0.45
10.0 0.46
0.47
* D2/D1 = Ratio of larger to smaller diameter.
APPENDIX B-3.5
o * o *
1.0 0.10 3.0 15.0
1.0 0.21 4.0 27.3
1.2 0.50 5.0 42.0
1.4 1.15 6.0 57.0
1.6 2.40 7.0 72.5
1.8 4.00 8.0 88.0
2.0 5.55 9.0 104.0
2.2 7.05 10.0 121.0
2.5 9.70
A/Ao = Ratio of area of pipe to area of opening at obstruction.
APPENDIX B-3.6
APPENDIX B-4: HYDRAULIC FIGURES
PRELIMINARY DRAFT
APPENDIX B-4
APPENDIX B-3.4
US DOT Culvert Design Charts
APPENDIX B-4
APPENDIX B-4.2
APPENDIX B-4.3
APPENDIX B-4.4
APPENDIX B-4.5
APPENDIX B-4.6
APPENDIX B-5: SAMPLE DETENTION CALCULATIONS
PRELIMINARY DRAFT
APPENDIX B-5
APPENDIX B-5.1
Sample Detention Calculations
APPENDIX B-5
APPENDIX B-5.2
The following is an example of the calculations of the sizing of a detention pond using the Modified Rational
Method:
GIVEN: A 10-acre site is to be developed for Neighborhood Commercial. The entire site contributes
to the drainage area of the proposed detention basin.
DETERMINE: Maximum release rate and required detention storage.
SOLUTION: 1. Determine the 100-year peak runoff rate for the site in single family conditions. This is
the maximum release rate from the site after development.
2. Determine inflow hydrograph for storms of various durations in order to determine the
maximum volume required with the release rate determined in Step 1.
Step 1
Single Family Conditions
C = 0.55
Tc = 15 minutes
I100 = 9.6 in/hr
A = 10 acres
Q100 = 0.55 x 9.6 x 10 = 52.8 cfs (Maximum release rate)
Step 2
Ultimate Conditions (Neighborhood Commercial)
C = 0.80
Tc = 10 minutes
I100 = 11.6
A = 10 acres
Q100 = 0.80 x 11.6 x 10 = 81.2 cfs
Check various duration storms
15 min I = 9.6 Q = .80 x 9.6 x 10 = 76.8 cfs
20 min I = 8.2 Q = .80 x 8.2 x 10 = 65.6 cfs
30 min I = 6.6 Q = .80 x 6.6 x 10 = 52.8 cfs
40 min I = 5.5 Q = .80 x 5.5 x 10 = 44.0 cfs
50 min I = 4.8 Q = .80 x 4.8 x 10 = 38.4 cfs
60 min I = 4.2 Q = .80 x 4.2 x 10 = 33.6 cfs
APPENDIX B-5.3
Maximum storage volume is determined by deducting the volume of runoff released during the time of inflow
from the total inflow for each duration.
Inflow = Storm duration x respective peak discharge x 60 sec/min.
Outflow = Half of the respective inflow duration x control release discharge x 60 sec/min
15 min storm Inflow 15 x 76.8 x 60 sec/min = 69,120 cf
Outflow 0.5 x 25 x 52.8 x 60 sec/min = 39,600 cf
Storage = 29,520 cf
20 min storm Inflow 20 x 65.6 x 60 sec/min = 78,720 cf
Outflow 0.5 x 30 x 52.8 x 60 sec/min = 47,520 cf
Storage = 31,200 cf
30 min storm Inflow 30 x 52.8 x 60 sec/min = 95,040 cf
Outflow 0.5 x 40 x 52.8 x 60 sec/min = 63,360 cf
Storage = 31,680 cf
40 min storm Inflow 40 x 44.0 x 60 sec/min = 105,600 cf
Outflow 0.5 x 50 x 52.8 x 60 sec/min = 79,200 cf
Storage = 26,400 cf
50 min storm Inflow 50 x 38.4 x 60 sec/min = 115,200 cf
Outflow 0.5 x 60 x 52.8 x 60 sec/min = 95,040 cf
Storage = 20,160 cf
60 min storm Inflow 60 x 33.6 x 60 sec/min = 120,960 cf
Outflow 0.5 x 70 x 52.8 x 60 sec/min = 110,880 cf
Storage = 10,080 cf
The maximum volume required is 22,500 cf at the 30 minute storm duration.
APPENDIX B-5.4
APPENDIX B-6: STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
PRELIMINARY DRAFT
APPENDIX B-6: STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
PAVING DETAIL DETAIL NO. REVISION DATE
CONCRETE STREET SECTIONS P-1 MAY 2006
STEEL LAYOUT PLAN P-2 MAY 2006
INTERSECTION JOINT SPACING P-3A MAY 2006
CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINTS P-3B MAY 2006
CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINTS P-3C MAY 2006
STANDARD CURB AND GUTTER P-4 MAY 2006
LAYDOWN CURB AND RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY P-5A MAY 2006
LAYDOWN CURB AND COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY P-5B MAY 2006
STREET HEADER P-6 MAY 2006
TYPICAL ALLEY SECTION P-7 MAY 2006
WHEELCHAIR RAMP P-8 MAY 2006
CONCRETE SIDEWALK P-9 MAY 2006
MANHOLE AND WATER VALVE BOXOUT P10-A MAY 2006
MANHOLE AND WATER VALVE BOXOUT P10-B MAY 2006
CURB AND GUTTER, SIDEWALK, AND DRIVEWAY
TYPICAL JOINT LAYOUT
P-11 MAY 2006
MEDIAN NOSE P-12 MAY 2006
LEFT TURN LANE IN MEDIAN P-13 MAY 2006
RIGHT TURN LANE WITHOUT CHANNELIZATION P-14 MAY 2006
RIGHT TURN LANE WITH CHANNELIZATION P-15 MAY 2006
CONCRETE VALLEY P-16 MAY 2006
DEAD END BARRICADE P-17 MAY 2006
METAL BEAM GUARDRAIL P-18 MAY 2006
STANDARD WOODEN FENCE P-19 MAY 2006
STANDARD MASONRY FENCE P-20A MAY 2006
STANDARD MASONRY FENCE P-20B MAY 2006
Minor Update - City Staff or City Engineer to update page numbers in Appendices B-1
through B-6, detail sheet numbers and dates for all tables once updated regulations are
approved.
MAY 2019



























PRELIMINARY DRAFT
STORM SEWER DETAIL DETAIL NO. REVISION DATE
STORM SEWER EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL D-1 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL D-2 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL D-3 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER SUBSURFACE DRAIN D-4 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER INLET GENERAL NOTES D-5 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CURB INLET D-6 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER RECESSED CURB INLET D-7 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CURB INLET D-8 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER DROP INLET D-9 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER STORM DRAIN MANHOLE D-10 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER REINFORCED CONCRETE COLLAR D-11 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CURBED FLUME AND PILOT
CHANNELS
D-12 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CONCRETE RIPRAP D-13 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER SLOPING HEADWALL D-14 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER VERTICAL HEADWALL D-15 MAY 2006
STORM SEWER CULVERT SAFETY END TREATMENTS D-16A MAY 2006
STORM SEWER SAFETY END TREATMENT RUNNERS D-16B MAY 2006
MAY 2019

















PRELIMINARY DRAFT
SANITARY SEWER DETAIL DETAIL NO. REVISION DATE
STANDARD SANITARY SEWER EMBEDMENT AND
BACKFILL
S-1A May 2006
STANDARD SANITARY SEWER EMBEDMENT AND
BACKFILL
S-1B May 2006
PRECAST SANITARY SEWER MANHOLE S-2 May 2006
CAST-IN-PLACE SANITARY SEWER MANHOLE S-3 May 2006
DROP SANITARY SEWER MANHOLE S-4 May 2006
MANHOLE FRAME AND COVER S-5 May 2006
EXTENSION RING INSTALLATION S-6 May 2006
4 INCH SANITARY SEWER SERVICE S-7 May 2006
SANITARY SEWER MAIN LINE CLEANOUT S-8 May 2006
ABANDONMENT OF EXISTING MANHOLE S-9 May 2006
CONCRETE ENCASEMENT S-10 May 2006
SANITARY SEWER LINE BORE AND CASING S-11 May 2006
MAY 2019












PRELIMINARY DRAFT
WATER DETAIL DETAIL NO. REVISION DATE
STANDARD WATER LINE EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL W-1A May 2006
STANDARD WATER LINE EMBEDMENT AND BACKFILL W-1B May 2006
FIRE HYDRANT INSTALLATION W-2 May 2006
GATE VALVE INSTALLATION W-3 May 2006
AIR RELEASE VALVE ASSEMBLY (TYPE 1) W-4A May 2006
AIR RELEASE VALVE ASSEMBLY (TYPE 2) W-4B May 2006
1 INCH THROUGH 2 INCH WATER SERVICE ASSEMBLY W-5 May 2006
FLUSHING VALVE INSTALLATION W-6 May 2006
HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL (DOWNWARD) THRUST
BLOCKING
W-7 May 2006
VERTICAL THRUST BLOCK W-8 May 2006
CONCRETE CRADLE AT VERTICAL BENDS W-9 Deleted in
December 2001
TYPICAL RING CONNECTION W-10 May 2006
WATER LINE BORE AND CASING DETAIL W-11 May 2006
3 INCH AND LARGER METER VAULT W-12 May 2006
BLOW-OFF SUMP MANHOLE INSTALLATION W-13 May 2006
SERVICE LINE ENCASEMENT W-14 May 2006
CONCRETE ENCASEMENT W-15 May 2006
MAY 2019
















