7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/334
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of La Feria, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of La Feria, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city commission, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
city commission:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of La Feria, Texas.
City commission. The city commission of the City of La Feria, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city manager,” “city secretary,”
“chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary,
chief of police or such other municipal officer or department, respectively, of the City of La Feria, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/334
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Cameron, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A, Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/334
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses
and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall
be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation in the code
of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/334
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city commission for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of,
or additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent
and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during
the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall
be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/334
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Code compliance
(a) [The city has] provided for the fees, found in section A1.01.010 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this
code, to be charged for code compliance activities completed by city employees on private property.
(b) Such fees for code compliance activities completed by city employees are in addition to any fines that may
be imposed by the court as a result of prosecution for a misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 2010-15 adopted 9/28/10)
ARTICLE 1.02 DISCRIMINATION
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.02.001–1.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing*
Sec. 1.02.031 Title
This division shall hereinafter be cited as the “Fair Housing Ordinance of the City of La Feria.” (1995 Code, sec.
1.401)
Sec. 1.02.032 Discrimination declared unlawful
Discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status,
parenthood or age in the sale or rental of housing, in the financing of housing, or in the provision of brokerage
services is declared to be against the public policy of the city, and any act of discrimination, as defined herein,
shall constitute a misdemeanor and subject the offender to a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision
found in section 1.01.009 of this chapter. (1995 Code, sec. 1.402)
Sec. 1.02.033 Discrimination in sale or rental of housing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/334
No person (including one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries) shall:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or
rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex or national origin.
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex or national origin.
(3) Make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or
advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation,
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex or national origin, or an intention to make such
preference, limitation, or discrimination.
(4) Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons
of a particular race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
(1995 Code, sec. 1.403)
Sec. 1.02.034 Discrimination in financing of housing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation,
association, firm or enterprise whose business consists, in whole or in part, in the making of commercial real
estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of
purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or to discriminate against him in the
fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, or national origin of such person or of any person associated
with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other
financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or
dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. (1995 Code, sec.
1.404)
Sec. 1.02.035 Discrimination in provision of brokerage services
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service,
real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation on account of race, color, religion, sex or national origin. (1995 Code, sec. 1.405)
Sec. 1.02.036 Exclusions
This division shall not apply to the sale or rental of a single-family house by its owner or prevent a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or
controlled by, or in connection with, a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale,
rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of
the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on
account of race, color, sex or national origin. Nor shall anything in this division prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public which, as incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/334
operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its
members, or from giving preference to its members. The provisions of 42 USC section 3603(b) and 42 USC
section 3603(c) shall govern the exemption herein provided with respect to the sale or rental of a single-family
house by its owners, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein by reference for all purposes. (1995
Code, sec. 1.406)
Sec. 1.02.037 Interference, coercion or intimidation declared unlawful
It shall further be unlawful under this division to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of having aided or
encouraged other persons in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this division. Any
person violating the provisions hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as provided for in the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this chapter. (1995 Code, sec. 1.407)
Sec. 1.02.038 Designation of fair housing officer
The city secretary is hereby designated as the fair housing officer of the city, and any person aggrieved by an
adverse decision of any vendor, lessor, financing institution, real estate broker, or any person who feels he has
been interfered with, coerced, or intimidated with respect to the rights hereby granted by this division shall make
a complaint to the fair housing officer on a form provided by said officer for that purpose. Upon receipt of any
such complaint, the fair housing officer shall investigate the complaint and shall attempt to conciliate the dispute
to secure voluntary compliance with the provisions hereof. In the event voluntary compliance is not
forthcoming, the fair housing officer shall forward the aggrieved person's complaint to the appropriate
department or agency of the United States government for action in conformity with 42 USC section 3601 et
seq. The fair housing officer is also authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development in the enforcement of the Fair Housing Law (42 USC sections 3601–3619) and may receive
reimbursement, on behalf of the municipality, for services rendered in the enforcement of said act. (1995 Code,
sec. 1.408)
ARTICLE 1.03 EMERGENCIES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.03.001 Emergency response by city officers, agents or employees
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to
act with ordinary and reasonable care that would be exercised by a person of ordinary prudence under the
circumstances. In the event of premises defects, the city shall be under a duty to repair after reasonable actual
notice and shall be afforded a reasonable time for such repair. This provision shall prevail over every other
ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law
establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee, officer, or agent
shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care. (1995 Code, art. 1.700)
Secs. 1.03.002–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Management*
Sec. 1.03.031 Organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor, or
other designated official as identified in the emergency management plan, in accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. The
city manager is hereby appointed as the emergency management coordinator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/334
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. He/she may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the
director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officer and employees
of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in
accordance with the term of the emergency management plan.
Sec. 1.03.032 Director's powers and duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards, which threaten life and property within the city and
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures, which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city.
He shall recommend for adoption by the city commission all mutual aid arrangements deemed
necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with consent of the city commission. Any order
or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives, which are necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this division. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be
disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public
and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city
secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization as well as
training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the purpose of improving emergency management within
the city.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/334
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purpose.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and service, which
could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (Chapter 418 of the Government
Code).
Sec. 1.03.033 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this division, all in accordance with the National Incident Management System (NIMS). As provided by state
law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management.
Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of
the departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the
plan in the current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this division and have the effect of the law during the time of a disaster.
Sec. 1.03.034 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith.
Sec. 1.03.035 Liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation pursuant to the provisions of this
division shall be liable for any damage sustained to person as the results of said activity. Any person owning or
controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of
privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real
estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impeding, or practice enemy attack or
natural or manmade disaster shall together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the
death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission of for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
Sec. 1.03.036 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this division without prior approval by the city commission, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city
commission unless during a declared disaster.
Sec. 1.03.037 Offenses; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/334
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by the maximum fine
allowed by law.
Sec. 1.03.038 Limitations
This division shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or
naval order, rule, or regulation.
(Ordinance 2006-11 adopted 8/31/06)
Secs. 1.03.039–1.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Mitigation Action Plan
Sec. 1.03.071 Adopted
The city mitigation action plan is hereby approved, and submission to the governor's division of emergency
management and the Federal Emergency Management Agency is hereby authorized. (Ordinance 2004-08
adopted 6/10/04)
Secs. 1.03.072–1.03.100 Reserved
Division 4. Incident Management
Sec. 1.03.101 System adopted
The city hereby adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004. (Ordinance 2005-14
adopted 8/25/05)
ARTICLE 1.04 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.04.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to them is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received
by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 1,
adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.002 Additional definitions
Department head. The officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that
creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of its operations in an
emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of its legal and financial status, or to the protection and fulfillment of
obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records schedule is given as
permanent.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/334
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.04.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.04.006 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 2, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.04.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city.
No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such
records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal
from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 3, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management from creation to ultimate disposition,
consistent with the requirements of the state Local Government Records Act and accepted records management
practice. (Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 4, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.005 Designation of records management officer
The office of the city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management
officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with
the director and librarian of the state library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office,
as applicable. (Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 5, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.006 Development of records management plan; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to
the city commission. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve
the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly
preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the
records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city commission, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city, and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/334
article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis
for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 6, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.007 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for
each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city,
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records
control schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(8) Disseminate to the city commission and department heads information concerning state laws
and administrative rules relating to local government records;
(9) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the
records of the city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program and the requirements of state law;
(10) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed
or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or
disposition;
(11) Report annually to the city commission on the implementation of the records management
plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled
under subsection (10); and
(12) Bring to the attention of the city commission noncompliance by department heads or other
municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the
Local Government Records Act.
(Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 7, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.008 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/334
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 8, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.009 Records control schedules development, approval, filing with the state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control
schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records series created or received by the department
and the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information
regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and the city commission.
(d) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 9, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.010 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.04.009
shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management
plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the city commission.
(Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 10, adopted 3/11/04)
Sec. 1.04.011 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/334
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (Ordinance 2004-05, sec. 11, adopted 3/11/04)
ARTICLE 1.05 LIBRARY
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.05.001 Use of materials
(a) No person shall remove or borrow any books, articles or library materials from the premises of the Bailey
H. Dunlap Memorial Library unless and until said removal of books, articles or materials have been consented
to, recorded and charged out at the circulation desk of said library.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to retain or fail to return any books, articles or materials beyond the
date designated by the library employee or officer at the time said book, article or material is removed by
consent of the library and charged out to the person removing same at the library or any extensions of time
granted in writing by the library.
(c) Any person failing to return any book, article or other material on or before the date designated as
provided in subsection (b) shall be liable for fine or late charge for each day of such retention as provided by the
rules and regulations of the Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial Library Board. If the offending person or borrower of
the book, article, or material is under eighteen (18) years of age, then the parent or guardian of such person shall
be notified by certified mail at the last known address contained in the library records of the default and
violation of the provisions of this division. The failure to return the books, articles or materials within ten (10)
days after mailing of such notice by certified mail shall cause said fine and late charge to be assessed against
such parent or guardian.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to register or furnish a false name or address or to forge or to furnish
false identification or card not belonging to said person for the purpose of borrowing or removing any book,
article or material from the Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial Library.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to direct, request, allow or otherwise permit or allow any other person
whomsoever to borrow or use his or her official Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial Library card for the purpose of
borrowing any library books or other materials owned or under the control of the Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial
Library.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to give written notice to library personnel at the circulation desk
at the Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial Library within seven (7) calendar days after said person knows or should have
known that his/her official Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial Library Card has been lost or stolen.
(g) (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to return to the circulation desk at the Bailey H.
Dunlap Memorial Library any materials of whatever character which are owned or under the control
of said library within ten (10) calendar days of the date of mailing of a letter via certified mail, return
receipt requested, by the library director or such other person designated by the library director
advising such person that the library materials are more than four (4) weeks overdue and further
advising that a complaint will be filed in the city municipal court against such person by the library
director or such employee designated by the library director if such person does not return such
materials to the circulation desk of the Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial Library within ten (10) calendar
days from the date of mailing of such letter.
(2) In the event the borrower of library materials is a minor, the certified mail notice provided for
above shall be mailed to the parents or guardian of said minor, and it shall be unlawful for the parent
or guardian of such minor to fail to return such library materials to the circulation desk of the Bailey
H. Dunlap Memorial Library within ten (10) calendar days of the date of mailing such letter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/334
(3) In addition to the maximum penalty, in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth
in section 1.01.009 of this chapter, provided in this article for violation of any provisions hereof, any
person who fails to return library materials in accordance with this section shall pay an administrative
charge as provided for in section A1.05.001 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code to defray
the costs of preparation and mailing of the certified mail letter(s) provided for in this section.
(h) It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface, cut, tear, disfigure, or destroy any books, articles or
other library materials or any part thereof which belong to or were borrowed from the Bailey H. Dunlap
Memorial Library.
(1995 Code, sec. 1.1001)
Sec. 1.05.002 Entry upon lawn
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to enter upon the lawn or other public grounds of the Bailey H.
Dunlap Memorial Library when forbidden to do so by an official sign posted on such grounds or by other
official notification. (1995 Code, sec. 1.1002)
Sec. 1.05.003 Conduct on library premises
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter in or upon any library lands or building or to
obstruct or molest the free passage of other persons in and from said library lands or buildings.
(b) No person shall loiter on the library lands or in its building in such a manner as to create or cause to be
created a danger or a breach of the peace or whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned.
(c) No person shall obstruct, annoy, molest, hinder, threaten, insult or interfere with any person legally
enjoying the privileges and use of the library nor shall such offending person make or cause to be made any
loud, disturbing or offensive noises or remarks in and upon the grounds and premises of the library.
(1995 Code, sec. 1.1003)
Sec. 1.05.004 Vandalism
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully or maliciously commit any vandalism or injury or
damage to or upon the lands or buildings of the Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial Library or any of its real or personal
property including, without limitation, any furniture, fixtures, shelving, equipment, books, pictures or other
artwork belonging to or in the possession of the Bailey H. Dunlap Memorial Library. (1995 Code, sec. 1.1004)
Sec. 1.05.005 Use of facilities
All facilities in the library shall be used for library purposes only. Meeting rooms may be used by nonprofit
organizations with the permission of the librarian provided that such nonprofit organizations observe all rules
and regulations governing the use of the meeting rooms. (1995 Code, sec. 1.1005)
Sec. 1.05.006 Penalty for violations
Each violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class C misdemeanor and shall be punishable by
a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009 of this chapter, upon
conviction in the municipal court. Each day in which a violation occurs shall constitute and be punishable as a
separate offense. (1995 Code, sec. 1.1006)
Secs. 1.05.007–1.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Public Library Board
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/334
Sec. 1.05.041 Established; membership
A commission to be known as the public library board, which has been previously established, shall be
composed of six appointive members and the mayor or his designated representative. Present library board
members shall remain on the board until their appointed terms expire. Upon the expiration of each term of each
of the appointive members, the vacancy or vacancies shall be filled on the 15th day of January each year by a
majority vote of those members of the board whose terms do not expire that year, subject to city commission
approval, and will serve for a term of three years. Any library board vacancy which occurs before the normal
date of expiration may be filled in the same manner described above. The mayor or his designated representative
shall always be an active and participating voting member of the library board. It is a city goal and the library
board must strive to attain a balance of members from inside and outside the limits of the city. In view of the
present board constituency, as each board member's term expires, the position should be filled by a city resident
until that balance of members sitting on this board is attained. (1995 Code, sec. 8.401)
Sec. 1.05.042 Bylaws, rules and regulations
The board shall amend its bylaws, rules, and regulations for the conduct of its meetings and its organization to
comport with this division, and all bylaws, rules and regulations of the board to be effective must be approved
by the city commission. (1995 Code, sec. 8.402)
Sec. 1.05.043 Accountability
The public library [board] shall be responsible to the city commission for efficient and proper operation of the
library. In this regard, the public library board shall make complete and comprehensive recommendations to the
city commission regarding payments to be made for library maintenance, salaries, replacement or acquisition of
books, and any other items that the public library board deems reasonable and necessary. The books and records
containing the financial information and all checking accounts, checkbooks or other financial records shall be
kept and maintained by the city finance department and shall at any and all times be located at city hall. All
expenditures must receive advance approval from the city finance department through the issuance of purchase
orders by that department. All checks written on behalf of the library must have the signature of one authorized
city staff member or the mayor plus the signature of the authorized library board member to be valid. (1995
Code, sec. 8.403)
Sec. 1.05.044 Powers and duties
The powers and duties of the public library board shall be to:
(1) Appoint a librarian for the public library who shall serve at the pleasure of the board and whose
successor shall be appointed from time to time by the board and shall serve at the pleasure of the
board. All appointments will be confirmed by a majority vote of the city commission.
(2) Determine and establish all general policies and program for the operation, conduct and
management of the public library and its personnel, with the approval of the city commission.
(3) The public library board shall be responsible for submitting to the city commission for its
approval a recommended proposed budget for the public library for the ensuing fiscal year, which
shall run concurrently with the fiscal year of the city. This shall be accomplished no later than July
31st of each year.
(4) Make recommendations on the maintenance, expansion, replacement or acquisition of books
and any other financial necessities of the public library.
(5) Establish general rules and regulations concerning the use by the public of the public library as
the board may deem advisable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/334
(6) Make recommendations to the city commission for action on its part from time to time for the
benefit of the public library.
(7) Submit at least one written report annually to the city commission of the activities, work and
operation of the public library and its board.
(1995 Code, sec. 8.404)
Sec. 1.05.045 Duty of librarian
The librarian of the public library shall be executive and administrative head of the public library and shall be
responsible to the public library board and to the city commission for the efficient operation, management and
conduct of the library and the administration of such policies, rules, regulations and bylaws as the board, with
city commission approval, shall promulgate. (1995 Code, sec. 8.405)
Sec. 1.05.046 Budget
From year to year, the city shall include as part of the city's budget the basic financing of the library's operational
needs. The library board is encouraged by the city commission to secure, from time to time, as many memorial
contributions from clubs, organizations, and individuals from the county and state and any other sources as
possible to assist with the expansion, enlargement and operations of the library. (1995 Code, sec. 8.406)
Sec. 1.05.047 Removal from membership
Any member of the library board may be removed at any time, with cause, by a majority vote of the city
commission. (1995 Code, sec. 8.407)
ARTICLE 1.06 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.06.001 Parks described
These areas are described as:
(1) Scott Sloane Memorial Park: Block 30 of the La Feria original townsite;
(2) East Park: Boulevard on East Street between Magnolia Street and Jessamine Street;
(3) West Park or Tony Unger Park: Boulevard on West Street between Magnolia and Jessamine
Streets; and
(1995 Code, sec. 1.1101)
(4) Tiny Town Park: An area between Blocks 16 and 22 of the La Feria original townsite or
described further as the area across Main Street from the library;
(5) Veterans Memorial Sports Complex: An area consisting of approximately 23.03 acres of land
out of Blocks 42, 43 and 44, Rabb Heights Subdivision and Block 22, La Feria Land and Irrigation
Company Subdivision;
(6) La Feria Wildlife and Nature Park: An area consisting of approximately 88 acres of land out of
Blocks 33 and 34, Rabb Heights and Blocks 69, 70 and 71, Rabb Heights #2 Subdivision;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/334
(7) Skateboard Park: Approximately 1/2 acre of land (fenced) out of Block 25, La Feria Land and
Irrigation Company Subdivision.
(Ordinance 2010-02 adopted 1/26/10)
Sec. 1.06.002 Regulations generally
All areas listed above:
(1) Will be closed to the public at 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday evenings and 11:00
p.m. on Friday and Saturday evenings except the Wildlife and Nature Park [will] be closed at sunset.
Areas will remain closed to the public until official sunrise the following day. (Ordinance 2010-02
adopted 1/26/10)
(2) Will not be used by any person or group of persons engaged in consuming alcoholic beverages
of any kind. This includes those parking and street areas abutting said areas. (1995 Code, sec. 1.1102)
Sec. 1.06.003 Private use of facilities
Private use of any of the park areas or facilities contained thereon, if authorized, must be scheduled with city hall prior to desired use,
said scheduling to be done on a first come, first served basis. Said applications are to be filed with the city clerk. An administrative fee
as provided for in section A1.06.003 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code will be required to reserve an area or facility, and
persons using same will be liable for any damage which may occur during said use and also responsible for cleanup of the reserved
area/facility after use. Private use of the Scott Sloane Memorial Park swimming pool will not normally be authorized. An exception to
this policy is use of the pool for La Feria public school organizations which must be scheduled with city hall and will be accomplished
on a first come, first served basis. Public use of the swimming pool is considered top priority for scheduling purposes. (1995 Code, sec.
1.1103)
Sec. 1.06.004 Closures
The city manager is authorized to temporarily close the park for public use if it is determined that the park
remaining open will be detrimental to the health and well-being of the public using the park facility. (Ordinance
2010-02 adopted 1/26/10)
Secs. 1.06.005–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parks and Recreation Board
Sec. 1.06.031 Established
A city parks board and recreation board is hereby established, said board being responsible for the conduct of a
well-rounded parks and recreation environment within the community. (1995 Code, sec. 8.301)
Sec. 1.06.032 Members
(a) Selected members of the community will serve as members of the city parks and recreation board, an
advisory board to the city commission.
(b) To insure continuity of the initial board, the selected individuals will serve terms of office as indicated
with follow-on terms of office for future board appointees being set at two (2) years, unless sooner replaced by
the city commission.
(1995 Code, sec. 8.302)
Sec. 1.06.033 Functions and responsibilities
(a) The board shall establish and elect officers of the board as it sees fit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/334
(b) The board shall make rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings insuring meeting minutes are
maintained, a copy of which will be provided to the city manager.
(c) All board meetings will fully comply with the Texas Open Meetings Law (V.T.C.A., Government Code,
chapter 551, as amended).
(d) The board shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and inspection of the city's parks and
recreation needs and so advise the city commission.
(e) The board shall consult with the city manager on all activities of the board to insure he/she is cognizant of
said activities.
(f) The board shall be active in local fundraising efforts thereby financially assisting community parks and
recreation needs.
(g) The board shall actively coordinate all their activities with other interested local agencies, in particular the
La Feria Independent School District.
(h) The board shall annually assist the city staff in developing a parks and recreation department budget.
(i) The board shall stay constantly aware of parks and recreation department budget expenditures to insure a
fiscally sound operation is being planned and conducted.
(j) The board shall act as “arbitrator” in resolving any dispute arising from any citizen or group of citizens
regarding recreation programs or objectives, understanding the right of any citizen to have complaints heard by
the city commission.
(k) The board shall be responsible for seeking and selecting appropriate volunteer assistance in satisfying
needed recreational activities.
(l) The board shall be responsible for the conduct of all city-sponsored recreational activities, members having
the authority to insure the highest standards of conduct from all participants and facility users.
(m) The board shall keep up with improvements and developments in the field of recreation and parks,
making appropriate recommendations to the city commission which are consistent with budgetary restraints.
(n) The board shall make an annual report to the city commission on its activities and work.
(1995 Code, sec. 8.303)
ARTICLE 1.07 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Sec. 1.07.001 Bylaws and articles of incorporation
Though not included in this Code of Ordinances, the bylaws and articles of incorporation of the industrial
development corporation, as certified by the secretary of state on September 10, 1990, are hereby specifically
retained and saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. (1995 Code, art.
8.800)
ARTICLE 1.08 CITY COMMISSION
Sec. 1.08.001 Meetings
(a) The city commission shall meet in at least two regular meetings per month for the transaction of business
of the city, except as identified in subsection (d) below.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/334
(b) The meetings shall be held at 6:30 p.m. on the 2nd and 4th Tuesday of each month, unless cancelled
pursuant to city commission vote on the meeting immediately prior to said cancelled meeting.
(c) During the months of November and December, the meetings shall be held at 6:30 p.m. on the 1st and 3rd
Tuesday, unless cancelled pursuant to city commission vote on the meeting immediately prior to said cancelled
meeting.
(d) Any properly posted workshop, joint, special, and/or emergency meeting(s) during said month may be held
in lieu of any regularly scheduled meeting(s).
(e) In the event a properly posted meeting was scheduled and a quorum of the city commission is not present
by 6:45 p.m. to call the meeting to order, no additional meeting is required to be called and any agenda item
requiring action of the commission shall be included at the next called meeting's agenda.
(f) Any regular meetings cancelled due to emergency or extenuating circumstances do not have to be
rescheduled.
(Ordinance 2008-01 adopted 1/10/08)
ARTICLE 1.09 PUBLIC RECORDS
Sec. 1.09.001 Availability
Upon reasonable notice and appropriate request from a requestor, public information will be available to the
public from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, excluding holidays.
Sec. 1.09.002 Inspection and copying
Pursuant to section 552.230 of the Government Code, the city does hereby establish rules of procedure for
inspection and copying of public information.
Sec. 1.09.003 Establishing costs and rates
Pursuant to sections 552.261 and 552.2615 of the Government Code, the city authorizes the city secretary,
officer for public information, or the officer's agent to establish costs and rates for photocopying, mailing,
facsimile transmission, materials, labor, and/or overhead as permitted by law.
Sec. 1.09.004 Deposit or bond for payment
Pursuant to section 552.263 of the Government Code, the city authorizes the city secretary, officer for public
information, or the officer's agent to require a deposit or bond for payment of anticipated costs for the
preparation of a copy of public information as permitted by law.
Sec. 1.09.005 Time limit
Pursuant to section 552.275 of the Government Code, the city authorizes the city secretary, officer for public
information, or the officer's agent to establish a reasonable limit on the amount of time that the city's personnel
are required to spend producing public information for inspection or duplication by a requestor, or providing
copies of public information to a requestor, without recovering its costs attributable to that personnel time, as
permitted by law.
Sec. 1.09.006 Rules, rates, and costs; other
The city secretary, officer for public information, or the officer's agent is authorized to promulgate any rules,
rates, and costs associated with the production of documents or data and not covered herein. All rules, rates, and
costs shall conform to the Texas Public Information Act.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/334
(Ordinance 2008-13 adopted 4/8/08)
ARTICLE 1.10 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 1.10.001 Authority
The city may sell, convey or exchange city-owned property to private, nonprofit entities qualifying under section
1.10.002 below for the purpose of development of affordable housing and economic development. The city shall
not be required to hold a public auction or solicit sealed bids in connection with any such sale, conveyance or
exchange. Any authorized sale, conveyance or exchange shall be on such terms and conditions which promote
the public purpose of affordable housing as determined by the city, including the conveyance of such land at less
than market value.
Sec. 1.10.002 Qualifying entity
A qualifying entity shall meet the following criteria:
(1) Be a nonprofit organization, described by 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(3) that develops affordable
housing as a primary activity;
(2) Be incorporated in the state for at least one year;
(3) Have a corporate purpose to develop affordable housing stated in its articles of incorporation or
bylaws;
(4) Engage primarily in the building, repair, rental, or sale of affordable housing;
(5) Have no fewer than two (2) or twenty-five percent (25%), whichever is more, of the members
of its board of directors be residents in the city; and
(6) Have at least one year's experience in the provision of quality, affordable housing in the city or
the surrounding area.
Sec. 1.10.003 Affordable housing
For purposes of this article, “affordable housing” shall be housing that is affordable to persons, families and
households that have incomes that do not exceed one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of the median family
income available from the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey or published by the Texas
Department of Agriculture, as modified over time.
Sec. 1.10.004 Condemned property
The authority granted in this article shall not apply to property acquired by the city by way of eminent domain.
(Ordinance 2013-03 adopted 4/9/13)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/334
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 2.02 CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.02.001 Applicability
This article shall apply to all vicious animals, livestock, dogs, cats, fowl, insects, reptiles and any other animals
to be kept within the city limits. (1995 Code, sec. 2.101)
Sec. 2.02.002 Definitions
Definitions of terms, as used in this article, are as follows:
Animal. Any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural.
At large. Off the premises of the owner or the custodian of the animal or fowl and not under the physical
restraint of the custodian or owner.
Cat. An animal of the domesticated feline species.
Dog. An animal of the domesticated canine species.
Fowl. Any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural.
Vicious animal. Any animal which has been raised for the sole or partial purpose of gamesmanship or any
animal which has a habit or reputation of charging, biting, mauling or attacking any human or other animal.
(1995 Code, sec. 2.104)
Sec. 2.02.003 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1995 Code, sec. 2.111)
Sec. 2.02.004 Requirements for keeping livestock, fowl, insects, reptiles or other animals
(a) Except as otherwise provided, the keeping of livestock, fowl, insects, reptiles or other animals within the
city limits shall be expressly prohibited unless an individual desiring to keep such animal or animals fits within
the following exceptions: (1995 Code, sec. 2.102; Ordinance adopting Code)
(1) The keeping of such animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary clinic as is necessary for
medical treatment.
(2) The wholesale or retail sale of such animal or animals as allowed herein.
(3) A kennel for boarding dogs, cats or other animals as allowed herein.
(4) Any shop providing for grooming of animals as allowed herein.
(b) In either exception (a)(1), (2), (3) or (4), a license will be required from the city, such license to be issued
upon meeting the requirements as provided by this article.
(1995 Code, sec. 2.102)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/334
Sec. 2.02.005 Bees, wasps, vicious animals, etc.
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any bees in the corporate limits of the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any vicious animals within the corporate limits of the city.
(c) Any nest of stinging insects, yellow jackets, hornets and/or wasps located within the corporate limits of the
city is hereby deemed a public nuisance and is a violation of this article.
(1995 Code, sec. 2.103)
Sec. 2.02.006 License for establishment selling more than ten animals
Licenses shall be required for the retail or wholesale sale of more than ten of any combination of dogs, cats,
livestock, pets, fowl, insects and/or reptiles, which establishments are within the city limits, veterinarian permits,
kennels or grooming shops. Licenses shall be issued for the same provided that the following requirements are
met:
(1) An inspection shall be made of the premises where such animals will be kept. The inspector
shall place a limitation on the numbers and/or kinds of dogs, cats or other animals which may be kept
upon the premises and other limitations and/or conditions may be placed upon the license to ensure
cleanliness and humane treatment of animals.
(2) Payment of inspection and other fees as may be required.
(3) The owner of the establishment shall present to the city proof of proper liability insurance in
regard to said animals. The applicant shall present proof to the city that the establishment conforms to
the city's zoning ordinance.
(4) Upon the issuance of any application for the above, such license shall be conspicuously
displayed at the establishment where it is readily available to public view.
(1995 Code, sec. 2.108(b))
Sec. 2.02.007 Barking, whining or howling animals
No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animal or animals to prevent them from becoming
a public nuisance, which such nuisance being defined as any animal which barks, whines or howls in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion to such an extent as to interfere with or prevent a citizen or citizens of
the city from obtaining the reasonable and necessary sleep, rest and relaxation normally and reasonably required
to maintain a person's health. (1995 Code, sec. 2.109)
Sec. 2.02.008 Horses on public streets
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or lead any horse on or across any public street in the city. Exception
to the above prohibition may be made for parades, law enforcement activities, and other exceptions as granted
by the city. Application for such exception shall be made to the city manager. Appeals from the decision of the
city manager may be made to the city commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (1995 Code, sec.
2.110)
Sec. 2.02.009 Responsibility for expenses
Animals that are running at large and captured by the city shall be impounded at the city's impoundment facility.
The owner of the animal may reclaim the animal by providing evidence of current vaccinations for the
impounded animal and paying fees to recover costs associated with the impoundment prior to the release of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/334
animal. Those fees are as provided for in section A2.02.009 of the fee schedule found in appendix A of this
code. These fees are in addition to any fines imposed. (Ordinance 2008-19 adopted 6/24/08)
Secs. 2.02.010–2.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Dogs and Cats
Sec. 2.02.041 Running at large
No dogs or cats shall run at large within the city limits. Any dog or cat running at large shall be impounded if the
same is not on a leash. Dogs shall not be left unattended on a chain if same is not on the premises of the owner.
If an animal is picked up, it will be held by the city for forty-eight (48) hours. During this period, efforts will be
made to identify and advise the owner of such animal to claim same and resolve any associated charges and/or
fees. If, after the forty-eight-hour period, the owner cannot be located, attempts will be made to locate the animal
with a humane society in the local area. If these attempts are successful, the animal will be transported to such
accepting shelter. If the attempts are unsuccessful, the animal will be turned over to the county health department
and the city will authorize the animal to be destroyed. If the owner is subsequently identified, he/she will be
required to pay all fees and/or charges for the above-described services. Paying these fees and/or charges does
not negate fines which can be assessed by the city for violation of the provisions of this article. If such fees, fines
and/or charges are not paid, the city will file charges against the owner for nonpayment in municipal court
and/or small claims court. (1995 Code, sec. 2.105; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.02.042 License required
(a) A dog or cat license shall be issued upon the following requirements:
(1) The owner shall fill out such form or forms listing information about the animal such as sex,
weight, color, pet owner's address and other information such as may be required by the city.
(2) Proof of rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian within seven (7) days of the application
for the license shall be presented.
(3) A nominal fee as provided for in section A2.02.042 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this
code shall be paid to the city for the issuance of the license and tags, such fees being used to defray
any expenses in the inspection and issuance of same.
(b) Each dog or cat kept within the city limits which is over four (4) months of age shall have a license for
each said cat or dog. The requirements for such license are as provided herein:
(1995 Code, secs. 2.106, 2.108(a))
(1) The license shall be required annually. (1995 Code, sec. 2.108(a); Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) Upon the issuing of each dog and/or cat license, a tag bearing the tag number, year, and/or
license number shall be issued and placed on the collar of each dog or cat.
(3) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to remove such tag from any licensed dog or
cat.
(4) Failure to register a dog or cat with the city shall be a violation of this section, and the owner
shall be imposed a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code.
(1995 Code, secs. 2.106, 2.108(a))
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/334
Sec. 2.02.043 Number limited
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than two dogs, two cats, or any combination thereof
within the city limits unless such be a litter of pups or kittens. In such case, the litter must be disposed of within
five (5) months of birth. This section does not apply to pet shops or kennels which have been duly licensed by
the city pursuant to this article. (1995 Code, sec. 2.107)
ARTICLE 2.03 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.03.001 Local rabies control authority
The chief of police is designated the local rabies control authority who, among other duties, shall enforce
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 826, and the state rules that comprise the minimum standards for
rabies control; the ordinances or rules of the city; and the rules adopted by the state under the area rabies
quarantine provisions of Health and Safety Code section 826.045. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Appointment of rabies control authority by municipality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.017.
Sec. 2.03.002 Vaccinations
Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies,
and such dog or cat shall receive a booster rabies vaccination within the 12-month interval following the initial
vaccination. Every domestic dog or cat must be revaccinated against rabies at a minimum of at least once every
three years with a rabies vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture. Any person moving
into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this section within ten (10) days after having
moved into the city. (1995 Code, sec. 2.201; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
Sec. 2.03.003 Certificate of vaccination
Upon vaccination the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a
certificate upon a form furnished by the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy. Such
certificate shall contain the following information:
(1) Owner's name, address, and telephone number.
(2) Animal identification: species, age, sex, size (in., lbs.), predominant breed, and colors.
(3) Vaccine used–producer, expiration date, and serial number.
(4) Date vaccinated.
(5) Rabies tag number.
(6) Veterinarian's signature and license number.
(1995 Code, sec. 2.202)
Sec. 2.03.004 Rabies tags
Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in section 2.03.003, the
owner of the dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog or cat a metal
tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance
and the name of the issuing veterinarian and his address. (1995 Code, sec. 2.203; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.03.005 Duplicate tags
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/334
In the event of loss or destruction of the original tag provided in section 2.03.003, the owner of the dog or cat
shall obtain a duplicate tag. (1995 Code, sec. 2.204; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.03.006 Proof
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his
copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this article.
(1995 Code, sec. 2.205)
Sec. 2.03.007 Harboring unvaccinated animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies, as
provided herein, or which cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate. (1995 Code, sec.
2.206)
Sec. 2.03.008 Animals exposed to rabies
(a) Any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to have been or suspected of being
exposed to rabies must immediately report such knowledge to the local rabies control authority giving him any
information which he may require. If an animal is known to have been or suspected of being exposed to rabies,
the following rules must apply:
(1) Unvaccinated animals which have been bitten or directly exposed by physical contact with a
rabid animal or its fresh tissues should be:
(A) Humanely killed; or
(1995 Code, sec. 2.207)
(B) If sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed animal shall be
immediately vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict isolation for 90 days, and given booster
vaccinations during the third and eighth weeks of isolation. (1995 Code, sec. 2.207; Ordinance
adopting Code)
(2) Vaccinated animals which have been bitten or otherwise significantly exposed to a rabid animal
should be:
(A) Humanely killed; or
(1995 Code, sec. 2.207)
(B) If sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed vaccinated animal
shall be given a booster rabies vaccination immediately and placed in strict isolation for 45
days. (1995 Code, sec. 2.207; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) These provisions apply only to domestic animals for which an approved rabies vaccine is available. (1995
Code, sec. 2.207)
Sec. 2.03.009 Duty to report animal bites
Any person having knowledge that an animal has bitten a human shall immediately report the incident to the
local rabies control authority. Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons for
such bites shall within twenty-four (24) hours report such treatment to the local rabies control authority or his
agent, giving name, age, sex, and precise location of the bitten person or persons and such other information as
the local rabies control authority may require. (1995 Code, sec. 2.208; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/334
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 824.041.
Sec. 2.03.010 Exclusions from reporting requirements
Bites from rodents, rabbits, birds and reptiles are excluded from the reporting requirements of this article. (1995
Code, sec. 2.209)
Sec. 2.03.011 Suspected rabies cases
Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or any other
domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the incident to the local rabies control authority or his agent
stating precisely where such animal may be found. If a known or suspected rabid animal bites or attacks a
domestic animal, such incident shall also be reported as required above. (1995 Code, sec. 2.210)
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 824.041.
Sec. 2.03.012 Confinement of dogs and cats
Any dog or cat which has bitten a person shall be observed for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the
biting. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the local rabies control authority. If the
dog or cat is not allowed an at-home quarantine, confinement shall be by impoundment at any veterinary
hospital of the owner's choice. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. Stray dogs or cats whose
owners cannot be located shall be confined in the county health animal shelter or a veterinary hospital. The
owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person shall on demand produce
said dog or cat for impoundment, as prescribed in this section. Refusal to produce said dog or cat constitutes a
violation of this section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and individual violation. At no
time shall a dog or cat be allowed an at-home quarantine if it is in violation of any provision of this article. (1995
Code, sec. 2.211)
State law reference–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.
Sec. 2.03.013 Removal of dogs and cats from confinement
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any dog or cat which has been
confined as authorized, without the consent of the local rabies control authority. (1995 Code, sec. 2.212)
Sec. 2.03.014 Procedures for other animal bites
Procedures concerning bites from other animals shall be discussed with the local rabies control authority, animal
control officer, or the department of state health services for proper disposition. Any wild animal which has
bitten a person should be caught and killed and the brain immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for
rabies examination. An exception to this rule may be allowed for large, exotic, or valuable zoo species which, by
reason of their close confinement, would be unlikely rabies vectors. Rodents, rabbits, birds, and reptiles are not
considered to be transmitters of the rabies virus and should not be submitted for laboratory examination for
rabies. (1995 Code, sec. 2.213)
ARTICLE 2.04 DANGEROUS DOGS*
Sec. 2.04.001 Adoption of state law
Dangerous dogs, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.041, shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter D, section 822.041
et seq. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.05 ANIMAL CONTROL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Sec. 2.05.001 Established
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/334
An animal control advisory committee is hereby established. This board shall meet at least three times per year
and all meetings shall be open to the public. (Ordinance 2007-16 adopted 12/13/07)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL CODES
Sec. 3.02.001 Adopted
The following codes are hereby adopted:
(1) 2006 International Building Code.
(2) 2006 International Residential Code.
(3) 2006 International Fire Code.
(4) 2006 International Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities.
(5) 2006 International Existing Buildings Code.
(6) 2006 International Plumbing Code.
(7) 2006 International Mechanical Code.
(8) 2006 International Property Maintenance Code.
(9) 2006 International Fuel Gas Code.
(10) 2006 International Energy Conservation Code.
(11) 2008 National Fire Protection Association 70 (National Electrical Code).
(Ordinance 2012-03 adopted 2/14/12)
(12) 2008 International Code Congress/National Storm Shelter Association Standards for the
design and construction of storm shelters. (Ordinance 2011-15 adopted 10/25/11)
State law references–International Residential Code adopted as a municipal residential building code, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 214.212; building and residential codes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.211 et seq.; National Electrical Code
adopted as the municipal residential electrical code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.214; adoption of rehabilitation codes
or provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.215; International Building Code adopted as municipal commercial building
code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.216; adoption of building energy efficiency performance standards, V.T.C.A., Health
and Safety Code, sec. 388.003; adoption of plumbing codes and amendment of codes by municipality, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code,
sec. 1301.255(d).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/334
ARTICLE 3.03 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.03.001–3.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Construction of Facilities and Use
Sec. 3.03.031 Findings and purpose
The purpose of this division is to:
(1) Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way in order to
minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the
citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way;
(2) Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way;
(3) Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare;
(4) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the
city;
(5) Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways;
(6) Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians;
(7) Keep track of the different entities using the rights-of-way to prevent interference between
them;
(8) Assist in scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and
(9) Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the public rights-of-way.
(Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.032 Authority; scope
This division applies to all persons who place facilities in, on or over public rights-of-way. (Ordinance 2000-05,
sec. 2, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.033 Definitions
In this division:
Affiliate. A person who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a provider.
Certificated telecommunications provider. The same as in Local Government Code section 283.002(2) (any
entity that has been granted a certificate from the state public utility commission under chapter 54 of Texas
Utility Code authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service).
City. Includes the designated agent of the city.
City manager. The city manager or the city manager's designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/334
Direction of the city. All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent
with this division and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted.
Facilities. Any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and
overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plants and appurtenances and all associated physical
equipment placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way.
Person. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability
company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity.
Public rights-of-way. The same as in the Texas Local Government Code, section 283.002(6) (the area on, below,
or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the
municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to
wireless telecommunications.)
(Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 3, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.034 Municipal authorization required
(a) Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way shall first file an application
for a building permit with the city and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this division pertaining to use
of the public rights-of-way.
(b) Any person, except a certificated telecommunications provider, prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering
facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must obtain separate municipal authorization from the city.
(c) Any person with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city
(“grant”) to use the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this division takes effect (ordinance adopted
April 23, 2000) shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is
terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the person, or terminated as otherwise provided for in law.
(Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 4, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.035 Administration and enforcement
(a) The city manager shall administer and enforce compliance with this division.
(b) A person shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way that the city manager
requires in the form and manner reasonably prescribed by the city manager.
(c) The city manager shall report to the city commission upon the determination that a person has failed to
comply with this division.
(Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 5, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.036 Construction obligations
A person is subject to reasonable police power regulation of the city to manage its public rights-of-way in
connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public
rights-of-way, pursuant to the city's rights as a custodian of public property, based upon the city's historic rights
under state and federal laws. Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) At the city's request, a person shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating
to the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed
by the person in the public rights-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/334
(2) A person may be required to place certain facilities within the public rights-of-way
underground according to applicable city requirements absent a compelling demonstration by the
person that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable or feasible nor is it equally
applicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way.
(3) A person shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-ofway
in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless
technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on
other similar users of the public rights-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement of trenchless
technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information
provided to the city by the person. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way
shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. A
person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any
such interference.
(4) A person must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by applicable city codes, prior to any
excavation, construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, relocation or maintenance of the
person's facilities. Once a permit is issued, the person shall give to the city a minimum of forty-eight
(48) hours' notice (which could be at the time of the issuance of the permit) prior to undertaking any
of the above-listed activities on its network in, on or under the public rights-of-way. The failure of the
person to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above-listed
activities in, on or over any public rights-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for in
subsection (11) below, will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement
action pursuant to the city's Code of Ordinances. If the person fails to act upon any permit within 90
calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the person will be required to obtain
another permit.
(5) When a person completes construction, expansion, reconstruction, removal, excavation or other
work, the person shall promptly restore the rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city
requirements. A person shall replace and properly relay and repair the surface, base, irrigation system
and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or damaged by reason of
the erection, construction, maintenance, or repair of the person's facilities within thirty (30) calendar
days after completion of the work in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the
time of the work.
(6) Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement work, and five (5) days
after written notice has been given by the city to the person, the city may repair such portion of the
public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors or agents. Upon
receipt of an invoice from the city, the person will reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within
thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice.
(7) Should the city reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of the completion of
the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation system or landscape treatment requires additional
restoration work to meet existing standards of the city, the person shall be held responsible subject to
all city remedies as provided herein.
(8) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city determines that the failure of a person to properly
repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may
undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. A person shall promptly reimburse the city for
all costs incurred by the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice.
(9) A person shall furnish the city with construction plans and maps showing the location and
proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction at least fifteen (15) days before beginning
construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public
rights-of-way. A person may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and proposed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/334
routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required plans and drawings have been
approved in writing by the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due
consideration of the surrounding area and alterative locations for the facilities and routing.
(10) If the city manager declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens
and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate
the person's facilities by the deadline provided in the city manager's request. The person and the city
shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If the person, after notice, fails
or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the person,
without paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring liability for damages.
(11) Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property or person
(“emergency conditions”), a person may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-ofway
without first complying with city requirements. The city manager or designee shall be notified
immediately regarding work performed under such emergency conditions, and the person shall
comply with the requirements of city standards for the restoration of the public rights-of-way.
(12) Within sixty (60) days of completion of each new permitted section of a person's facilities, the
person shall supply the city with a complete set of as-built drawings for the segment in a format used
in the ordinary course of the person's business and as reasonably prescribed by the city, and as
allowed by law.
(13) The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a person, as are required of other
entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way.
(Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 6, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.037 Conditions of public right-of-way occupancy
(a) In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the public rightsof-
way. The city reserves the right to lay sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas, water, and other pipelines or cables
and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring or changes in aerial
facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or public right-of-way occupied by a person, and to
change the curb, sidewalks or the grade of streets.
(b) The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public
rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type and, to the
extent the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as
allowed under state or federal law.
(c) If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or
public right-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized
user of the public right-of-way. If the city closes or abandons a public right-of-way that contains a portion of a
person's facilities, the city shall close or abandon such public right-of-way subject to the rights of the person.
(d) If the city gives written notice, a person shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of the person's facilities that are in the public right-of-way within 120 days,
except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the city based upon
information provided by the person. For projects expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, change or
relocate, the city will confer with person before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof.
The city shall give notice whenever the city has determined the removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city or other
governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a
person's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/334
relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely for beautification purposes without
prior joint deliberation and agreement with a person.
If the person fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the city in this division, the person may be subject
to liability to the city for such delay and as set forth in the city codes or ordinances, now or hereafter enacted.
Notwithstanding anything in this subsection (d), the city manager and a person may agree in writing to different
time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change.
(e) During the term of its municipal consent, a person may trim trees in or over the rights-of-way for safe and
reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with
standards promulgated by the city. Should the person, its contractor or agent fail to remove such trimmings
within twenty-four (24) hours, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a
bill from the city, the person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within thirty (30) calendar
days.
(f) A person shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or
other bulky structures, if the city gives written notice of no less than 48 hours. The expense of these temporary
rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary
rearrangements. A person may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the
temporary move.
(Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 7, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.038 Insurance requirements
(a) A person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the city with an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state acceptable to the city throughout the term of a municipal
consent conveyed under this division. A person shall furnish the city with proof of insurance at the time of the
request for building permits. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably
adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city manager determines that changes in statutory law, court
decisions, or the claims history of the industry of the person require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of
this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the state or letters written by the person
in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required
herein. However, for the city to accept such letters the person must demonstrate by written information that it
has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on
financial information requested by and furnished to the city. The city's current insurance requirements are
described in exhibit A attached to Ordinance 2000-05.
(b) The person shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage
required by this division to the city. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular
policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or
regulation binding the city, the person, or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision, or
modification, a person shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change.
(c) An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions:
(1) Name the city and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as
additional insureds for all applicable coverage;
(2) Provide for 30 days' notice to the city for cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change; and
(3) Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the city manager by certified mail.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/334
(d) The person shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city manager. An insurance certificate
obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval. The city may require the certificate to be
changed to reflect changing liability limits. A person shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or
potential litigation that may develop that may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify.
(e) An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the person
and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
(f) The policy clause “other insurance” shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy.
(g) The person shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has no
recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a person must
provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in
connection with damage covered by the policy.
(Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 8, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.039 Indemnity
(a) Except as to certified telecommunications utilities, each person placing facilities in the public rights-ofway
shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs,
losses or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials,
structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the person's acts or
omissions, (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for (a)
damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to the person, its agents, officers,
employees and subcontractors, city's agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily
injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including but not limited to
the agents, officers and employees of the person, person's subcontractors and city, and third parties); arising out
of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the person, its agents,
employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this division.
(b) This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its
officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors.
(c) The provisions of this indemnity is solely for the benefit of the city and is not intended to create or grant
any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity;
(Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 9, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.040 Severability
The provisions of this division are severable. However, in the event this division or any procedure provided in
this division becomes unlawful, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority
exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, illegal or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in
part, the remaining and lawful provisions shall be of full force and effect and the city shall promptly promulgate
new or revised provisions in compliance with the authority's decision or enactment. (Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 10,
adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 3.03.041 Governing law
This division shall be construed in accordance with the city codes in effect on the date of passage of this division
(April 13, 2000) to the extent that such codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the constitution and laws
of the United States or the state, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable regulations to manage
its public rights-of-way, pursuant to sections 3.03.036 and 3.03.037 or as otherwise provided by law. (Ordinance
2000-05, sec. 11, adopted 4/13/00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/334
Sec. 3.03.042 Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way
The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from knowingly using the public rightsof-
way unless the person has complied with the terms of this division. (Ordinance 2000-05, sec. 12, adopted
4/13/00)
ARTICLE 3.04 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 System established
(a) The city commission authorizes the establishment of a consistent numbering system for the city based on a
3-digit numbering system.
(b) The city commission authorizes to change the numbering within the city limits if necessary.
(c) The city commission authorizes the renumbering of areas that will be annexed into the city limits.
(d) The city commission authorizes the city manager or his/her designee to issue proper notices to the general
public and establish an effective dates for changeover after consulting with other agencies and affected groups.
(Ordinance 2001-24 adopted 12/27/01)
Secs. 3.04.002–3.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Posting of Physical Address
Sec. 3.04.031 Conflicting addresses prohibited
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person in the city to post or allow remaining posted a physical address on a
property or structure that conflicts with those physical addresses most currently assigned by the city more than
10 days after written notice of such violation is deposited in the U.S. mail, first class postage prepaid, to such
property owner or the most recent address reflected in the city's records. (Ordinance 2004-09, sec. 1, adopted
6/24/04)
Sec. 3.04.032 Utility company records to be current
All utility companies that provide service to the residents of the city shall change the service addresses in their
databases to reflect the most current physical address as assigned by the city within a reasonable period of time
not to exceed 45 days from the date of receiving notice from the city advising of change of physical address.
(Ordinance 2004-09, sec. 2, adopted 6/24/04)
Sec. 3.04.033 Requirements
(a) Posting. A proper, accurate and visible physical address shall be posted on all properties where residents
are residing or conducting business at all times.
(b) Size. The standard size of any physical address sign shall be in numbers/letters not less than four inches in
height.
(c) Location. The physical address shall be posted on the main structure or in front of the main structure
visible from the nearest street.
(Ordinance 2004-09, secs. 3–5, adopted 6/24/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/334
Sec. 3.04.034 Permits or utilities denied without proper posting; city action
(a) The city shall not issue any permit to residents/property owners or activate utility services to the property
if the physical address is not properly displayed on the property.
(b) The city manager is authorized to initiate action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county against
any person or entity to compel them to post the proper physical address or cause them to correct the physical
address within the city customer database, if they are not voluntarily causing such address to be posted or in the
case of a utility company if their database is not updated in a timely manner as provided herein.
(c) The city shall be entitled to recoup all reasonable and necessary costs, including attorney's fees, incurred in
enforcing the provisions of this division.
(Ordinance 2004-09, secs. 6–8, adopted 6/24/04)
Sec. 3.04.035 Penalty
Persons or entities violating the provisions of this division, or anyone posting an improper or confusing physical
address, if found guilty, shall be punished in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section
1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 2004-09, sec. 9, adopted 6/24/04)
Sec. 3.04.036 Waiver of compliance
For good cause shown, as determined at the sole discretion of the city manager, the city manager is authorized to
issue a written directive waiving compliance of the provisions of this division. (Ordinance 2004-09, sec. 10,
adopted 6/24/04)
ARTICLE 3.05 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.05.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings:
Building inspector. The building inspector for the city or the agent thereof authorized by the city manager.
City manager. The city manager or an agent thereof authorized specifically by the city manager.
Fire marshal. The fire marshal for the city or the agent thereof authorized by the city manager.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.214)
Sec. 3.05.002 Prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to allow or permit any building or part of any building,
or the surroundings thereof, to become dilapidated, substandard, unfit for human habitation or a hazard to the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to allow or permit any building or part of any building,
regardless of its structural condition, to be unoccupied by its owner(s), lessee(s) or other invitee(s) and
unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited
persons as a place of harborage, or to the extent that it could be entered or used by children.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to allow or permit any building or part of any building to
be boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if the building constitutes a danger to the public even
though secured from entry, or if the means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized
entry or use of the building in the manner described in subsection (b) above.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/334
(1995 Code, sec. 3.201)
(d) Fences shall be maintained in an upright position (not more than 5 degrees from vertical), and in good
condition (e.g., free of rust, peeling paint or coatings, missing or broken pickets, wood rot, and graffiti).
(Ordinance 2012-15, sec. IV, adopted 11/6/12)
Sec. 3.05.003 Inspections
(a) The building inspector and the fire marshal shall have the right at all reasonable times to enter into any
buildings in the city for the purpose of examining and inspecting said buildings for any violation of this article,
or for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. (1995 Code, sec. 3.202; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Any individual who interferes with, or obstructs the examination or inspection of, a building by the
building inspector shall be guilty of a misdemeanor violation that shall be punishable by a fine in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1995 Code, sec. 3.202)
Sec. 3.05.004 Applicability of codes
All buildings in the city, regardless of the date of construction, must comply with the current codes adopted by
the city, as amended from time to time, as well as any ordinance creating and/or regulating any fire zone in the
city. These codes and ordinances will contain the minimum standards for all buildings in the city, in order to
allow for their continued use and occupancy. (1995 Code, sec. 3.203; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.05.005 Notice of violation
(a) If, after examination and inspection of a building, it is found that the building does not meet the minimum
standards for continued use and occupancy as set out in section 3.05.004 of this article, then the city manager
shall cause a proper notice to be delivered to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building by certified
mail, return receipt requested, at least thirty (30) days before the scheduled public hearing, as set out in section
3.05.006 of this article. If the required notice is mailed and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as
“refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall be deemed as delivered.
When the owner of the building cannot be located, the city manager shall cause a proper notice to the owner to
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least twice before the scheduled public hearing,
as set out in section 3.05.006 of this article.
(b) The notice shall contain specific information regarding findings, as a result of the inspection or
examination, describing the building's noncompliance with the minimum standards for continued use and
occupancy, as set forth in section 3.05.004 of this article. The notice shall also contain a date for a public hearing
to be conducted in open session of a regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission. The notice shall also
include a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit, at the hearing, proof of
the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably
perform the work.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.204)
Sec. 3.05.006 Public hearing requirement
(a) All public hearings for continued use and occupancy of a building shall be held in open session of a
regular meeting of the city commission.
(b) The city manager shall present evidence to the city commission of the condition of the building in question
and why said condition does not meet the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy as set out in
section 3.05.004 of this article. The owner of the building shall have an opportunity to present evidence in his
defense as well as proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/334
will take to reasonably perform the work. Members of the general public will be given an opportunity to voice
their opinions regarding the building, which is the subject of the public hearing.
(c) If the owner of the building fails or refuses to attend the public hearing, the public hearing shall,
nevertheless, be conducted.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.205)
Sec. 3.05.007 Order of vacation or repair
(a) After the public hearing, if a building is found in violation of standards set out in section 3.05.004 of this
article, the city commission may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by
the owner within a reasonable time as provided by this article. The city commission may also order that the
occupants be relocated within a reasonable time.
(b) If the owner does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, the city manager shall make a
diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or in the property on
which the building is located. The city manager shall send to each identified mortgagee and lienholder a notice
containing an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on
which it is located; a description of the violation of municipal standards that is present at the building; and a
statement that the municipality will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of
the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.206)
Sec. 3.05.008 Alternative procedures
(a) As an alternative to the procedure prescribed in section 3.05.007 of this article, the city manager may make
a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder before conducting the public hearing and may give
them a notice of and an opportunity to comment at the hearing.
(b) In addition, the city manager may file notice of the hearing in the official public records of real property
for the county. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that
information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file in the office of the county
clerk, a legal description of the affected property, and a description of the hearing.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.207)
Sec. 3.05.009 Order using alternative procedures
If the procedure in section 3.05.008 of this article is used, after the public hearing, if a building is found in
violation of the standards set out in section 3.05.004 of this article, the city commission may issue an order
specifying a reasonable time, as provided by this article, for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired,
removed or demolished by the owner, or for the occupants to be relocated by the owner, and an additional
reasonable time, as provided by this article, for the ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or
lienholders in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the
owner. (1995 Code, sec. 3.208)
Sec. 3.05.010 Order mailed to owner
(a) After the public hearing, the city manager shall promptly mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
copy of the order to the owner of the building.
(b) If the owner does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, the city manager shall promptly
mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to any lienholder or mortgagee of the
building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/334
(c) The city manager shall use the records in the office of the county clerk to determine, if possible, the
identity and address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.209)
Sec. 3.05.011 Time for completing ordered action
(a) In a public hearing to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in this article, the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(b) In conducting the public hearing, the city commission shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of
the building to secure the building from unauthorized entry or repair, remove, or demolish the building within
thirty (30) days, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
performed within thirty (30) days.
(c) If the city commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair,
remove, or demolish the building, the city commission shall establish specific time schedules for the
commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the
property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by
the city commission.
(d) The city commission may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to
repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing and
establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety (90) days because of the
scope and complexity of the work.
(e) If the city commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete
any part of the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the city commission shall require the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the city manager to demonstrate that the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and
performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the city
commission or its designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.210)
Sec. 3.05.012 Failure to take ordered action
(a) If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated
within the allotted time, the city manager may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants at the expense of the city.
(b) If the city incurs expenses under this section, the city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien
against, the property on which the building is located to the full extent allowed by law.
(c) The city manager shall cause to be recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk a notice of lien
which must contain the name and address of the owner, if that information can be determined with a reasonable
effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses
incurred by the municipality, and the balance due.
(d) The lien shall be extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to
the property reimburses the city for the expenses.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.211)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/334
Sec. 3.05.013 Additional authority
(a) In addition to the authority granted to the city by any other provision of this article, after the expiration of
the time allotted under section 3.05.007 or section 3.05.011 of this article for the repair, removal, or demolition
of a building, the city manager may repair the building at the expenses of the city and assess the expenses on the
land on which the building stands or to which it is attached and may provide for that assessment, the mode and
manner of giving notice, and the means of recovering the repair expenses; or assess a civil penalty against the
property owner for failure to repair, remove, or demolish the building and provide for the assessment, the mode
and manner of giving notice, and the means of recovering the assessment.
(b) The city manager may repair a building under this section only to the extent necessary to bring the
building into compliance with the minimum standards and only if the building is a residential building with ten
(10) or fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds
minimum housing standards.
(c) The city manager shall impose a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a
homestead as protected by the state constitution, to secure the payment of the repair, removal, or demolition
expenses or the civil penalty. Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the city manager must file for record, in
recordable form in the office of the county clerk, a written notice of the imposition of the lien. The notice must
contain a legal description of the land.
(d) Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this section accrues interest at the rate of ten percent
(10.0%) per year from the date of the assessment until paid in full.
(e) The city may not transfer to third parties its right to the assessment lien.
(f) The city may not foreclose a lien acquired under this section if the property on which the repairs were
made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person sixty-five (65) years of age or older.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.212)
Sec. 3.05.014 Securing building
(a) If, after examination and inspection of a building, it is found that the building does not meet the minimum
standards for continued use and occupancy as set out in section 3.05.004 of this article and is unoccupied or is
occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building, then the city manager may
secure the building.
(b) Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured, the city manager shall give notice to the owner
by personally serving the owner with written notice; depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to
the owner at the owner's post office address; publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is located if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or posting the notice on or near the front door of the
building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown.
(c) The notice must contain an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building
and the property on which it is located; a description of the violation of the minimum standards that is present at
the building; a statement that the municipality will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and
an explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the municipality's
securing of the building.
(d) The city commission shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or
written information about any matter relating to the city manager's securing of the building if, within thirty (30)
days after the date the city manager secures the building, the owner files with the city commission a written
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/334
request for the hearing. The city commission shall conduct the hearing in open session of a regularly scheduled
meeting of the city commission within twenty (20) days after the date the request is filed.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.213)
ARTICLE 3.06 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.06.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has, in section 16.315 of the Texas Water Code delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Sec. 3.06.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
Sec. 3.06.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.06.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/334
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.06.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/334
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as existing structures.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding.
Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/334
Functionally dependent use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/334
construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/334
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
Sec. 3.06.006 Lands to which this article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.06.007 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency by flood insurance
rate maps dated September 15, 1983, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this article.
Sec. 3.06.008 Establishment of additional requirements for building permit application
Base flood elevations will be checked during the building application process to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.06.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.06.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.06.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/334
Sec. 3.06.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 3.06.013 Designation of the floodplain administrator
The city manager or designated representative is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and
Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.06.014 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state commission on environmental
quality which is TCEQ, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.06.007, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
sections 3.06.017 through 3.06.021.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/334
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
Sec. 3.06.015 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on
forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.06.018(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.06.014.
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
Sec. 3.06.016 Variance procedures
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/334
(a) The zoning board of adjustments, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on
requests for variances from the requirements of this article.
(b) The zoning board of adjustments shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of adjustments may appeal such
decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.06.015(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article (section 3.06.003).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/334
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) above are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 3.06.017 General standards for flood hazard reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Sec. 3.06.018 Specific standards for flood hazard reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.06.007, section 3.06.014(8), or section 3.06.019(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 3.06.015(a)
(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/334
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood;
(v) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones M-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/334
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.06.015(a), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
Sec. 3.06.019 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with sections 3.06.002, 3.06.003, and 3.06.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.06.008, section 3.06.015,
and the provisions of sections 3.06.017 through 3.06.021 of this article.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.06.007 or section 3.06.014(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Sec. 3.06.020 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.06.007, are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade
at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified); or
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation
or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of
effects of buoyancy.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/334
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.06.014 are satisfied.
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
Sec. 3.06.021 Penalties for noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than the current
maximum allowed by law or imprisoned for not more than the maximum time allowed, or both, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ordinance 2006-17 adopted 10/12/06)
ARTICLE 3.07 PLUMBING*
Sec. 3.07.001 Definitions
The meaning and use of terms and words in this article shall be those generally used and associated with the
plumbing industry and associated with a municipality's control of said industry activities. Specific definitions of
terms used in this article can, for the most part, be found in the codes adopted by the city with said definitions
applicable to city needs. (1995 Code, sec. 3.401; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.07.002 Administration and enforcement
The administration and enforcement of this article for the city falls within the purview of the city manager's
office. He/she shall insure that a qualified and competent plumbing inspector make all plumbing inspections
within the city and that said inspections be accomplished in accordance with the requirements of this article and
the plumbing code adopted by the city. Written reports by the plumbing inspector, to include any violation of
requirements, shall be submitted to the city manager of all inspections made. Thorough records will be
maintained by the plumbing inspector on all inspection activities. To insure a plumbing inspection activity clear
of all conflict of interest, or even the appearance of a conflict of interest, the plumbing inspector shall not engage
in the business of the sale, installation, or maintenance of plumbing pipes, devices, appliances, apparatus,
fixtures, or other plumbing equipment, either directly or indirectly, and he/she shall have no financial interest in
any concern engaged in such business at any time while in the employment of the city, as a plumbing inspector.
All fees charged for the services of the plumbing inspector will be established by the city manager's office and
collected by the city at City Hall, 115 East Commercial Ave., La Feria, Texas. (1995 Code, sec. 3.402;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.07.003 Powers of plumbing inspector
The plumbing inspector has the powers of a police officer when enforcing the provisions of this article. He/she
may enter any house or premises, by due process of law and during reasonable hours, to examine and inspect
any plumbing installation therein. He/she may order compliance to this article and/or the plumbing code adopted
by the city if required. (1995 Code, sec. 3.403; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.07.004 Liability of plumbing inspector
All inspection acts performed by the plumbing inspector shall be accomplished in the name of the city and as
such said inspector shall not render himself/herself personally liable for any damage which may occur to persons
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/334
or property as a result of legal acts committed in good faith and discharge of his/her duties, and any suit brought
against said inspector by reason thereof shall be defended by the city through final termination of proceedings.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.404)
Sec. 3.07.005 Special decisions/rulings by plumbing inspector
Should a special ruling regarding a plumbing activity not covered in this article be required, the plumbing
inspector will have the authority to make such a decision or ruling. In addition, the plumbing inspector has the
authority to modify and in special cases waive provisions of this article if such action is reasonable, does not
differ from the intent of this article and does not create an injustice. In any such instance, the plumbing inspector
will, immediately and with specifics, outline in writing to the city manager the special ruling made and the
reasons for said ruling. The city manager will determine the appropriateness of the special ruling and whether or
not a change to this article is required therefrom. (1995 Code, sec. 3.405)
Sec. 3.07.006 Qualifications of plumbers
All persons and business firms desiring to perform plumbing work in the city must, prior to commencing work,
obtain a construction permit. When seeking this permit at city hall, the city's plumbing inspector will determine
the credentials, qualifications and plumbing experience of the person or persons to perform said plumbing work.
This is done to determine if standards established in this article can reasonably be expected for the work to be
done. If not, the permit will be refused until such time as qualified persons are identified and assigned to
accomplish said work. If, in the opinion of the plumbing inspector, persons assigned the proposed plumbing
work are qualified, a permit will be issued, all other requirements being confirmed. The plumbing inspector has
final authority in determining plumber qualifications and may request plumbing contractors to show proof of
such qualifications. Normally, licenses are designated as master, journeyman or apprentice. The plumbing
inspector will maintain records to demonstrate efforts made in determining plumber qualifications and potential
contractors may place on file with the inspector qualification records of his/her plumbers for future reference.
(1995 Code, sec. 3.406)
Sec. 3.07.007 Conviction for violation
A conviction for violation of any of the provisions of this plumbing article/code in the municipal court of the
city shall be deemed just cause for monetary fines and the revocation of all plumbing privileges within the city.
This revocation shall be for no longer than one (1) year providing the revokee provides sufficient justification, in
the eyes of the plumbing inspector, for reinstatement. (1995 Code, sec. 3.407)
Sec. 3.07.008 Violations
Any person or persons violating this article or the plumbing code adopted by the city shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. After being officially notified of the violation by citation issued by the police department, as
directed by the city's plumbing inspector, each succeeding day of the violation shall constitute a distinct and
separate offense. Conviction for violations of this code, in the municipal court of the city, could result in
monetary fines and possible revocation of a person's or business firm's authorization to perform plumbing work
in the city. (1995 Code, sec. 3.408; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.08 INSPECTIONS
Sec. 3.08.001 Prior to occupancy or reoccupancy
(a) An inspection shall be required prior to occupancy or reoccupancy of commercial structures if
disconnection of any utility, such as electricity, natural gas, or water has occurred.
(b) An inspection shall be required prior to occupancy or reoccupancy of residential structures if electrical
service has remained disconnected for a period of one year or more prior to the date of application for
reconnection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/334
(c) Inspections of any type that are requested to be performed Monday through Thursday after 5:00 p.m. shall
be charged $75.00 per inspection.
(d) Inspections of any type that are requested to be performed Friday after 5:00 p.m. shall be charged $150.00
each.
(Ordinance 2008-06 adopted 2/26/08)
ARTICLE 3.09 SIGNS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.09.001–3.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Changeable Electronic Variable Message Signs
Sec. 3.09.031 Definitions
Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS). A sign which permits light to be turned on or off
intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any
illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or
color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic-control
device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)
approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard.
Off-premises sign. Any sign, commonly known as a billboard, that advertises a business, person, activity, goods,
products or services not located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained, or that directs
persons to a location other than the premises where the sign is installed and maintained.
On-premises sign. Any sign identifying or advertising the business, person, activity, goods, products or services
sold or offered for sale on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained when such premises is used
for business purposes.
Sign code application area. The corporate limits of the city and the area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction as
defined by Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code section 42.021.
Sec. 3.09.032 Prohibitions
(a) New off-premises signs. From and after the effective date, no new construction permit shall be issued for
the erection of an off-premises sign, including but not limited to a new off-premises CEVMS and the conversion
of an existing non-CEVMS off-premises sign to a CEVMS, within the sign code application area.
(b) Changeable electronic variable message signs. From and after the effective date of this article, no CEVMS
shall be allowed within the [sign] code application area.
(Ordinance 2008-12 adopted 4/8/08)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/334
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 4.01.001 Occupational licenses
(a) All trades and professions established in the city subsequent to January 1, 1985, are required to complete
the required city licensing forms and pay the associated licensing fees prescribed in section A4.01.001 of the fee
schedule in appendix A to this code prior to commencement of business in the city.
(b) These forms shall include at least the following information:
(1) The new business name or assumed name;
(2) The principal owner of the business;
(3) The address of the business;
(4) The telephone number of the business;
(5) The date or the approximate date business activity will commence in the city; and
(6) Any other data deemed appropriate by the city manager or the city tax assessor/collector.
(c) Each proprietor or owner of a new business shall be required to furnish the city information required on
the prescribed license form on demand of the city manager or the city tax assessor/collector.
(d) Any proprietor or owner of any trade or profession who shall fail, refuse, or neglect to furnish information
required on the prescribed license form shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in accordance
with the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(e) The following trades and professions are specifically exempt from city licensing requirements:
(1) Actual places of religious worship;
(2) Places of burial not held for private or corporate profit;
(3) Public and nonprofit schools;
(4) All disabled veterans who are recognized by the United States Veterans Administration;
(5) Any and all other trades and professions specifically exempt or hereinafter exempt by the
constitution of the state or the general laws of the state.
Note: The burden of proving exemption from licensing requirements prescribed in this section shall be on the
proprietor or owner of the affected trade or profession.
(1995 Code, sec. 1.803)
ARTICLE 4.02 CARNIVALS*
Sec. 4.02.001 Deposit; permit fee
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation intending or planning to operate a carnival in the city shall post a deposit
as provided for in section A4.02.001 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code, refundable after inspection
of the site where said carnival is operated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/334
(b) Before putting such carnival into operation for patronage by the public, said carnival shall be presented
written authorization from the property owner of the proposed site to the city commission to obtain a permit to
perform or operate the carnival within the city, and such permit, when issued by the city commission, shall
authorize such carnival to do business or perform within the city limits for a period of up to thirty (30) days from
the date of its issuance, and the charge to be made by the city for such permit shall be as provided for in section
A4.02.001 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code, and a receipt shall be issued therefor by the city
secretary.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.101)
Sec. 4.02.002 Electrical connections
Before any electrical connections or electrical appliances or electrically operated equipment used in the carnival
operation are connected with electric lines supplying electricity in the city, such connections and electrical
appliances and electrically operated equipment shall be inspected and approved by the city inspector, and a fee
as provided for in section A4.02.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code shall be charged by the city
inspector for such inspection. (1995 Code, sec. 4.102)
Sec. 4.02.003 Complaints
In the event that a formal complaint is filed against carnivals operating in the city for offensive noise, dust, heat,
smoke, odor, glare, or other insanitary or objectionable reason, the city manager shall at his discretion provide in
writing a twenty-four-hour notice to cease operation and remove equipment from the site. (1995 Code, sec.
4.103)
Sec. 4.02.004 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any section of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009
of this code, and each day that such violation continues shall be construed as a separate offense. (1995 Code,
sec. 4.104)
ARTICLE 4.03 TAXICABS*
Sec. 4.03.001 License required
No individual, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated upon or over the highways, streets, or
alleys within the city limits any vehicle for the transportation of person as passengers for compensation or hire,
unless there has been obtained for such vehicle, and existing in full force and effect, a license duly issued by the
city. (1995 Code, sec. 4.201)
Sec. 4.03.002 License issuance
(a) A license for the operation of a motor vehicle as a taxicab shall be issued by the city manager for a period
of one (1) year from the date thereof, when all of the following requirements have been met by the applicant:
(1) The vehicle or vehicles used as a taxicab or taxicabs will be appropriately and clearly marked
as such, with painted letters that contrast with the color of the taxicab.
(2) The applicant must present evidence that the vehicle/vehicles to be used as taxicabs have
passed a state safety inspection. A valid state safety inspection sticker must be affixed to the
vehicle/vehicles at all times. It is the responsibility of the applicant to insure his/her vehicle/vehicles
meet safety standards, regardless of the date a safety inspection is required by state statute.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/334
(3) No person shall operate a licensed vehicle unless he/she has been authorized to do so by the
city and unless he/she has on his/her person, while doing so, a valid chauffeur's license issued by the
state.
(4) The applicant must present evidence that he/she possesses liability insurance coverage
(applicable to a taxicab business) on all vehicles used as taxicabs. This coverage must be at least that
equal to state-required minimums for public liability (bodily injury and property damage) and cover
all employees designated by the applicant to operate the vehicle/vehicles. On occasion, these
minimums change and it is the applicant's responsibility to keep his/her insurance coverage current.
(5) No vehicle for which a license has been issued shall be operated by anyone except the licensee
thereof or any employee of the licensee. The applicant is further responsible to provide the city
manager with a list of all employees who will be operating the vehicle/vehicles and a photostatic
copy of their driver's license. The applicant is further responsible to insure that operators of his/her
vehicles have good driving records and practice safe driving habits.
(b) The license issued under the above provisions shall be displayed in the vehicle while in operation.
(c) No license shall be transferable to any other person, firm, or corporation, nor shall such license be used for
the operation of any other vehicle except the vehicle for which said license is issued.
(d) Applicants shall pay a fee as provided for in section A4.03.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this
code, which is to be used to cover the expenses of carrying out the requirements of this article.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.202)
Sec. 4.03.003 Penalty
Any violation of a provision or provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any convicted violator
or violators will be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
Additionally, the municipal court judge may also order that the license for the vehicle involved be suspended or
revoked. (1995 Code, sec. 4.203)
ARTICLE 4.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4.04.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the definitions of the following words and/or terms shall be the same as those set
forth in the state Alcoholic Beverage Code, section 1.04:
(1) Alcoholic beverage;
(2) Distilled spirits;
(3) Liquor;
(4) Wine and vinous liquor;
(5) Ale;
(6) Malt liquor; and
(7) Beer.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.301)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/334
Sec. 4.04.002 Businesses subject to regulation
The types of businesses requiring licenses or permits to operate within the legal limits of the city shall be such
types of businesses as described and set forth in title 3, subtitles A and B, of the state Alcoholic Beverage Code.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.302)
Sec. 4.04.003 Locational restrictions
No person or other entity shall sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage for consumption on or at the premises
where such alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale within 300 feet of any church, public school, or public
hospital. The measurement of the aforesaid 300-foot distance for churches and public schools shall be along the
property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door and in direct line across intersections, where
that occurs. The measurement for public schools shall be from the nearest property line of the school to the
nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in direct line across
intersections. This provision shall not be construed to violate, alter, amend or be in conflict with any provision of
the city's zoning ordinances, or the Alcoholic Beverage Code, which shall control in all instances of conflict, this
provision being cumulative of all such zoning regulations. (Ordinance 99-02, sec. 1 (4.303), adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 4.04.004 Hours of consumption
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages in any public place in the city or for any
person to possess any alcoholic beverage in any public place in the city for the purpose of consuming same in
such public place, at any time on Sunday between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon, and on all other days
between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ordinance 2003-15, sec. 1, adopted 10/23/03)
Sec. 4.04.005 Hours of sale
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to sell or deliver any liquor to retail establishments in the city
on Sundays, on Christmas Day, on New Year's Day, on Thanksgiving Day, or between 9:00 p.m. of any other
day and 10:00 a.m. of the following day. (Ordinance 99-02, sec. 3 (4.305), adopted 4/22/99)
(b) Subject to the provisions of subsection (c), it shall be unlawful for any person or other entity to sell
alcoholic beverages for sale on Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon and on other days
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ordinance 2003-15, sec. 2, adopted 10/23/03)
(c) A person or other entity may sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage for consumption on or at the
premises where such alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale during certain late hours, namely, on Sunday
from 1:15 a.m. until not later than 2:00 a.m., and on Monday through Saturday from 12:15 a.m. until no later
than 2:00 a.m., provided such person or other entity is in possession of a valid specific use permit issued by the
city commission permitting such person or other entity to sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages for
consumption on or at said premises during the late hours stated herein, and provided such person or other entity
is also in possession of a current Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission retail dealer's on-premises late hours
license. (Ordinance 2010-06 adopted 6/8/10)
Sec. 4.04.006 License and permit requirements
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to manufacture, distill, brew, sell, possess for the purpose of sale,
import into this state, export from this state, transport, distribute, warehouse, solicit orders for, take orders for;
or, for the purpose of sale, to bottle, rectify, blend, treat, fortify, mix, or process any liquor, distilled spirits, wine,
vinous liquor, ale, malt liquor, beer, or other alcoholic beverage, in the city, without first having obtained from
the city, through its city manager, a permit or license of the class required to perform the act, acts, or businesses
above enumerated; such license to be in the form prescribed by the city manager, and with such permit or license
to be displayed at all times in some conspicuous place within the premises and place of business of the person or
entity holding such permit or license. There is herewith levied a license and/or permit fee for each of the licenses
or permits herein provided for, with the same to be collected in advance by the city, through its city manager,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/334
prior to the issuance of such license or permit. Such annual license or permit fee shall be in the respective
amounts as provided for in section A4.04.006 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code for each respective
type of license or permit, and the same shall be for a one-year period. Should the initial such permit or license to
each applicant be issued any time other than January 1 or 2 of each calendar year, such applicant shall be
charged and shall pay a first such license or permit fee in pro rata amount for the remaining portion of the
calendar year in which initially issued, and with the remaining portion of the month in which issued to count as a
full month in determining the pro rata charge for such initial license or permit fee. Such initial license shall
expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which issued, and the holder thereof, as a lawful prerequisite to
continue the handling of alcoholic beverages as authorized by such license or permit, shall first obtain a renewal
license or permit for the succeeding calendar year and each calendar year thereafter during which the handling of
such alcoholic beverages is conducted by such holder of such license or permit. Such permits and licenses shall
apply to the activity as defined for such permit and license in the state Alcoholic Beverage Code. Such permits
and licenses shall be of the same classes outlined in subtitles A and B, title 3 of said Code. A listing of same is
found in section A4.04.006 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code, which includes the applicable section
of the Alcoholic Beverage Code which describes such activities and the annual city permit/license fee. (1995
Code, sec. 4.306)
Sec. 4.04.007 Penalty for violation
The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction of same
shall be subject to a fine as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code. The operation of any business or
performing of any act requiring a license or permit hereunder without first obtaining and paying the license or
permit fee shall constitute a separate violation for each day said business or act continues. (1995 Code, sec.
4.307)
ARTICLE 4.05 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.05.001 Purpose and findings
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions
of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of this article to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United
States Constitution, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
(b) Based on the findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41,
106 S.Ct. 925 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493
U.S. 215, 110 S.Ct. 596 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456 (1991); City of Erie
v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S.Ct. 1382 (2000); and on studies in other communities, the city commission
finds:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that
are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on
their premises;
(2) Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this article as adult theaters and
adult cabarets, engage in higher incidents of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of
other establishments;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/334
(3) Sexual acts occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows;
(4) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy
conditions;
(5) Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other sexually oriented businesses for
the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses;
(6) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented
businesses, including but not limited to syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella
infections;
(7) Since 1981, there have been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS
(acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the
United States;
(8) The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high
level;
(9) The Surgeon General of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected
blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn;
(10) According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and
gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts;
(11) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the
activities conducted there are unhealthy, and in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and operators to self-regulate those activities and maintain
those facilities;
(12) The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(11) raise substantial governmental
concerns; and
(13) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably
regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 4.401, adopted 4/26/01)
Sec. 4.05.002 Definitions
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture image projections, or other imageproducing
devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore. A commercial establishment which derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenue
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its
sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books, magazines, periodicals or
other printed material or photographs or other visual presentations which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis upon matters describing or exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/334
(1) Persons who appear nude or seminude;
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the display of specified sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas;
(3) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual presentations, which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition, depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly
features films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual presentations, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult novelty store. A commercial establishment which derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenue
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its
sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of instruments, devices or
paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear nude or seminude of live performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult video store. A commercial establishment which derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenue
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its
sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of photographs, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual presentations, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Employee, employ, and employment. With regard to sexually oriented businesses, describe and pertain to any
person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a part-time, full-time, or
contract or freelance basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, or agent, or by other status. These terms do not describe or pertain to a person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business exclusively for repair or maintenance of the premises or for delivery of goods to the
premises.
Establish.
(1) The opening or commencement of a sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to a
sexually oriented business;
(3) The addition of a sexually oriented business to any other sexually oriented business; or
(4) The relocation of a sexually oriented business.
Expand. As the term refers to a sexually oriented business, means to increase the floor area of a sexually
oriented business, or to convert one area of a sexually oriented business from one purpose to another.
Nude, nudity, state of nudity, and nude condition. Refer to a state of undress which permits the display of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering, or
the display of the human female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the
display of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/334
Operate. Cause a sexually oriented business to function, or put or keep a sexually oriented business in a
functioning state.
Operator. Any person who is authorized to exercise control of a sexually oriented business, or who causes a
sexually oriented business to function or who puts or keeps a sexually oriented business in operation, without
regard to whether the person has an ownership interest in the sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented
business may have more than one operator.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Seminude, seminudity, state of seminudity, and seminude condition. Refer to a state of undress which permits the
display of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or of the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, or of the male or female buttocks. These terms do not include a
state of dress which displays the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard,
bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Seminude model studio. A commercial establishment which regularly features a person or persons who appear
seminude and to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted or photographed by other persons, for any form
of consideration. This term does not refer to a proprietary school licensed by the state or to a state college, junior
college, or university, or a private college or university whose credits are transferable to a state college, junior
college, or university.
Sexual encounter center. A commercial establishment that as one of its principal business purposes offers, for
any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the
purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities. This term does not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically
approved and recognized sexual therapy.
Sexually oriented business. Includes each form of business listed in Local Government Code section 243.002, as
those terms are defined in this article, and also includes an adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, seminude model studio, and sexual encounter center.
Specified anatomical areas. Include the human male genitals in discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered, less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and the female human
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Specified sexual activities. Include the actual or simulated sex acts, whether normal or perverted, including the
fondling of a person's genitals, public region, anus or female breasts; intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation,
and sodomy; and excretory functions as part of or in connection with any part of the other listed activities.
Transfer ownership or control. As the term refers to a sexually oriented business, means to sell, lease or sublease
a sexually oriented business, to transfer securities which constitute a controlling interest in a sexually oriented
business, whether by sale, exchange or other means, or establish a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for the transfer by bequest or other operation of law
upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 4.402, adopted 4/26/01)
Sec. 4.05.003 Location
(a) No sexually oriented business may be established or operate:
(1) In any zoning district other than as authorized by the applicable zoning regulations under
Ordinance 2000-03.
(2) Within one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') of:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/334
(A) A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building used primarily for religious worship
and related religious activities;
(B) A public or private educational facility or the grounds of such facility, including but not
limited to a child day care facility of any type, nursery school, preschool, kindergarten,
elementary school, private school, intermediate school, junior high school, middle school, high
school, vocational school, secondary school, continuation school, special education school,
junior college, or university;
(C) A boundary of any residential district as defined by Ordinance 2003-03;
(D) A park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities
including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian or bicycle path, wilderness area, or other area;
(E) The property line of a lot devoted to residential use, whether classified by Ordinance
2000-03 as residential property or not; or
(F) An entertainment business or area, whether for profit or not, oriented primarily toward
children or family entertainment;
(3) Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other sexually oriented business; or
(4) In the same building, structure, or portion thereof as any other sexually oriented business.
(b) For the purpose of subsection (a)(2), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on the nearest exterior wall of the structure used as a part
of the premises on which a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the closest point on the nearest property
line of any of the premises described in subsection (a)(2).
(c) For the purposes of subsection (a)(3) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest points on the nearest exterior walls of each structure
in which each sexually oriented business is located.
(d) The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for the purposes
of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 4.403, adopted 4/26/01)
Sec. 4.05.004 Operation
(a) All areas accessible to the public shall be illuminated at all times during hours of operation at no less than
one (1.0) footcandle.
(b) All areas which are visible from any area accessible to the public in which employees of a sexually
oriented business may appear in a seminude state must be:
(1) At least six (6) feet, measured horizontally, away from all other areas to which the public has
access; and
(2) Elevated at least two (2) feet, measured vertically, above all other areas to which the public has
access.
(c) With the exception of restroom areas, all areas accessible to the public in the interior of a sexually oriented
business shall remain visible to and from each other at all times during the hours of operation of the sexually
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/334
oriented business. No piece of furniture, wall, partition, or temporary or permanent structure shall be permitted
to obstruct the view of any area accessible to the public in the interior of a sexually oriented business.
(d) No video display or reproduction equipment shall be permitted in any restroom in a sexually oriented
business at any time.
(e) No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours of twelve (12:00) midnight and eight (8:00)
a.m.
(f) Every sexually oriented business in the city shall permit representatives of the city to inspect the premises
for compliance with all applicable laws, codes and ordinances.
(g) An operator of a sexually oriented business in violation of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of
not more than $2,000.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues may be considered a separate
violation for purposes of a civil penalty assessment.
(h) An operator who permits a violation of subsection (b) commits a class B misdemeanor offense.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 4.404, adopted 4/26/01)
(i) The premises must contain a nonsmoking area available to patrons.
(j) The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is not permitted on the premises.
(k) A sexually oriented business specific use permit and business license are nontransferable and are deemed
automatically revoked without further action required by the city upon the transfer by any means, other than
transfer upon death, of any interest in the operator of the sexually oriented business or owner of the premises
upon which the sexually oriented business is located.
(l) A permittee is obligated to report to the city any total or partial change in ownership or control of the
business, premises, or gaming devices during the period of the specific use permit and business license, within
ten (10) days of such change in ownership or control.
(Ordinance 2011-10, sec. 1, adopted 7/12/11)
Sec. 4.05.005 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if that person allows a person under 18 years of age to enter or remain on the
premises of a sexually oriented business.
(b) A person commits an offense if that person is under 18 years of age and enters a sexually oriented
business.
(c) A person commits an offense if that person knowingly and intentionally appears in a state of nudity in a
sexually oriented business.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution for an offense under subsection (b) if the person appeared in a state of nudity
while participating as a model in a class operated by:
(1) A proprietary school, licensed by the state;
(2) A state college, junior college, or university;
(3) A private college, junior college, or university from which credits are transferable to an
institution listed in subsection (d)(2).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/334
(e) A person commits an offense if that person engages in a specified sexual act in a sexually oriented
business.
(f) A person commits an offense if that person is an employee of a sexually oriented business and knowingly
and intentionally appears in a nude or seminude condition in a sexually oriented business in an area of the
sexually oriented business to which the public has access, and which does not meet the requirements established
in section 4.05.006(c) of this article.
(g) A person commits an offense if that person, while nude or seminude, directly accepts any pay or gratuity
from any customer of a sexually oriented business.
(h) A person commits an offense if that person gives any pay or gratuity to a person who is nude or seminude
in a sexually oriented business.
(i) A person commits an offense if that person, while nude or seminude, knowingly and intentionally touches a
customer of a sexually oriented business or that customer's clothing.
(j) A person commits an offense if that person is a customer of a sexually oriented business and knowingly
and intentionally touches an employee of a sexually oriented business while the employee is nude or seminude.
(k) An offense under subsection (a), (b), (c), (f), (g), (h), (i), or (j) is a class A misdemeanor.
(l) An offense under subsection (e) is a class B misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 4.405, adopted 4/26/01)
Sec. 4.05.006 Specific use permit and business license required
(a) A person proposing to operate a sexually oriented business must submit an application for a specific use
permit as provided in chapter 14, exhibit A, section 19 of this code together with business license application as
provided in this code. Such applications shall be in the form as required to comply with the provisions of this
code and other applicable law as determined by the city manager and shall include a requirement that the
applicant provide a Texas Department of Criminal Safety Criminal History Record dated within 30 days of the
date of such application on all owners of the premises and all owners and operators of the proposed sexually
oriented business.
(b) The applications for a specific use permit and business license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
payment in the form of cashier check or money order in such amount as provided in the fee schedule found in
sections A4.01.001 and A14.01.001 of appendix A to this code as amended from time to time.
(c) In addition to the site plan required by chapter 14, exhibit A, section 19 of this code, an applicant must
submit a floor plan which displays the physical layout of the proposed sexually oriented business. The floor plan
must at least at 1/8" = 1' scale and must show:
(1) All means of ingress and egress;
(2) The location of all walls and partitions;
(3) Whether such walls or partitions extend from the floor to the ceiling or not, and if not the
distance from the top of the wall or partition to the ceiling; and
(4) The location and intensity of all lighting fixtures.
(d) An applicant shall, not later than the 10th day after filing of the required applications and payment of the
required nonrefundable fees, erect a sign on the property where the proposed sexually oriented business is to be
located. The sign shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/334
(1) Face and be visible from the public roadways adjacent to the premises;
(2) Measure four feet by eight feet in size; and
(3) In clear type of no less than six inches in size state, in both English and Spanish, the following:
“A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS is proposed for this location. The City Commission
will hold a Public Hearing on ________(date). For more information, contact La Feria City Hall
at 797-2261.”
Such sign shall be continuously maintained on the property for not less than 45 consecutive
days prior to the date of such scheduled public hearing.
(e) In addition to the matters set forth in chapter 14, exhibit A, section 19 of this code relating generally to
special use applications, the city commission may disapprove a special use application for a sexually oriented
business if it determines that the proposed sexually oriented business constitutes a detriment to health, life, and
property or the preservation of good government, order, and security of the municipality and its inhabitants,
including but not limited to the following factors:
(1) The proposed premises violate any city zoning, fire, health, safety, building, plumbing or
electrical code;
(2) Delinquency in the payment of any tax, fee or assessment, including utility charges, due to the
city by the applicant or owner of the premises;
(3) Delinquent payment of occupational taxes or other fees to the state, county, or the city by the
applicant or owner of the premises;
(4) Conviction for a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude by the applicant, any owner, part
owner, shareholder, officer, director, manager or any person with any financial interest in the
applicant, the premises, or any food or beverage concession;
(5) An excess number of requests for police or other emergency response at the premises or
excessive need for emergency response;
(6) Denial or termination of a similar license or permit by another governmental entity;
(7) Admission to the premises being conditioned upon membership in a private club;
(8) The premises of the proposed sexually oriented business are licensed for either the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages; or
(9) Any failure to comply with any provision of this article.
(f) Applications for a sexually oriented business special use permit, including initial and renewal applications,
must be completed by the applicant under oath, subjecting the applicant to the applicable laws of perjury.
Sec. 4.05.007 Renewal of permit and business license required
(a) Before the renewal of any specific use permit and business license as provided in section 4.05.006, an
operator of a sexually oriented business holding a valid specific use permit and business license shall, in a timely
manner, submit applications for renewal and the applicable renewal fees.
(b) The fees for renewal of such specific use permit shall be the same as provided in section 4.05.006(b)
above. The renewal fees are nonrefundable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/334
(c) Applications and fees shall be considered timely only if actually received by the city no later than 60 days
prior to the expiration of the current specific use permit and business license.
(d) The procedures for processing such renewal applications shall be the same as set forth in section 4.05.006
above except that the requirements of section 4.05.006(d) relating to signage shall not be applicable.
(e) If renewed, the specific use permit and business license shall be valid for a term of not more than one (1)
calendar year from the date of renewal or such lesser term as specified by the city commission.
(f) If any provision of this section is in conflict with any other ordinance of the city, the section with the
strictest standards controls to the extent of such conflict.
(Ordinance 2011-10 adopted 7/12/11)
Sec. 4.05.008 Permit for expansion required
(a) Before an operator of a sexually oriented business may expand the sexually oriented business, the operator
shall submit an application for an expansion permit.
(b) Together with an application for an expansion permit, an applicant must submit a floor plan which meets
the requirements of section 4.05.006(c) and displays the physical layout of the sexually oriented business after
the proposed expansion is complete.
(c) The fee for an expansion permit shall be $800.00. This fee is nonrefundable.
(d) The city commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider an application for an expansion permit.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the public hearing.
(e) If approved, the expansion permit shall be valid only for the proposed expansion as submitted.
(f) If a sexually oriented business operates after expansion commences and before the expansion is complete,
no activity incident to the expansion shall excuse any violation of any applicable ordinance.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 4.408, adopted 4/26/01)
Sec. 4.05.009 Qualifications of applicants
(a) A person applying for a license to operate a sexually oriented business must consent to a thorough
investigation of the backgrounds of the business and the applicant by the police department and any agency
utilized by the city to conduct such an investigation.
(b) The following are minimum qualifications which must be met in order for an application to be considered:
(1) The applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(2) The applicant or applicant's spouse must not be delinquent in taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed by any governmental entity;
(3) The applicant must truthfully complete the application and provide all information necessary to
process the application;
(4) The applicant must provide verifiable proof of ownership of the establishment; and
(5) The applicant or applicant's spouse:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/334
(A) Must not have been under indictment for or convicted of any of the following offenses:
(i) An offense under section 43.02, 43.03, 43.04, 43.05, 43.22, 43.23, 43.24, 43.25,
43.251 or 43.26 of the Texas Penal Code, or their successors;
(ii) An offense under section 21.07, 21.08, or 21.11, of the Texas Penal Code, or their
successors;
(iii) An offense under section 71.02 of the Texas Penal Code, or its successor;
(iv) An offense under section 22.011 or 22.021 of the Texas Penal Code, or their
successors;
(v) An offense under section 25.02, 25.04, or 25.06 of the Texas Penal Code, or their
successors;
(vi) An offense under section 20.02, 20.03, 20.04 or 20.05 of the Texas Penal Code, or
their successors;
(vii) An offense under section 29.02 or 29.03 of the Texas Penal Code, or their
successors;
(viii) An offense under section 36.02, 36.03, 36.04, or 36.06 of the Texas Penal Code,
or their successors;
(ix) A violation of the Texas Controlled Substance Act or Dangerous Drugs Act
punishable as a class A misdemeanor or class B misdemeanor;
(x) Any offense under section 4.05.006 of this article;
(xi) The attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; or
(xii) Any federal offense which includes in its description all of the elements of any one
of the foregoing offenses; and
(B) If convicted:
(i) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the offense is
a misdemeanor;
(ii) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the offense is
a felony; or
(iii) If convicted or two or more offenses, less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date.
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the qualification or disqualification of
the applicant or applicant's spouse.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 4.409, adopted 4/26/01)
Sec. 4.05.010 Enforcement
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/334
(a) The operator of a sexually oriented business in violation of any provision of this article is subject to
immediate revocation of the operator's sexually oriented business specific use permit.
(b) A person who violates any provision of this article is subject to a suit for injunction and enforcement of a
civil penalty as well as prosecution for any criminal violation.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 4.410, adopted 4/26/01)
Sec. 4.05.011 Grounds for revocation of specific use permit
Any of the following circumstances shall serve as grounds for the city to revoke or cancel a specific use permit
for a sexually oriented business:
(1) Any violation of city zoning, fire, health, safety, building, plumbing or electrical codes;
(2) Any violation of the terms and conditions of the existing special use permit;
(3) Delinquency in the payment of any tax, fee or assessment, including utility charges, due to the
city by the business licensee or owner of the premises;
(4) Delinquent payment of occupational taxes or other fees to the state, county, or the city;
(5) Conviction for a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude by the permittee, any owner, part
owner, shareholder, officer, director, manager or any person with any financial interest in the sexually
oriented business, the premises, or any food concession;
(6) An excess number of requests for police or other emergency response at the premises or
excessive need for emergency response;
(7) Denial or termination of a similar license or permit by another governmental entity;
(8) Admission to the premises being conditioned upon membership in a private club;
(9) Any occasion where the doors to the premises are locked during business hours; or
(10) Any violation of any provision of this article.
Sec. 4.05.012 Revocation procedures
(a) In the event any of the circumstances enumerated in section 4.05.011 exist, the city manager may
immediately cancel and revoke such special use permit and instruct the permittee to cease all activity at the
premises for which the special use permit was issued.
(b) Such notice of cancellation and revocation shall be written and personally delivered to any person
employed at the premises, posted on the front door of the premises, or mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the permittee at the address shown on the most recent special use permit application.
(c) Any person whose special use permit is revoked by the city manager may appeal to the city commission by
filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within five (5) days of receipt of the cancellation notice.
The written notice of appeal shall set forth with specificity all facts and reasons which the permittee asserts as
grounds for withdrawing such cancellation.
(d) If a written notice of appeal is not timely filed, the action of the city manager shall be final on the sixth
calendar day following delivery of such notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/334
(e) If a timely written notice of appeal is filed, it shall be heard by the city commission at a public hearing
during a regularly scheduled city commission not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from
the date the notice of appeal is received by the city manager, unless the time for hearing is extended for good
cause shown by either party or by mutual consent of the parties. In any event, written notice of the time, date,
and place of the hearing shall be provided to the permittee at least seven (7) days prior to the scheduled date of
such hearing.
(f) After written notice of the appeal is filed, the cancellation of the special use permit shall be stayed pending
the decision on the appeal by the city commission unless the city manager files with the mayor an affidavit to the
effect that the continued operation of the sexually oriented business constitutes an immediate threat to the health,
safety or morals of the public and specifying the grounds of such opinion. Should the mayor, on the basis of such
affidavit, determine that probable cause exists for such opinion; the mayor shall order the special use permit
suspended pending the hearing before the city commission. If the special use permit is so suspended, all
operations of the sexually oriented business during such suspension shall immediately cease until such time as
reinstated by the city commission.
(g) At least three (3) days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing, the city manager shall provide to
permittee, and the permittee to the city manager, a list of witnesses to be called by each party, and a written
memorandum of the expected testimony of each witness.
(h) At any hearing on an appeal held by the city commission objecting to the cancellation of a special use
permit the permittee shall be afforded the right to be present and to confront and cross-examine any witnesses
adverse to the permittee. The permittee shall be permitted to offer witnesses on the permittee's behalf. The
permittee shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel employed by the permittee and may provide for a
record to be made of the testimony at any such hearing at the permittee's expense. All testimony given shall be
under oath. The city staff shall be afforded like privileges as the permittee. The city commission shall be the
judge of the credibility of the witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony. The mayor shall be the
presiding officer at such hearing.
(i) At the completion of the hearing, the city commission shall vote whether the action of the city manager
should be sustained and the special use permit cancelled and revoked, the action of the city manager overruled
and the special use permit continue in full force and effect as originally issued, or the action of the city manager
modified and the special use permit suspended for a specific period of time with such other conditions as set by
the commission.
(j) The provisions hereof providing for the appeal of a cancellation of a special use permit by action of the city
manager do not apply to the denial of an original or renewal application by the city commission.
(Ordinance 2011-10 adopted 7/12/11)
ARTICLE 4.06 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS*
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
In this article:
Basic cable rates. The monthly charges imposed by a cable operator for a subscription to the basic service tier
and the associated equipment.
Basic service tier. A separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier
of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and all domestic
television signals other than superstations, provided by the cable operator to any subscribers, except a signal of a
television station which is secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such
station, and any additional video programming signals as a service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/334
Benchmark. A per-channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has
determined is reasonable.
Cable Act of 1992. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
Cable operator. Any person or group of persons who:
(1) Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns
a significant interest in such a cable system; or
(2) Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and
operation of such a cable system.
Cable service. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service;
and subscriber interaction, if any, which is a requirement for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service. For the purposes of this definition, “video programming” is programming provided by, or
generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and “other
programming service” is information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally.
Cable system. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming
and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
(1) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television
broadcast stations;
(2) A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common
ownership, control or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way;
(3) A facility or a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II
of the Communication Act of 1994, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers; or
(4) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
Channel. A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
Cost-of-service showing. A filing in which the cable operator attempts to show, in a manner consistent with FCC
regulations, that the operator rate of the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the
costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract capital.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Initial basic cable rates. The rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges
for associated equipment, on the date the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to
regulate basic cable rates.
Initial date of regulation. The date on which the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and
intent to regulate basic cable rates.
Initial permitted per-channel charge. The permitted per-channel charge on the initial date of regulation which
shall be consistent with FCC regulations to be lawful either under the benchmark analysis or through a cost-ofservice
showing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/334
Maximum monthly charge. The maximum amount per month which a cable operator may charge per subscriber
for a tier of regulated programming services offered by a cable system and shall consist of a permitted perchannel
charge multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise fees.
Must-carry signal. The signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is required to be
carried on the cable system and for which the local broadcast station has notified the cable operator of its
election for must-carry rights.
PEG channel. The channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use required by the
franchise of the cable system to be provided to subscribers, and facilities and equipment for the use of that
channel capacity.
Price cap. The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city based on a
formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and
changes in overall inflation.
Reasonable rate standard. A per-channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level.
Subsequent permitted per-channel charge. The permitted charge per channel after the initial date of regulation
determined pursuant to cost-of-service showing or the prior permitted per-channel charge previously approved
by the city commission, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the price cap analysis.
Superstation. Any nonlocal broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.501)
Sec. 4.06.002 Review of initial basic cable rates
(a) Notice. Upon the adoption of this article (May 12, 1994) and the certification of the city by the FCC, the
city shall immediately notify all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the
city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized
by the Cable Act of 1992.
(b) Cable operator response. Within thirty (30) days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall
file with the city its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material
concerning the reasonableness of its rates.
(c) Expedited determination and public hearing.
(1) If the city commission is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rates for the
basic service tier and associated equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as
determined by the applicable benchmark, the city commission shall:
(A) Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
(B) Act to approve the rates within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its
basic cable rates with the city.
(2) If the city commission takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator
filed its basic cable rates with the city, the proposed rates will continue in effect.
(d) Extended review period.
(1) If the city commission is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-ofservice
showing, the city commission shall, within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/334
filed its basic cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination.
(A) Ninety (90) days if the city commission needs more time to ensure that a rate is within
the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or
(B) One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark.
(2) If the city commission has not made a decision within the ninety- or one-hundred-fifty-day
period, the city commission shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the
cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on
whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(e) Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city
commission shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
(f) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the initial basic cable rates may
request the city manager to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
any time before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the
objector must provide the city manager with the objector's name and address.
(g) Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its initial basic cable rates schedule as being in
compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city commission shall review the rates using the
benchmark analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city
commission's findings, the initial maximum monthly charge shall be established as follows:
(1) The initial permitted per-channel charge shall be determined as follows:
(A) If the initial basic cable rates contain a per-channel charge for regulated programming
services and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation equal to or below the
benchmark per-channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to
the date of initial regulation, then the permitted per-channel charge shall be the per-channel
charge in effect on the date of initial regulation, adjusted for equipment.
(B) If:
(i) The initial basic cable rates contain a per-channel charge for regulated programming
services and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation above the benchmark perchannel
charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial
date of regulation; and
(ii) The per-channel charge for regulated programming services and equipment in effect
on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per-channel charge;
then the initial permitted per-channel charge is nine-tenths of the per-channel charge in
effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark per-channel charge,
additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of
regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels.
(C) If:
(i) The initial basic cable rates contain a per-channel charge for regulated programming
services and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation above the benchmark per7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/334
channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial
date of regulation; and
(ii) The per-channel charge for regulated programming services and equipment in effect
on September 30, 1992, was below the benchmark per-channel charge;
then the initial permitted per-channel charge is the benchmark rate per channel adjusted
for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and
for any changes in the number of channels offered on all regulated tiers.
(2) The initial maximum monthly charge shall be determined by multiplying the initial permitted
per-channel charge times the number of channels on the basic service tier plus a charge for franchise
fees.
(h) Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the level permitted using
the benchmark analysis, the cable operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an
attempt to justify a maximum monthly charge per subscriber above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city
commission will review a cost-of-service review. The city commission may approve initial basic cable rates
above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service
determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30, 1992, rates
minus ten percent (10%) will prescribe the cable operator's new rates.
(i) Decision.
(1) By formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable operator's initial basic cable
rates, the city commission shall adopt its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include
one of the following:
(A) If the initial basic cable rates are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or are
justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the city commission shall approve the initial basic cable
rates as the maximum monthly charge per subscriber; or
(B) If the initial basic cable rates are not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the
cost-of-service analysis, the city commission shall establish the maximum monthly charge per
subscriber that is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that is justified by a cost-ofservice
analysis, if any, does not justify such rates, the city commission shall establish the
maximum monthly charge per subscriber that is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or
that is justified by a cost-of-service analysis.
(2) Rollbacks and refunds. If the city commission determines that the initial basic cable rates as
submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing
justifies lower rates, the city commission may order the rates reduced in accordance with subsection
(g) or (h) above, as applicable. In addition, the city commission may order the cable operator to pay
to subscribers refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates
published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments). The method
for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in
the city commission's decision resolution.
(3) Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If initial basic cable rates of a cable
operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were objections made by other parties to the
initial basic cable rates, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city commission
must give public notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the
official newspaper of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/334
(j) Appeal. The city commission's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment
may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.502)
Sec. 4.06.003 Review of request for increase in basic cable rates
(a) Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated
equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least thirty (30) days before the cable
operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than that permitted under
FCC regulations and not until at least one year after the determination of the initial maximum monthly charge
per subscriber.
(b) Expedited determination and public hearing.
(1) If the city commission is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase
request for basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the
applicable price cap, the city commission shall:
(A) Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views;
(B) After consideration of the views of interested persons, either:
(i) Act to approve the rates within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed
its basic cable rates with the city, or
(ii) Act to extend the review period as provided in subsection (c) below.
(2) If the city commission takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator
filed its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into effect.
(c) Extended review period.
(1) If the city commission is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-ofservice
showing, the city commission shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
(A) Ninety (90) days if the city commission needs more time to ensure that the requested
increase is within FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
(B) One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap.
(2) The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period.
(3) If the city commission has not made a decision within the ninety- or one-hundred-fifty-day
period, the city commission shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the
cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate
increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(d) Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase,
the city commission shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views
and record objections.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/334
(e) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may
request the city manager to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
any time before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the
objector must provide the city manager with the objector's name and address.
(f) Delayed determination. If the city commission is unable to make a final determination concerning a
requested rate increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect,
subject to subsequent refund if the city commission later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the
increase.
(g) Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with
the FCC's price cap, the city commission shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the
standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city commission's findings, the basic cable rates shall be
established as follows:
(1) If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the
proposed rates shall become the new maximum monthly charges.
(2) If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city
commission shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance
with the price cap.
(h) Cost-of-service showing. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a
rate increase above the price cap, the city commission will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards
for cost-of-service review. The city commission may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable
operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the
price cap or below the cable operator's than current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate.
(i) Decision. The city commission's decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal
resolution. If a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections
were made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision.
Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting the city manager to record the objection or
may be submitted in writing at any time before the decision resolution is adopted.
(j) Refunds.
(1) The city commission may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if:
(A) The city commission was able to make a decision within the extended time period as
described in subsection (c) above;
(B) The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review
period; and
(C) The city commission determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the
applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-ofservice
showing,, and the city commission disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
(2) The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC
regulations as directed in the city commission's decision resolution.
(k) Appeal. The city commission's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment
may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.503)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/334
Sec. 4.06.004 Cable operator information
(a) City may require. In those cases where the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an
increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the city commission may require the cable include proprietary
information, if needed to make a rate determination. In these cases where initial or proposed rates comply with
additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the standard.
(b) Request for confidentiality.
(1) A cable operator submitting proprietary information to the city commission may request in
writing that the information no be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the
request shall be attached to and cover all of the information and all copies of the information to
which it applies. Any such request shall be submitted to the office of the city manager to ensure
compliance with chapter 552, Government Code, V.T.C.A., the Open Records Act.
(2) If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any
information to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion to which the
request does not apply shall be identified.
(3) Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a
statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based.
(4) Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be
considered.
(c) City commission action. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (b) will be acted
upon by the city commission. The city commission will grant the request if the cable operator presents, by a
preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the
request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public
inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city commission denies the request,
the city commission shall take one of the following actions:
(1) If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable
operator may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city
will comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires will the
information be made available for public inspection.
(2) If the information was required to be submitted by the city commission, the information will be
made available for public inspection.
(d) Appeal. If the city commission denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review
of that decision from the FCC within five (5) working days of the city commission's decision, and the release of
the information will be stayed pending review.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.504)
Sec. 4.06.005 Automatic rate adjustments
(a) Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped
base per-channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index.
(b) Other external costs.
(1) The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier
automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those
factors exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/334
state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise
requirements. The total cost of increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base perchannel
rate, without regard to its relation to the GNP-PI.
(2) For all categories of external costs than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting
date for measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per-channel rate may be
adjusted will be the date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulations or February
28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per-channel rate may not be adjusted for costs of
retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before October 6, 1994.
(c) Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least thirty (30) days of receiving notice
of the increase, the increase may go into effect.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.505)
Sec. 4.06.006 Refunds
The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the
following circumstances:
(1) A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier
charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or
(2) The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.506)
ARTICLE 4.07 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Sec. 4.07.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Business day. Any calendar day except Saturday, Sunday or any state or national holiday.
Charitable purpose. Philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy,
sick, refugees or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the
benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic
organization; or the benefit of any educational institution. “Charitable purpose” shall be construed to include the
direct benefit of the individual making the solicitation. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include the
benefit of any political group or political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or
federal law.
Consumer. An individual who seeks or acquires real or personal property, services, money or credit for personal,
family or household purposes.
Consumer transaction. A sales transaction in which one or more of the parties is a consumer.
Handbill. Any printed matter, sample, or device, circular, flyer, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, sample of
merchandise, or any advertising matter which is not delivered by the United States mail, which is predominantly
and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for private benefit or
gain; provided such definition is not intended to include newspapers, magazines or other periodicals regularly
published and sold to the public, nor to interstate commerce.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/334
Home solicitation transaction. A consumer transaction for the purpose of goods, services or realty, payable in
installments or in cash, in which the merchant engages in a personal solicitation of the sale to the consumer at a
residence, and the consumer's agreement or offer to purchase is given at the residence to the merchant. A home
solicitation shall not include a sale made pursuant to a preexisting revolving charge account or retail charge
agreement; or a sale made pursuant to prior negotiations between the parties that have business establishments at
a fixed location where goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale; or a sale of realty in which transaction
the purchaser is represented by a licensed attorney or in which the transaction is being negotiated by a licensed
real estate broker.
Merchant. A party to a consumer transaction other than a consumer.
Person. An individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association or any other legal entity.
Public place. Any property open or devoted to public use.
Religious purpose. The use of money or property for the support of a church, religious society, or other religious
sect, group, or order.
Religious solicitation. Conduct whereby a person, organization, society, corporation or its agent, member or
representative:
(1) Solicits property, financial aid, gifts, money, or any article representing monetary value; or
(2) Sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service or printed material;
on the plea or representation, whether express or implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation or
sale are for a religious purpose.
Residence. Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons contained within
any type of building or structure.
Solicit funds or solicitation of funds. Any requests for the donation of money, property or anything of value; or
the pledge of a future donation of money, property, or anything of value; or the selling or offering for sale of any
property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of value or not, including, but not limited to, goods,
books, pamphlets, tickets, publications, or subscriptions to publications. Expressly excluded from the meaning
of “solicit funds” or “solicitation of funds” is any offer of membership in any organization. A solicitation of
funds is complete when the solicitation is communicated to any individual then located within the corporate
limits of the city.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.601)
Sec. 4.07.002 Exemptions
(a) The provisions of this article do not apply to public utility companies or others operating under franchises
granted by the city, nor to insurance salespersons, real estate salespersons, and others licensed by the state. (1995
Code, sec. 4.602)
(b) Although persons engaged in interstate commerce are required to register with the city under this article,
no fee shall be required of those persons engaging in interstate commerce. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.07.003 Hours
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds or go upon any residential premises and ring the
doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of the residence for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in a home solicitation or to
distribute handbills or samples of merchandise in the city: (1995 Code, sec. 4.603)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/334
(1) Before 9:00 a.m. or 9:00 p.m. of any day, Monday through Saturday; (1995 Code, sec. 4.603;
Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) Any time on a Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July Fourth, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, or Christmas Day.
(b) This section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or an appointment by the
occupant.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.603)
Sec. 4.07.004 Exhibiting card prohibiting solicitors or handbills
(a) A person desiring that no merchant or other person engage in a home solicitation or place handbills or
other advertisement at his residence or business shall exhibit, in a conspicuous place upon or near the main
entrance, a weatherproof card, not less than 3" x 4" in size, containing the words “no solicitors.” The letters shall
not be less than 2/3 of 1" in height.
(b) Every merchant going onto any premises upon which a residence or business is located shall first examine
the residence or business to determine if any notice prohibiting solicitation is exhibited upon or near the main
entrance. If notice prohibiting solicitation is exhibited, the merchant shall immediately depart from the premises
without disturbing the occupant, unless the visit is a result of a request made by the occupant.
(c) No person shall go upon any residential or business premises, and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon
the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence or
business, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a
home solicitation transaction, or place handbills or other advertisement, if a card as described in subsection (a)
above is exhibited in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence, or business, unless the
visit is a result of a request by the occupant.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.604)
Sec. 4.07.005 Supervision of child solicitors
It shall be unlawful for any person to use children under seventeen (17) years of age or less for any type of
solicitation purposes unless such children are kept actively supervised by a permitted or registered adult
individual at least eighteen (18) years of age within one hundred (100) yards of the child solicitor. (1995 Code,
sec. 4.605)
Sec. 4.07.006 Sale on public rights-of-way; city parks; mobile vendors
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, sell, offer for sale or exhibit for sale any merchandise
or services upon any public sidewalk, street, street right-of-way, parkway or other public right-of-way, except
that it shall be lawful for a person to engage in a mobile vending operation involving food products upon any
street, public street or street right-of-way, provided such person has previously obtained a solicitor's permit and a
health permit from the city's code enforcement officer or his designee and subject to the conditions set forth
herein. (1995 Code, sec. 4.606; Ordinance adopting Code)
(1) No person shall engage in or attempt to engage in any mobile vending operation involving food
products unless such person has in his immediate possession a valid solicitor's permit and health
permit issued to him by the city.
(2) No person shall engage in or attempt to engage in any mobile vending operation involving food
products on any public street which is not residential in character or on any major thoroughfare or
within the limits of any city park.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/334
(3) Any person engaged in or who attempts to engage in mobile vending operations involving food
products shall stop his motor vehicle only in immediate response to a direct request from a potential
customer and for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
(4) All persons engaged in mobile vending operations involving food products shall comply with
all traffic laws and parking regulations. Sales and deliveries of products shall not be made from any
part of the vehicle away from the curb.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, a person may sell or offer for sale any food,
drinks, confections, merchandise or services within the limits of any city park or public facility if
such person has a written agreement with the city.
(6) No person shall engage in or attempt to engage in any mobile vending operation involving food
products on any public street before 9:00 a.m. or thirty (30) minutes following sunset.
Notwithstanding this subsection, it shall be lawful for a person to engage in mobile vending
operations involving food products in parking lots or other private property provided such operation
does not cause a traffic hazard on any adjacent street, street right-of-way, or other public right-ofway.
(7) If bells, music boxes, radios, or any other mechanical or electronic sound-producing devices
are employed to attract patrons, such device shall be operated as to be inaudible at a distance of two
hundred (200) feet in every direction.
(8) Persons engaged in mobile vending operations involving food products shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this code and all applicable ordinances governing the handling, service,
preparation, storage, display and transportation of food.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.606)
(9) A mobile vending operation involving food products shall not serve, sell or distribute
potentially hazardous food not intended for immediate consumption. All food and beverages sold,
served or distributed from a mobile vending operation must be approved in advance by the code
enforcement officer or his designee and specified on the permit for the mobile vending operation. No
person shall sell, serve or distribute from a mobile vending operation any food not specified on the
permit. (1995 Code, sec. 4.606; Ordinance adopting Code)
(10) Ice used in a beverage served by a mobile vending operation must be from an approved source
stored in an approved container that is drained, covered and dispensed with an approved scoop or
from automatic, self-service ice dispensing equipment.
(11) Each mobile vending operation involving food products shall have a commissary permitted by
the appropriate health authority at which those foods served, sold or distributed are stored and
prepared.
(12) A person shall not engage in a catering service unless the service is affiliated with a food
products establishment operating from a fixed facility that is permitted by the appropriate health
authority.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.606)
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in mobile vending operations involving services, including
but not limited to veterinary services, mobile X-ray services, and mobile blood donation services, in the city,
except that it shall be lawful for a person to engage in a mobile vending operation involving services on church,
school, retail and commercial parking lots with the written consent of the owner, provided such person has
previously obtained a mobile vendor services permit from the city. Any person desiring to engage in a mobile
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/334
vending operation involving services shall make written application on a form provided by the city to the code
enforcement officer or his designee, for a permit which shall include the same information required for a
noncharitable solicitor's permit. Mobile vending operations involving services shall be conducted only during
hours of daylight and shall not be conducted longer than fourteen (14) consecutive days per person or
organization, with a maximum of not more than four (4) permits per each twelve-month period per person or
organization regardless of location. Only one permit for mobile vending operations involving services shall be
issued for any one location regardless of the applicant for the permit, unless at least thirty (30) days has expired
from the last permit for that location. Mobile vending operations involving services conducted by nonprofit
organizations, including charitable, veterans', educational, religious, or philanthropic organizations, shall be
exempt from the permit fee. (1995 Code, sec. 4.606; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.07.007 Permit and registration required
No person, directly or through an agent, shall engage in a home solicitation or canvass or solicit in person from
house to house in the city to sell or attempt to sell goods, merchandise, wares, services or anything of value, or
to take or attempt to take orders for the future delivery of goods, merchandise, wares or any personal property of
any nature whatsoever, or take or attempt to take orders for services to be furnished or performed in the future,
or to distribute handbills or samples of merchandise within the city, without first having obtained a written
permit, or to solicit funds for charitable purposes without first having registered with the city. (1995 Code, sec.
4.607)
Sec. 4.07.008 Noncharitable solicitations permit
(a) Application and required information. Any person desiring to make home solicitation transactions, canvass
or solicit in person from house to house in the city to sell or attempt to sell goods, merchandise, wares, services
or anything of value, or to take or attempt to take orders for the future delivery of goods, merchandise, wares or
any personal property of any nature whatsoever, or take or attempt to take orders for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, or to distribute handbills or samples of merchandise, within the city, shall make written
application on a form provided by the city to the code enforcement officer or his designee for a permit which
shall include at least the following: (1995 Code, sec. 4.608; Ordinance adopting Code)
(1) The name of the person applying and desiring to make home solicitations;
(2) Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership, corporation or association; and
(A) If a natural person, the business or residence address and telephone number;
(B) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and
telephone number of each partner;
(C) If a corporation, the person registering must state whether it is organized under the laws
of the state or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location,
telephone number, name of the main individual in charge of the local office of such corporation,
if any, and the names of all officers and directors or trustees of such corporation, and, if a
foreign corporation, the place of incorporation;
(D) If an association, then show the association's principal business address and telephone
number, if any, and show the names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone
numbers of all members of the association unless they exceed ten (10) in number, in which case
the application shall so state and the person registering may alternatively list names and
principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and directors or
trustees of the association. If the association is part of a multistate organization or association,
the mailing address and business location of its central office shall be given in addition to the
mailing address and business location of its local office;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/334
(3) The names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all individuals who will be in direct
charge or control of the solicitation of funds;
(4) The time period within which solicitation of funds is to be made, giving the date of the
beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion, and how often the applicant will solicit during
the year;
(5) A description of the methods and means by which solicitation of funds is to be accomplished;
(6) Names of other communities in which the applicant has made home solicitations in the past six
(6) months;
(7) The nature of the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, or the nature of the service to be
furnished;
(8) Whether such applicant, upon any such order obtained, will demand, accept or receive payment
or deposit the money in advance of final delivery;
(9) If the applicant is unable to provide any of the foregoing information, an explanation of the
reasons why such information is not available;
(10) Name, address, telephone number and social security number of each adult who will be
responsible for supervising any solicitor under seventeen (17) years of age;
(11) Whether the applicant, or any person employed by the applicant, to solicit, has ever been
convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(b) Signatures. The application must be signed by the applicant, if the person is an individual; if the person
applying is a partnership, by the partner charged with the disbursing of funds solicited; and if the person
applying is a corporation or an association, by its officer charged with the disbursing of funds solicited. The
individual signing the application shall sign and swear before an officer authorized to administer oaths that he
has carefully read the application, that all the information contained therein is true and correct.
(c) Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee as provided for in section
A4.07.008 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code to compensate the city for the cost of administration of
this article, and no permit hereunder shall be issued until such fee has been paid by the applicant. A permit fee
shall be required for each person making a solicitation or distribution for the applicant.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.608)
Sec. 4.07.009 Charitable solicitations registration
(a) Any person desiring to solicit funds for charitable purposes in the city shall file with the code enforcement
officer or his designee a registration statement on forms provided by the city. (1995 Code, sec. 4.609; Ordinance
adopting Code)
(b) The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by any organization or association from its members, or
the solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by persons when such solicitation occurs on premises owned or
controlled by the person soliciting funds or with the permission of the person who owns or controls the premises,
when previously invited to the premises for solicitation, is exempt from the registration requirement. (1995
Code, sec. 4.609)
Sec. 4.07.010 Issuance of permit; certificate of registration
After review of the registration statement or permit application, as the case may be, to determine its compliance
with this article, and within ten (10) working days of the receipt of same, the code enforcement officer or his
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/334
designee shall either issue a certificate of registration or permit, as provided in this article, or notify the person
applying that the registration statement or permit application does not comply with the requirements of this
article and specifically point out what information or explanation has not been furnished that has been required
before a permit or certificate of registration can be issued. (1995 Code, sec. 4.610; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.07.011 Possession and display of permit or registration
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit goods or funds, or to distribute handbills or samples of
merchandise, without carrying the permit or registration statement required by this article on their person while
engaged in such solicitation or sale. Any person engaged in the sale or solicitation of goods or funds shall
display their permit or registration statement upon demand of a consumer, police officer, or the code
enforcement officer or his designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to display a permit or registration
statement issued in the name of another person. (1995 Code, sec. 4.611; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.07.012 Soliciting for other purposes
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit in the city for a purpose other than set out in the application
upon which the permit or certificate was issued. (1995 Code, sec. 4.612)
Sec. 4.07.013 False information
It shall be unlawful for any person to file a false registration statement or application for a solicitation permit
with the code enforcement officer or his designee. (1995 Code, sec. 4.613; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.07.014 Expiration of registration or permit
Every certificate of registration or solicitation permit issued by the city shall expire at the termination of the
solicitation period specified in the certificate or permit or one (1) year from the date of issuance, whichever is
less. (1995 Code, sec. 4.614)
Sec. 4.07.015 Revocation of permit or registration; appeal
(a) Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall constitute grounds for revocation of any
permit or registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. Written notice of revocation shall
be given to such person by certified mail or by personal delivery. (1995 Code, sec. 4.615)
(b) Should a person have a permit or registration revoked, he may appeal that decision to the city manager or
his designated representative by submitting a letter to the code enforcement officer or his designee within ten
(10) days of the receipt of the notice of revocation. A hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the appeal.
The city manager or his representative shall render a decision on the appeal within one (1) day of the date of the
hearing. The decision of the city manager or his designated representative shall be final. (1995 Code, sec. 4.615;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.07.016 Charitable solicitations on public rights-of-way
Persons holding a charitable solicitation certificate of registration may conduct charitable solicitations within
and upon public rights-of-way within the city, subject to the following:
(1) No such charitable solicitation shall be conducted upon or within the rights-of-way of any
street or road designated by the state or federal government as a state or federal highway or farm-tomarket
road.
(2) Persons planning to conduct charitable solicitations in or upon public rights-of-way shall
identify in writing, to the code enforcement officer or his designee, all locations for the planned
solicitations at the time of application for the certificate of registration, for review of safety
conditions by the city's public works department and approval prior to any such solicitation, and with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/334
such approval subject to revocation based upon traffic safety conditions. (1995 Code, sec. 4.616;
Ordinance adopting Code)
(3) Such charitable solicitations shall be conducted only during hours of daylight and shall be
conducted no more than one (1) consecutive thirty-six-hour period each year per organization.
(4) No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall conduct any solicitation in or upon public
rights-of-way.
(5) Applicants for a charitable solicitation certificate of registration who contemplate conducting
any solicitation in or upon public rights-of-way shall, prior to conducting any such solicitation,
furnish the city with a certificate of insurance complying with the standards established by the city
and execute a waiver of liability in favor of the city on a form provided by the city.
(6) Persons conducting charitable solicitations in or upon public rights-of-way shall, at all times
during which solicitation is being conducted, wear traffic safety vests.
(7) Each organization conducting charitable solicitations in or upon public rights-of-way shall
designate a person to be in charge of and responsible for each intersection and/or portion of public
right-of-way upon which such solicitation is to be conducted.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.616)
Sec. 4.07.017 Religious solicitation in public places
(a) A person who engages in religious solicitation in public places shall first register with the code
enforcement officer or his designee on forms provided by the city, containing the following information: (1995
Code, sec. 4.617; Ordinance adopting Code)
(1) Name of registrant;
(2) Name of organization;
(3) Duration and locations of proposed solicitation; and
(4) Number of participants.
(b) Registration expires after one (1) year and must be renewed annually. If a change occurs in any of the
information submitted with the registration, the person or organization shall notify the code enforcement officer
or his designee of the change. (1995 Code, sec. 4.617; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) A person engaged in religious solicitation shall visibly display the registration statement provided by the
city while engaged in religious solicitation in a public place.
(d) If a person, organization, society, or corporation conducting a religious solicitation obtains a charitable
solicitation registration in compliance with section 4.07.009, that person, organization, society or corporation is
not required to comply with the registration requirements of this section.
(e) A person engaged in a religious solicitation in a public place shall not:
(1) Obstruct or impede the passage of a pedestrian or vehicle;
(2) Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless that person's permission is
obtained;
(3) Misrepresent the religious purpose of the solicitation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/334
(4) Misrepresent the religious affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
(5) Engage in religious solicitation without displaying the religious solicitation registration as
provided by the city.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.617)
Sec. 4.07.018 Outdoor retail sales and commercial promotion
(a) Permit and application. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor retail sale and/or outdoor
commercial promotion without first having obtained a permit from the code enforcement officer or his designee.
A person desiring to conduct an outdoor retail sale and/or outdoor commercial promotion within the city shall
make written application on a form provided by the city, to the code enforcement officer or his designee, for a
permit which shall include at least the following: (1995 Code, sec. 4.618; Ordinance adopting Code)
(1) Name of the person applying and desiring to conduct the retail sale and/or outdoor commercial
promotion;
(2) The names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all individuals who will be in direct
charge or control of the retail sale and/or outdoor commercial promotion;
(3) The nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, or the nature of the commercial
promotion to be conducted;
(4) Location of the outdoor retail sale or commercial promotion on the premises;
(5) Hours of operation of the outdoor retail sale or commercial promotion;
(6) Location and size of any proposed temporary advertising and/or signs for the outdoor retail sale
or commercial promotion;
(7) Proximity of residential areas to the location of the retail sale or commercial promotion;
(8) Number of parking spaces, if any, to be encumbered by the proposed outdoor retail sale or
commercial promotion.
(b) Signatures. The application must be signed by the applicant if the person is an individual; if the person
applying is a partnership, by a partner; and if the person applying is a corporation or an association, by one of its
officers. The individual signing the application shall sign and swear before an officer authorized to administer
oaths that he has carefully read the application, and that all of the information contained therein is true and
correct.
(c) Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee, as provided for in section
A4.07.018 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code, to compensate the city for the cost of administration of
this article, and no permit hereunder shall be issued until such fee has been paid by the applicant.
(d) Exemption from fee. The permit fee shall not be required when the outdoor retail sale and/or outdoor
commercial promotion is conducted by a nonprofit organization, including a charitable, veteran, educational,
nonprofit, philanthropic, or religious organization.
(e) Standards of operation.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor retail sale or commercial promotion in
the city unless such sale or promotion is adjacent to an existing permanent business operated in the
city and where the products sold outdoors are the same as those sold inside the existing permanent
business, and such activity is incidental to the normal conduct of business operated by the same
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/334
merchant or his employer in an on-site building for which a valid certificate of occupancy exists. An
outdoor retail sale or commercial promotion shall be limited to a total of thirty (30) days during any
twelve-month period. Notwithstanding this subsection, it shall be lawful for an outdoor retail sale or
commercial promotion of not more than fourteen (14) days in duration, when conducted by a
nonprofit organization, including a charitable, veteran, educational, religious, or philanthropic
organization on a church, school, retail or commercial parking lot in which event the products sold
need not be those sold inside the existing permanent business.
(2) No outdoor retail sale and/or outdoor commercial promotion shall utilize or encumber more
than ten percent (10%) of any parking lot, obstruct or interfere with any required parking space, fire
lane, fire hydrant, access, easement or any other area necessary for public traffic circulation within a
parking lot, be closer than the required building setback line from any dedicated street right-of-way.
No outdoor retail sale and/or outdoor commercial promotion shall be conducted in or on any vacant
lot, unimproved parking lot, public sidewalk, public street, public street right-of-way or public street
median.
(3) Any outdoor retail sale and/or outdoor commercial promotion shall be required to obtain all
necessary tent permits, building permits, electrical permits, food establishment permits, alcoholic
beverage permits, and all other permits required by ordinance or other law for the specific activities
to be conducted in conjunction with or as part of the outdoor retail sale and/or commercial promotion
and must be applied for separately in accordance with the applicable ordinance or law.
(4) Outdoor retail sales and/or outdoor commercial promotions shall be conducted only during the
hours of daylight except that an outdoor retail sale or outdoor commercial promotion adjacent to an
existing permanent business may be conducted during the normal hours of operation of the business.
(5) No person shall engage in or attempt to engage in any outdoor retail sale and/or commercial
promotion unless such activity is consistent with the zoning regulations prescribed for the district in
which the activity takes place.
(6) Outdoor retail sales and/or commercial promotions may only be conducted on church, school,
retail and commercial parking lots.
(7) No person engaged in an outdoor retail sale or commercial promotion shall stand in any street,
street right-of-way, median, or parkway to advertise or direct persons to the outdoor retail sale or
commercial promotion.
(1995 Code, sec. 4.618)
ARTICLE 4.08 DRILLING AND MINING OPERATIONS*
Sec. 4.08.001 Activities prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, individual, partnership or other legal entity to engage in or
permit drilling or mining for the purposes of exploring for, discovering, or producing oil, gas or other minerals
on any property within the city limits. (1995 Code, sec. 4.701)
Sec. 4.08.002 Penalty for violation
Each day in which a violation of the provisions of section 4.08.001 of this article occurs shall constitute a
separate offense and be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1995 Code, sec. 4.702)
ARTICLE 4.09 AMBULANCE SERVICES†
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/334
Sec. 4.09.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
Ambulance. Any vehicle equipped or used for transporting wounded, injured, or sick persons, but specifically
excludes funeral coaches.
Emergency ambulance. An ambulance used, designed or redesigned for the purpose of transporting the sick or
injured, the rendering of first aid, or the performance of rescue work while the vehicle is being operated under
emergency conditions.
Emergency services. An emergency trip to a place of emergency and the rendering of first aid and assistance and
the trip to a hospital or other qualified emergency treatment destination.
Transport ambulance. An ambulance or nonemergency vehicle designed or equipped for the purpose of picking
up and delivering sick, injured or wounded persons where time is not essential to the health or life of such
person.
Transport services. The nonemergency pickup and delivery of sick, injured or wounded persons where the
element of time in transporting said sick, injured or wounded persons (patients) to or from a hospital, rest home
or other health care institution is not essential to the health or life of such patient. The transport service regulated
hereby includes the pickup or the delivery of a patient coming into or leaving the city when the point of pickup
or point of delivery is outside of the limits of said city.
(Ordinance 95-2 adopted 4/20/95)
Sec. 4.09.002 City's rights reserved
The city reserves the right to grant an exclusive contract for ambulance services, for such period of time as it
sees fit, to a qualified licensee upon terms and conditions to be agreed upon between the parties. The city
reserves the right to render said services with its own equipment and personnel in the event circumstances
dictate. The city further reserves the right to call upon other ambulance service providers or other entities to
assist in providing said services in the event of a disaster which would necessitate additional vehicles, or in the
event adequate ambulance services cannot be provided under the terms of the exclusive contract. (Ordinance 95-
2 adopted 4/20/95)
Sec. 4.09.003 Certification
No person or business (profit or nonprofit) shall provide ambulance services upon the public streets of the city
without first obtaining approval of the city commission. Any person or business (profit or nonprofit), seeking to
obtain an exclusive right to provide ambulance services within the city, must certify and show proof that it can
and will comply with all license requirements and rules and regulations prescribed by state statutes pertaining to
the operation of ambulances and hold valid permits for providing said services. (Ordinance 95-2 adopted
4/20/95)
Sec. 4.09.004 Response to calls for service
Any person or business (profit or nonprofit) given an exclusive right to provide ambulance services within the
city shall agree to accept and respond to all 911 emergency calls originating from the city without undue delay,
except for justifiable cause. Requests for transport services shall be accepted and responded to on a first come
first serve basis and dependent on the availability of assets to perform the requested service. Lack of such
response could be a condition for the continuation of said exclusive right to provide ambulance services, as
determined by the city commission. (Ordinance 95-2 adopted 4/20/95)
Sec. 4.09.005 Accountability
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/334
The city's selected ambulance services provider shall provide the city manager a written monthly report on
operations conducted in support of its contract/agreement with the city. This report shall include the necessary
data required to insure that contractual obligations are being satisfied, subject data to be determined by
signatories of the contract/agreement which must protect established patient confidentiality rights. (Ordinance
95-2 adopted 4/20/95)
Sec. 4.09.006 Subsidies, fees and terms
Any subsidies, user fees and the terms for contracted ambulance services provided the city must be approved by
the city commission. User fees for said services shall be billed by the provider who has the responsibility of
collecting same. Subsidies, fees and terms for ambulance services providers within the city shall be determined
during negotiations for said services between the city and the services provider selected by the city. Said fees
and terms for the agreed upon services will be included in a contract/agreement between the city and the selected
provider, to which both parties will be a signatory. (Ordinance 95-2 adopted 4/20/95)
Sec. 4.09.007 Penalty for violation
Any person or persons violating the above outlined provisos shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, plus
court costs. (Ordinance 95-2 adopted 4/20/95)
ARTICLE 4.10 MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
Sec. 4.10.001 Definitions
Mobile home. Any vehicle or similar portable structure having been originally constructed with wheels, designed
for use as a conveyance upon highways, and having no original foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirting
and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes. This term shall be
interpreted to be inclusive of those structures commonly known as manufactured homes.
Mobile home or travel trailer park. Any plot of ground upon which ten or more spaces for mobile homes or
travel trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is
made for such accommodations.
Mobile home or travel trailer lot. Any plot of ground within a mobile home and/or travel trailer park designed
for the accommodation of one mobile home, travel trailer, motorized home, or motorized camper.
Travel trailers, motorized homes, motorized campers. All vehicles with permanent wheels that are readily
mobile from place to place, used primarily for travel and recreational purposes and usually not permanently or
semipermanently located in one particular site for use as a residence.
(1995 Code, sec. 12.101)
Sec. 4.10.002 License
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate, within the limits of the city, any
mobile home and/or travel trailer park unless such person shall first obtain a city license therefor. The license is
subject to being renewed in each fiscal year of the city.
(b) Fees. The annual license fee for each mobile home and/or travel trailer park shall be as provided for in
section A4.10.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code. The fee for the transfer of such license, as
provided for in this article, shall be as provided for in section A4.10.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to
this code.
(c) Application. Application for a mobile home and/or travel trailer park license shall be filed with the city
secretary for consideration by the city commission, and upon approval by the city commission, city zoning
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/334
commission and/or city adjustment board, the city secretary shall issue a license. Applications shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant, and contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home and/or travel trailer park.
(3) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed, or to be
constructed within the mobile home and/or travel trailer park.
(4) Such further information as may be requested by the city commission to enable it to determine
if the mobile home and/or travel trailer park will comply with the legal requirements.
(5) Dedication of public streets, alleys, public easements for utilities and drainage shall be optional
with the city commission, depending on the needs of the subdivided and surrounding area.
(d) Issuance. The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. The
city secretary, city health officer, and city planning and zoning commission shall investigate the applicant and
inspect the proposed plans and specifications. Each of them shall then make a report to the city commission and
include therein their recommendation relative to the issuance of a license. If the mobile home and/or travel
trailer park will be in compliance with all provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances or
statutes, the city commission may approve the application and, in the case of proposed parks, make such
approval contingent upon the completion of the park according to the plans and specifications submitted with the
application. The city secretary, at the direction of the city commission, shall issue the license.
(e) Mobile homes and/or travel trailers outside licensed parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or
maintain any such mobile home or travel trailer in any place in the city other than a duly licensed and lawful
mobile home and/or travel trailer park.
(f) Revocation. The city commission may revoke any license issued under this article in case any of the
provisions hereof are violated. However, before said license may be revoked, the city commission must give ten
(10) days' notice to the holder of said license and hold a hearing thereon. After said license has been revoked, the
license may be reissued if the reasons for said revocation have been duly corrected.
(g) Transfer and duration. Upon application for a transfer of the license, the city commission may issue a
transfer upon payment of the transfer fee. Such original license and transfer thereof may be granted at any time
during the year and shall expire at the end of the fiscal year of the city, unless previously revoked or terminated.
(h) Posting. The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the
mobile home and/or travel trailer park at all times.
(1995 Code, sec. 12.102)
Sec. 4.10.003 Penalty for violation
Any person, firm, or corporation violating this article or any portion thereof shall upon conviction be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009 of this
code, and each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense and punishable
accordingly. (1995 Code, sec. 12.103)
ARTICLE 4.11 WRECKER BUSINESSES
Sec. 4.11.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/334
Abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle that has been left on private property without the consent of the property
owner for a period in excess of five (5) calendar days or as defined in article 12.03, divisions 1 and 2 of the
parking regulations of the city.
Accident or collision. An accident or collision means a situation where one or more motor vehicles have collided
with any other motor vehicle or object.
Auto wrecker. A motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or
otherwise move another motor or electric vehicle.
Chief of police or police chief. The chief of police of the city or his/her designated representative.
Consent tow. Any tow conducted with the permission of, or at the direction of, the towed vehicle's legal or
registered owner, or such owner's authorized representative or vehicle operator. The term does not include a tow
of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves
the vehicle. Except as set forth in the definition of nonconsent tow, a tow will be considered a consent tow where
the owner is able to give consent or authorization.
Nonconsent tow. The tow of a motor vehicle in every instance in which the vehicle's legal or registered owner,
lienholder, or the owner's authorized representative or vehicle operator is unwilling or unable to designate a tow
operator to remove the vehicle, including instances in which the vehicle is: (1) abandoned or stolen; (2) a
wrecked vehicle that is unable to operate safely pursuant to the traffic laws of the state; or (3) being operated by
a person who is the subject of a custodial arrest or who is physically or mentally unable or unwilling to request a
wrecker company, tow operator, or destination, when a law enforcement officer determines that no other
authorized person is present and able to remove the vehicle. Regardless of this definition, city police officers
may control the scene of an accident in the manner they deem appropriate and order a nonconsent tow.
Pecuniary interest. Money, property or commercial interest, the primary significance of which is economic gain.
Pecuniary interest does not include any agreement by which a wrecker registered to one permit holder may
provide service to another permit holder, nor any monies paid pursuant to such an agreement.
Permit. Authorization granted by the chief of police under the provisions of this article to engage in towing from
the wrecker rotation lists in the city. A permit to operate as a vehicle storage facility lot shall only be valid for
the location set out in the application.
Permit holder. Any wrecker company possessing a current, valid permit to engage in towing from the wrecker
rotation lists in the city. No person other than the person to whom a permit to operate a vehicle storage facility
has been issued, or his agents or employees shall operate the vehicle storage facility.
Police scene. A police scene or scene of collision or accident is a place at which:
(1) An accident has taken place that is subject to a field investigation conducted by a law
enforcement officer;
(2) A law enforcement officer has recovered a stolen vehicle;
(3) A vehicle has been abandoned in a roadway;
(4) A custodial arrest by a law enforcement officer has taken place; or
(5) A vehicle is otherwise subject to removal or impoundment pursuant to law by a law
enforcement officer.
Redtagged vehicles. A motor vehicle that has been identified for towing by the police department for parking,
traffic, or code violations or a junked vehicle as defined in section 8.04.001 of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/334
Tow. The removal from public or private property of a vehicle, including a trailer towed by the vehicle, by
means of an auto wrecker only.
Tow operator. Any individual who drives an auto wrecker.
Vehicle. An electrical or motorized device in, on, or by which a person or property may be transported on a
public roadway. The term includes an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle,
or trailer but does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail or track.
Vehicle owner. A person:
(1) Named as the purchaser or transferee in the certificate of title issued for the vehicle under
chapter 501, Transportation Code;
(2) In whose name the vehicle is registered under chapter 502, Transportation Code, or a member
of the person's immediate family;
(3) Who holds the vehicle through a lease agreement;
(4) Who is an unrecorded lienholder entitled to possess the vehicle under the terms of a chattel
mortgage; or
(5) Who is a lienholder holding an affidavit of repossession and entitled to repossess the vehicle.
Vehicle storage facility. The site to which a permit holder shall tow and/or store vehicles picked up under the
provisions of this article. The site shall accommodate parking for at least twenty (20) vehicles parked in an
orderly manner. No vehicle may be stored or kept on any vehicle storage facility operating under a permit issued
under this article unless it is kept inside the fenced area at all times. The site shall be located within the city
limits, its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or within three (3) miles of these areas, and must be leased or owned by
the permit holder. The site must be licensed by the state.
Wrecked vehicle. A vehicle that, due to a collision, is incapable of being driven or moved.
Wrecker company. A person or legal entity operating a tow truck registered under Tex. Transportation Code
Ann. chapter 643 (Vernon 1999). The term includes the owner, operator, employee, or agent of a towing
company, but does not include a political subdivision of the state.
Wrecker company office. A building located in the city limits, or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and owned or
leased by the permit holder, being the permit holder's primary business location and housing all of the permit
holder's business records, phones and personnel with regular business hours Monday through Saturday and on
Sundays and legal holidays with the same being posted in the building. This may be, but is not required to be,
the same as the permit holder's vehicle storage facility.
Wrecker rotation list. A list of permit holders prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 4.11.002 Scope
(a) This article applies to all wrecker movements within the city, except for those performed by governmental
entities.
(b) Unless exempted by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a wrecker company, or to
perform wrecker movements for nonconsent tows in the city without a permit issued in accordance with this
article.
(c) This article does not prohibit a wrecker company that has obtained a certificate of registration or permit
from the state, from making a consent tow through the limits of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/334
(d) All permit holders under this article shall comply with all applicable state laws. A failure to comply with
state laws will be a violation of this article.
Sec. 4.11.003 General regulations
(a) Obedience to police at accident scene; interference with police. All wrecker drivers at a police scene shall
obey all lawful orders given them by any law enforcement officer investigating such scene and shall not in any
manner knowingly or intentionally interfere with such law enforcement officer in the performance of his duty.
(b) Wrecker driven to police scene or scene of collision. No person shall drive, or cause to be driven, a
wrecker to or near the scene of a collision on a street in the city unless such person has been called to the scene
by the police department. In situations where a wrecker driver is a certified emergency medical technician, such
driver may stop and render aid as required by law but such wrecker driver will not be able to tow at such
collision except pursuant to the rotation list.
(c) Police transmitter inside wrecker unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any wrecker or wrecker service to have
a police transmitter inside any wrecker operating within the city limits.
(d) Wrecker driver's relationship with police officers. All wrecker drivers arriving at the place where any
accident has occurred shall obey all lawful orders given them by any police officer investigating such accident
and shall not in any manner interfere with such officer in the performance of his duty.
(e) Parking of wrecker at scene of accident. Whenever a wrecker arrives at the place where a vehicle has been
disabled, the wrecker driver shall park his wrecker as close to the street curb as possible and otherwise dispose
of it in a manner that does not interfere with traffic. He shall not park his vehicle within a distance of twenty-five
(25) feet from a wrecked or disabled vehicle.
(f) Duty of wrecker driver to clear debris. Where vehicles to be towed have been involved in an accident or is
an otherwise damaged or disabled vehicle, it is the responsibility of the wrecker drivers to ensure that any glass
or other debris or parts accumulated as the result of an accident or collision from the street are removed from the
scene of the accident to the satisfaction of the officer investigating the accident. In the event two (2) or more
wreckers pick up vehicles for towing, it shall be the duty of each driver to clear and remove debris, parts or glass
from the street. The fees established in section 4.11.012 of this code for the nonconsent tows are inclusive of
glass, parts, and debris cleanup and removal for services other than tows requiring heavy-duty wreckers. For
consent tows, any additional service fees for those services shall be disclosed on the wrecker slip.
(g) Issuance and expiration of permits; renewal; fee.
(1) The chief of police shall issue an annual permit to engage in towing from the wrecker lists to
all applicants complying with the provisions of this article. A permit may be evidenced by a
windshield sticker.
(2) No permit shall be granted to any person who had a pecuniary interest in a wrecker business
whose permit has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. This shall include any
stockholders, officers, directors, managers or partners.
(3) Each permit holder must present the wreckers for inspection annually by January 1 at the police
department.
(4) Each company desiring to be on the wrecker lists shall pay an annual nonrefundable inspection
fee as provided for in section A4.11.007 of the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(5) A wrecker company or wrecker failing to pass inspection shall pay a nonrefundable
reinspection fee, as provided for in section A4.11.007 of the fee schedule found in appendix A of this
code, per additional inspection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/334
(6) No permit shall be granted to any person or company whose name appears on the current
delinquent tax rolls of the city.
(h) Vehicle operator to designate wrecker company. When a police officer investigating a collision determines
that any vehicle involved in a collision is unable to safely proceed under its own power, or when the police
officer determines that the driver of any vehicle involved in a collision is physically unable to safely move the
vehicle to a location where it will not create a traffic hazard, such officer shall request the driver to designate the
permit holder he desires to remove the vehicle, and the police officer shall contact the driver's designee.
(i) Wrecker rotation list operation. In the event a police officer requires the removal of a vehicle and the
vehicle operator does not designate the permit holder of his choice, due to the operator's arrest or incapacitation,
the officer shall request the permit holder next to be called from the wrecker rotation list.
(j) Parking in residential areas. Except in the following situations, no person shall drive or park a permitted
wrecker in a residential area within the corporate limits of the city:
(1) Where a consent tow has been requested;
(2) Where a wrecker has become inoperable and is waiting for transportation to a repair facility; or
(3) Where the police department has directed such activity.
(k) Business name; fences, paving, signs, etc. No name other than the name set out in the application as the
name under which the business is conducted may be used for advertising, for telephone listing or for the conduct
of the automobile storage business at a storage lot authorized to operate as a vehicle storage facility.
(1) If a vehicle storage facility permit holder desires to change the name under which it conducts
business, the permit holder shall file a notice of such change with the police department on a form
designated by the city at least ten days before the name of the vehicle storage facility is changed.
Such notice shall show the license number issued under this chapter for the vehicle storage facility,
the current name under which business is conducted, the name that will be used, and the date on
which the change of name shall be made. Only one name may be used at any one time for the
conduct of business at a vehicle storage facility.
(2) Each vehicle storage facility operating under a permit issued under this article:
(A) Shall be shielded from view from any public roadway, enclosed by a privacy fence at
least six (6) feet in height constructed from materials approved by the city planning department,
and a gate that is locked at all times while the permit holder or an agent or employee is not at
the vehicle storage facility to insure twenty-four (24) hour security;
(B) Shall have an all-weather surface of concrete, asphalt, blacktop, stone, macadam,
limestone, iron ore, gravel or shell;
(C) Shall have a sign clearly readable from the street setting out the name of the vehicle
storage facility, the street address, the hours vehicles will be released to vehicle owners, and the
city license number of the vehicle storage facility;
(D) Shall have a sign setting out the charges for towing vehicles, the per diem charge for
storage and all other fees that may be charged by the vehicle storage facility. This sign shall be
located so that it is clearly visible to a vehicle owner prior to payment of the fees;
(E) Shall have an operable telephone. If at any time, the number of the telephone located at
the vehicle storage facility is changed from the number set out in the application for permit to
operate as a vehicle storage facility, the permit holder shall give written notice of the change to
the police department prior to the date the new number is used setting out in such notice the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/334
name of the storage facility, its location, its city license number, the old telephone number and
the new telephone number.
(l) Inspection and report. When the permit holder, agent or employee of a vehicle storage facility accepts a
vehicle towed without the consent of the vehicle owner, such person shall inspect the vehicle and note, as an
addition on the wrecker slip, any differences from the information previously set out thereon, but shall not write
over or deface in any manner any prior writing on the wrecker slip. If the license plate number or vehicle
identification number on the wrecker slip was incorrect, the vehicle storage facility shall notify the police
department of the correct number within 30 minutes of the time the vehicle was delivered to the vehicle storage
facility if delivered during hours the vehicle storage facility must ensure that vehicles may be released or within
two hours from the time the vehicle storage facility must ensure vehicles may be released if the vehicle was
delivered during any other time.
(m) Inspection by police. The permit holder shall ensure that all automobiles and parts thereof located on a
vehicle storage facility are available and accessible for inspection by any police officer during the hours the
vehicle storage facility must ensure that vehicles may be released to vehicle owners.
(n) Right of owner of stored vehicle to inspect wrecker slip. Whenever a person claims ownership or right of
possession to a motor vehicle located on a vehicle storage facility operated under a permit issued under this
article, such person shall be entitled to inspect the wrecker slip for the motor vehicle, and shall not be required to
pay any fees or charges prior to inspecting the wrecker slip.
(o) Duty to provide attendant, etc. The permit holder of a vehicle storage facility that has on its property
vehicles that were towed without the consent of the vehicle owner shall be responsible to ensure that vehicles
may be received at any time and that motor vehicles may be released to the vehicle owner twenty-four (24)
[hours] a day, seven (7) days a week. Additionally, the permit holder of a vehicle storage facility that has on its
property vehicles that were towed without the consent of the vehicle owner shall be responsible to ensure that
the vehicle owner have access to their vehicle for retrieval of personal belongings twenty-four (24) [hours] a day,
seven (7) days a week. During the hours the permit holder shall ensure that vehicles may be released, someone
must be at the vehicle storage facility who has authority to release the vehicles to the vehicle owners or a phone
must be provided so that a vehicle owner can contact someone who is able and will in fact be at the vehicle
storage facility within 30 minutes of receiving such a call and who is able to release the vehicles.
Sec. 4.11.004 Duties of permit holders
(a) Insurance.
(1) All permit holders shall carry public liability and property damage insurance in the amount
decided by the city commission.
(2) All permit holders shall maintain automobile liability insurance, $1,000,000.00 combined
single limit per occurrence.
(3) All permit holders shall maintain a certificate of cargo insurance to cover damage to a towed
vehicle during hook-up and/or towing in the minimum amount of $50,000.00; or a surety bond in the
amount of $50,000.00.
(4) Workers' compensation or occupational safety insurance.
(5) All drivers of auto wreckers shall be named insured on operator's liability insurance policy.
(b) Call response.
(1) All permit holders shall be allowed no more than thirty (30) minutes to respond to a call
anywhere in the city limits. If the responding wrecker fails to meet this time requirement, whether in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/334
route or not, the call shall immediately be canceled and the next rotation wrecker called.
(2) Any permit holder unable to respond, for whatever reason, for five (5) times or three (3)
consecutive times during any one (1) year [period], shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation
pursuant to section 4.11.009 of this article.
(3) All permit holders shall store all vehicles picked up under the provisions of this article at their
respective vehicle storage facility unless otherwise instructed by the owner of the vehicle.
(c) Service hours. A permit holder operating a wrecker, must maintain a twenty-four (24) hour wrecker
service, seven (7) days a week, and have two (2) telephone numbers, one of which is answered twenty-four (24)
hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The permit holder must be able to immediately advise the chief of the
availability of a tow truck. The wrecker company must have two-way voice communication between the
wreckers and the wrecker company's office.
(d) Solicitations by permit holders prohibited. No permit holder, or his employee, shall solicit, in any manner
directly or indirectly, on the streets of this city, a wrecker's business involving any vehicle that has been wrecked
or otherwise disabled on a public street. This prohibition applies regardless of whether the solicitation is for the
purpose of soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, selling, or
purchasing such vehicle. Proof of the operation of a wrecker by any person engaged in a wrecker business by or
near the scene or site of a wreck or collision on a public street in the city without having first complied with the
provisions of section 4.11.003(g) or (h) of this article shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation
of this section.
Sec. 4.11.005 Wrecker requirements
(a) General.
(1) All permit holders shall maintain wreckers meeting the requirements of this article.
(2) All wreckers shall be in such condition that they can safely and readily be used as a wrecker.
(3) All permit holders shall provide wreckers with qualified and capable drivers, and/or operators
with the knowledge and experience satisfactory to the chief of police.
(b) Wrecker lifting capacity. Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power operated winch with a lifting
capacity of not less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds single line capacity, as reflected by a manufacturer's
certificate.
(c) Standard equipment.
(1) Each wrecker shall carry as standard equipment: two (2) safety chains, one (1) 2.5 pound
A.B.C. fire extinguisher, wrecker bar, broom and dust pan.
(2) Each wrecker with a rated capacity of three (3) tons or greater shall be equipped with booster
brakes.
(3) Each wrecker must be equipped with dual rear tires.
(4) Upon request of a police officer or vehicle owner, the permit holder must make available a
wrecker with a specially designed wheel lift attachment. This need not be a requirement for every
wrecker unit, but each permit holder must own at least one (1) so equipped.
(5) Each wrecker shall carry a trash receptacle capable of holding all debris from a vehicle
accident scene.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/334
(d) Carrying capacity. Each wrecker's carrying capacity shall not be less than one (1) ton as reflected on the
manufacturer's certificate for the vehicle.
(e) Name. Each wrecker must have the permit holder's name permanently displayed on each side of the
wrecker at least three (3) inches in size.
Sec. 4.11.006 Wrecker rotation list operation
(a) The chief of police shall establish and cause to be maintained two (2) wrecker lists of wrecker companies
domiciled within the city limits, its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or within three (3) miles of these areas, and must
be leased or owned by the permit holder, as follows:
(1) A rotation list that indicates all validly permitted wrecker companies and shall only be used for
nonconsent tows of vehicles involved in traffic accidents, arrests or traffic hazards; and
(2) A service list that shall be the same as the rotation list, but shall only be used for nonconsent
tows involving abandoned and/or redtagged vehicles or city vehicles.
(b) Such lists shall be made available for inspection during regular business hours. The lists shall contain a
designation of each permit holder qualified to be on the lists in order of rotation list number. The list shall be
reviewed every two (2) years at the discretion of the police chief. As each new permit holder becomes qualified,
it shall be placed at the end of the list. Each permit holder shall make his records available to the chief of police
or his designee during regular business hours at the primary office of the permit holder within the city or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. In the event no permit holder agrees to be placed on the service list, then all permit
holders will be automatically assigned to the service list by the police chief and subject to the provisions of
section 4.11.009 of this article.
(c) Nothing in this article shall be construed to either create rotation and/or service lists or set maximum
towing fees for consent tows.
Sec. 4.11.007 Fees
Each permit holder shall charge fees according to the classification for the service provided. Fees shall be as
provided for in the fee schedule found in sections A4.11.007 and A4.11.012 of appendix A of this code.
Sec. 4.11.008 Contractual agreement between wrecker owner and permit holder
No permit holder may engage in more than one (1) contractual agreement to provide wreckers to another permit
holder.
Sec. 4.11.009 Violation procedures; enforcement; penalties
(a) The police chief, or his designee, shall enforce the terms and provisions of this article.
(b) The police chief, or his designee, may promulgate procedures to carry out and enforce the provisions of
this article.
(c) The police chief, or his designee, may immediately revoke the permit if he finds either of the following to
be true:
(1) The permit was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact or that any
fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the time of application and such fact would have
constituted just cause for refusal to issue the permit; or
(2) The permit holder's insurance has been cancelled, is no longer in force for whatever reason, the
amounts of insurance have been reduced, or the permit holder does not furnish proof of financial
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/334
responsibility upon demand by the police chief, or his designee.
(d) The police chief, or his designee, may revoke the permit or suspend the permit holder from the rotation
and/or service lists if he finds any of the following to be true:
(1) The permit holder illegally solicited tow or repair services at a police investigation;
(2) The permit holder on a rotation or service list refuses to tow a vehicle when requested by the
police department;
(3) The permit holder exceeded the fee schedule;
(4) The permit holder has violated any of the requirements or provisions of this chapter, any of the
rules and regulations established by the police chief, or his designee, or the city or any state or federal
law or regulation;
(5) The amount of towed or stored vehicles exceed the permissible capacity of the vehicle storage
facility as defined in section 4.11.001 of this article;
(6) The permit holder parks towed or stored vehicles outside of the vehicle storage facility for
more than 30 minutes, whether situated on private or public property.
(e) Upon complaint being filed by any person with the chief of police of a violation of any of the terms or
provisions of this article, or the violation of any of the applicable laws of the state, federal government, or city,
the chief of police shall, after fifteen (15) days' written notice, to the holder of a permit under this article, on the
grounds of such complaint, or upon the chief's motion, conduct a hearing to hear evidence with reference to such
complaint or motion. Should such hearing reveal a violation of any of the terms of this article or the laws of this
state or federal government, or ordinances of the city, the police chief, or his designee, may suspend, cancel, or
revoke the permit of such permit holder as set forth below.
(f) After the police chief has held the hearing and investigation upon the complaint or motion for the
suspension, cancellation, or revocation of a permit of any permit holder, he shall make his findings and declare
the same in writing to the permit holder within fifteen (15) days after such hearing.
(g) The permit holder, in cases of revocation, shall have the right to appeal to the city commission. The
request for appeal must be made, in writing, to the city secretary within ten (10) days of notification. Upon
receiving such request for appeal, the city commission, as soon as practicable thereafter, shall notify the
appellant as to whether or not such an appeal will be heard and if the council approves such an appeal, it then
may hear such and shall either sustain or reverse the revocation of the police chief.
(h) If no appeal is taken from the police chief's action within ten (10) days of notification, as set out herein,
then the decision of the police chief shall be final.
(i) The period of administrative action per calendar year shall be as follows:
(1) For the first violation, not more than thirty (30) days;
(2) For the second violation, not more than ninety (90) days; and
(3) For the third or subsequent violation, such period of suspension, cancellation or revocation as
the police chief may determine, including permanent revocation.
(j) Unless otherwise provided, a person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than
$500.00; provided, however, if the person is convicted of an offense under this article that is also a violation of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/334
the penal laws of the state, the person shall be subject to the penalties set out in the state penal laws for the
offense. Each day that any violation continues shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense.
(k) The administrative penalty set forth in this section shall be independent of and may be in addition to any
other penalties assessed pursuant to any violation of any ordinance of the city or statute or administrative code of
the state. The determination of whether the violation is significant shall be within the sole discretion of the
police chief.
Sec. 4.11.010 Actions to be taken after vehicle storage facility permit lapses or is suspended or revoked
If a permit to operate a vehicle storage facility is not renewed or is suspended or revoked, or if a vehicle storage
facility surrenders its permit for any reason, the former holder shall continue to comply with section 4.11.003(o)
and all provisions of this article relating to the care of vehicles on the vehicle storage facility, the moving of such
vehicles from the vehicle storage facility and the release of such vehicles to vehicle owners until all vehicles that
have been brought to the lot without the vehicle owner's consent have been released to the vehicle owner or
moved from the vehicle storage facility.
Sec. 4.11.011 Surrender of permit after suspension; no refund of fees after revocation
(a) In the event a vehicle storage facility permit is suspended for a definite period of time, the permit shall be
surrendered to the city immediately upon demand of the police department and shall be void and of no effect
during the period of such suspension.
(b) In the event a vehicle storage facility permit is revoked, the city shall not be liable to the holder for any
refund or any part of the fee paid for the permit.
Sec. 4.11.012 Maximum charges
Maximum charges for nonconsent tows and storage fees arising out of tows originating within the city limits or
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall not exceed those as provided for in section A4.11.012 of the fee
schedule found in appendix A of this code.
Sec. 4.11.013 Miscellaneous requirements
(a) Conflict of interests by city officials. No member of the police department shall have any ownership
interest in any vehicle storage facility that is required to be authorized under the provisions of this article or in
any towing company that holds a police-authorized tow service agreement. No other appointed or elected official
or employee of the city shall have any ownership interest in any vehicle storage facility where there may be a
conflict of interest due to the person's position or duties. This section shall not be applicable to members of the
automotive board.
(b) Permits and licenses.
(1) Permits enumerated in this subsection shall be denied if the applicant (1) has been convicted of
any of the designated offenses within the seven-year period immediately preceding the date of the
filing of the application or has spent time in jail or prison during the seven-year period immediately
preceding the date of filing of the application for such a conviction; or (2) is subject to deferred
adjudication in connection with any of the above offenses. The seven-year limitation shall not apply
to any felony conviction for any sexual offense or offense involving violence, including, but not
limited to, murder. Additionally, the permit shall be subject to denial, revocation, or refusal for
renewal, as applicable, if the permittee has been convicted of any of the designated offenses since the
application was filed. Provided, however, no such permit shall be denied, revoked, or refused for
renewal if the conviction was set aside as invalid or if it is found that the permit should not be denied,
revoked or refused for renewal under chapter 53 of the Texas Occupations Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/334
(2) The following shall be grounds for denial, revocation, or refusal if the applicant or permittee
has been convicted of the following:
(A) Any violation of the ordinances or statutes regulating the sale, trade, servicing, storage,
handling, dismantling, or destruction of any motor vehicle or motor vehicle parts, accessories,
or supplies.
(B) Any offense involving fraud or misrepresentation.
(C) Any offense involving felony theft, robbery, or burglary.
(D) Any offense involving bribery or perjury.
(E) Any offense involving violence to any person except for conduct that is classified as no
greater than a class C misdemeanor under state laws.
(F) Any felony conviction for any violation of any state or federal laws regulating firearms.
(G) Any offense involving forgery.
(H) Any offense involving the theft or unauthorized use of a motor vehicle.
(I) Any offense involving prostitution, the promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion
of prostitution, or compelling prostitution.
(J) Obscenity.
(K) Any offense involving rape, sexual abuse, sexual assault, enticing of a child, rape of a
child, sexual abuse of a child, indecency with a child, or sexual performance by a child.
(L) Harboring a runaway child as described in chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code.
(M) Possession or promotion of child pornography.
(N) Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor.
(O) Employment harmful to children.
(P) Any offense involving the felony possession or delivery of drugs.
(Q) Any offense involving driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated, whether under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, or both.
(R) Any offense involving gambling or possession of gambling paraphernalia.
(S) Four or more moving violations of the traffic laws of the state or any other state, each of
which arises from a separate incident, occurring within any 12-month period during the three
years immediately preceding the application for a license or of the notice of a hearing for
revocation of a license.
(T) Any violation of state laws relating to the operation of motor vehicle storage lots.
(3) This section shall not limit the right of the city to deny, revoke or refuse to renew any license or
permit on any grounds set out in the ordinance relating to such permit except insofar as such license
or permit is denied or revoked on the basis of a criminal conviction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/334
(Ordinance 2009-08 adopted 7/14/09)
ARTICLE 4.12 REFUSE TRANSFER STATIONS
Sec. 4.12.001 Application fees; inspection fees; host fee
Fees are provided for in section A4.12.001 of the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
Sec. 4.12.002 Civil fines and penalties
In the event a transfer station owner and/or operator is finally adjudged in the proper state or federal regulatory
or judicial process of contaminating the surface, subsurface, or groundwater, transfer station operations will
cease and a civil fine of $1,000.00 per day will be assessed to the operator or owner until remediation has begun.
Remediation will be considered to have begun once an assessment study has been implemented.
(Ordinance 2009-17 adopted 12/1/09)
ARTICLE 4.13 GAME HALLS
Sec. 4.13.001 Purpose
(a) This article shall govern all premises in which one (1) or more level 1 gaming devices, as hereinafter
defined, and/or six (6) or more level 2 gaming devices, as hereinafter defined, are operated, displayed, or
exhibited. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other city ordinance, the stricter requirements
shall prevail.
(b) No person, partnership, corporation, estate, trust or any other form of legal or business entity shall display
or exhibit, or permit to be displayed or exhibited, operate or permit to be operated, one (1) or more level 1
gaming devices, as hereinafter defined, and/or six (6) or more level 2 game devices, as hereinafter defined on
any premises located within the corporate limits of the city without having first obtained from the city a game
hall business license and specific use permit (SUP) as required in this code. In addition, no person, partnership,
corporation, estate, trust or any other form of legal or business entity shall display or exhibit, or permit to be
displayed or exhibited, operate or permit to be operated any gaming devices, as hereinafter defined and whether
level 1 or level 2, without first paying any applicable occupational tax as required in this code.
(c) A “gambling device” is strictly prohibited within the city.
Sec. 4.13.002 Definitions
City manager. All references to the “city manager” in this article shall be understood to include any
administrative official designated by the city manager to act in his or her behalf.
Gambling device. As currently defined under Texas Penal Code chapter 47, means any electronic,
electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance not excluded under subsection (2) below that for a consideration
affords the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or
partially by chance, even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid by
the contrivance. The term:
(1) Includes, but is not limited to, gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery,
roulette, video poker, or similar electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical games, or facsimiles
thereof, that operate by chance or partially so, that as a result of the play or operation of the game
award credits or free games, and that record the number of free games or credits so awarded and the
cancellation or removal of the free games or credits; and
(2) Does not include any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance designed, made,
and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes if the contrivance rewards the player
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/334
exclusively with noncash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties, or a representation of value
redeemable for those items, that have a wholesale value available from a single play of the game or
device of not more than 10 times the amount charged to play the game or device once or $5.00,
whichever is less.
Game hall. Any premises within city limits, in which one (1) or more level 1 gaming devices or six (6) or more
level 2 gaming devices are operated or available for operation, or exhibited or displayed to retail patrons or
potential retail patrons.
(Ordinance 2011-10 adopted 7/12/11)
Level 1 gaming device. An electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance (including any software
related to the operation thereof) designed, made, and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes which
rewards the player, either by chance or a combination of skill and chance, exclusively with noncash merchandise
prizes, toys, or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, that have a wholesale value
available from a single play of the game or device of not more than ten times the amount charged to play the
game or device once or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is less. A level 1 gaming device also includes an
electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance (including any software related to the operation
thereof) designed, made, and used for amusement, promotional or charitable fundraising purposes and
commonly referred to as a “sweepstakes”; provided such sweepstakes meets all criteria imposed by state law
related to such activity. To qualify as a sweepstakes, the player must be rewarded solely by chance, participation
is not conditioned upon the making of a purchase or donation, the odds of winning are identical whether the
participant makes a purchase or donation or does not make a purchase or donation, a single finite set of entries is
available, and a single finite set of prizes is awarded regardless of the number of participants and is established
prior to commencing the sweepstakes. A “level 1 gaming device” includes, but is not limited to, gaming and
sweepstakes versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, roulette, video poker, or similar 8-liner machines
whether operated on a dedicated machine exclusively programmed therefor or on a nondedicated device
including but not limited to a computer terminal. (Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 3/13/12)
Level 2 gaming device.
(1) Machines that awards the user noncash prizes, toys or novelties directly from the machine,
including claw, crane and similar machines; and
(2) Machines or contrivances from which the opportunity to receive noncash merchandise prizes,
toys or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, varies depending upon the
user's ability to throw, roll, flip, toss, hit or drop a ball or other physical object into the machine or
contrivance or a part thereof, including, but not limited to, baseball, basketball, bowling, football,
golf, pinball, pusher, ring toss, skeeball or other similar machines or contrivances.
Operator. Any person who exhibits, displays, or permits to be exhibited, displayed, or operated, in a premises
owned by him or her or under his or her control, one (1) or more level 1 gaming devices or six (6) or more level
2 gaming devices, in the city.
Permittee. Any person, employee, assignee, firm, company, partnership, association, or corporation that holds a
game hall SUP.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
Sec. 4.13.003 Specific use permit and business license
(a) All game halls are required to obtain a game hall specific use permit (SUP) and a game hall business
license before commencing operations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/334
(b) Traveling carnivals are not required to obtain a game hall SUP or a game hall business license provided
the traveling carnival obtains a carnival SUP, its stay in the city does not exceed fourteen (14) days and it does
not operate any level 1 gaming devices. Carnivals are subject to the fifteen ($15.00) per gaming device
occupational tax. If a carnival operates any level 1 gaming devices, it must obtain an SUP and business license
as provided in this article prior to opening for business. Any carnival level 2 gaming devices that remain within
the city longer than fourteen (14) days will no longer be considered carnival level 2 gaming devices and are
subject to all other provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, this article.
(c) A person proposing to operate a game hall must submit an application for a specific use permit as provided
in chapter 14, exhibit A, section 19 of this code together with business license application as provided in this
code. Such applications shall be in the form and content as required to comply with the provisions of this code
and other applicable law as determined by the city manager and shall include a requirement that the applicant
provide a Texas Department of Criminal Safety Criminal History Record dated within 30 days of the date of
such application on all owners of the premises, owners and operators of the proposed game hall, and all owners
of the proposed gaming devices.
(d) The applications for a specific use permit and business license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
payment in the form of cashier check or money order in such amount as provided in the fee schedule found in
sections A4.01.001 and A14.01.001 of appendix A to this code as amended from time to time.
(e) In addition to the site plan required by chapter 14, exhibit A, section 19 of this code, an applicant must
submit a floor plan which displays the physical layout of the proposed game hall. The floor plan must at least at
1/8" = 1' scale and must show:
(1) All means of ingress and egress;
(2) The location of all walls and partitions;
(3) Whether such walls or partitions extend from the floor to the ceiling or not, and if not the
distance from the top of the wall or partition to the ceiling; and
(4) The location and intensity of all lighting fixtures.
(f) An applicant shall, not later than the 10th day after filing of the required applications and payment of the
required nonrefundable fees, shall erect a sign on the property where the proposed game hall is to be located.
The sign shall:
(1) Face and be visible from the public roadways adjacent to the premises;
(2) Measure four feet by eight feet in size; and
(3) In clear type of no less than six inches in size state, in both English and Spanish, the following:
“A GAME HALL is proposed for this location. The City Commission will hold a Public
Hearing on ________(date). For. more information, contact La Feria City Hall at 797-2261.”
Such sign shall be continuously maintained on the property for not less than 45 consecutive days prior to the
date of such scheduled public hearing.
(g) Applications for a game hall SUP, including initial and renewal applications, must be completed by the
applicant under oath, subjecting the applicant to the applicable laws of perjury.
Sec. 4.13.004 Location
(a) No game hall may be established or operate:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/334
(1) In any zoning district other than as authorized by the applicable zoning regulations under this
code.
(2) Within six hundred sixty feet (660') of:
(A) A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building used primarily for religious worship
and related religious activities;
(B) A public or private educational facility or the grounds of such facility, including but not
limited to a child day care facility of any type, nursery school, preschool, kindergarten,
elementary school, private school, intermediate school, junior high school, middle school, high
school, vocational school, secondary school, continuation school, special education school,
junior college, or university;
(C) A boundary of any residential district as defined by chapter 14 of this code;
(D) A park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities
including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian or bicycle path, wilderness area, or other area;
(E) The property line of a lot devoted to residential use, whether classified by chapter 14 of
this code as residential property or not; or
(F) An entertainment business or area, whether for profit or not, oriented primarily toward
children or family entertainment;
(3) Within five hundred feet (500') of any other game hall; or
(4) In the same building, structure, or portion thereof as any other game hall.
(b) For the purpose of subsection (a)(2), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on the nearest exterior wall of the structure used as a part
of the premises on which a game hall is conducted, to the closest point on the nearest property line of any of the
premises described in subsection (a)(2).
(c) For the purposes of subsection (a)(3) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest points on the nearest exterior walls of each structure
in which each game hall is located.
(d) The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for the purposes
of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
Sec. 4.13.005 Approval or disapproval of the SUP application
(a) In addition to the matters set forth in chapter 14, exhibit A, section 19 of this code relating generally to
special use applications, the city commission may disapprove an SUP application for a game hall if it determines
that the game hall constitutes a detriment to health, life, and property or the preservation of good government,
order, and security of the municipality and its inhabitants, including but not limited to the following factors:
(1) Failure to provide separate on premises handicap accessible sanitary facilities for men and
women;
(2) Delinquency in the payment of any tax, fee or assessment, including utility charges, by the
business licensee or premises owner;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/334
(3) Delinquency in the payment of gaming device occupational taxes, amusement taxes, or other
fees to the state, county, or the city by the business licensee, premises owner or owner of the gaming
devices;
(4) Conviction for a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude by the applicant, any
owner, part owner, shareholder, officer, director, manager or any person with any financial interest in
the game hall, the gaming devices, the premises, or any food concession;
(5) Denial or termination of a similar license or permit by another governmental entity;
(6) Admission to the premises being conditioned upon membership in a private club;
(7) The premises of a proposed game hall containing level 1 gaming devices are licensed for either
the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages; or
(8) Any failure to comply with any provision of this article.
(b) The city commission reserves the right to include in each game hall SUP those terms and conditions that it
believes are necessary or desirable to protect the public health, safety or welfare, including limitations on the
hours of operation, number of gaming devices, licensee requirements, site requirements, and anything else the
commission deems to be in the best interest of the citizens of the city.
Sec. 4.13.006 Operations
(a) Occupational tax.
(1) Each gaming device, whether level 1 or level 2, located within the city and operated by or
available for operation by a retail patron is subject to annual occupational tax of $15.00.
Occupational taxes shall be paid prior to any gaming device being made available for operation by a
retail patron and shall be pro-rated when applicable, based on the calendar year.
(2) Any gaming device, whether level 1 or level 2, which is located in an area open to the public
shall be presumed to be operated by, or available for operation by, a retail patron and subject to the
city's annual $15.00 occupational tax.
(3) The occupational tax is specific to each gaming device. Identification of the gaming device by
serial number or other method approved by the city manager and payment of the occupational tax is
required when any new gaming device or devices are brought into the city.
(b) Physical facilities. In addition to complying with all other applicable laws and ordinances, each game hall
must adhere to the following:
(1) Minimum general illumination of 20 footcandles/200 lux and gaming device illumination of 60
footcandles/600 lux;
(2) A nonsmoking area available to patrons;
(3) Seven foot (7') wide halls or pathways between gaming devices facing each other;
(4) Three foot (3') distance between each gaming device;
(5) All doors and gates to the building and parking lot shall remain unlocked while the licensed
premises are occupied by patrons or guests; and in the event the gate to the parking lot is locked after
hours, a key or lock combination will be provided to the city's fire and police department;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/334
(6) Every game room shall have transparent unobstructed windows or open space on at least one
(1) side so that the area is open to view by the general public passing by on a public street or using a
corridor, lobby or other room to which the public has access and is admitted without charge; and no
such view shall be obstructed by the use of drawn blinds, shades, partitions, tinting or other
structures, equipment or obstructions; and
(7) No more than one hundred (100) level 1 gaming devices may be operated in a game hall.
(c) No person under the age of 18 years old is permitted to enter or remain on the premises of a game hall
which contains a level 1 gaming device.
(d) No person in an intoxicated condition is permitted to enter or remain on the licensed premises of a game
hall.
(e) No loud or boisterous behavior either inside or outside the premises of a game hall by patrons or potential
patrons shall be permitted.
(f) Obscene material, as defined in chapter 43, section 43.24 of the Texas Penal Code, is prohibited and shall
not be permitted to be sold, viewed, or be available for viewing or sale on the licensed premises of a game hall.
(g) No game hall shall operate before 10:00 a.m. on any day or after 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday
nights or after 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
Sec. 4.13.007 Change in ownership or control
(a) A game hall SUP and business license are nontransferable and are deemed automatically revoked without
further action required by the city upon the transfer by any means, other than transfer upon death, of any interest
in the operator of the game hall, owner of the gaming devices or owner of the premises upon which the game
hall is located.
(b) A permittee is obligated to report to the city any total or partial change in ownership or control of the
business, premises, or gaming devices during the period of the SUP and business license, within ten (10) days of
such change in ownership or control.
Sec. 4.13.008 SUP and business license renewal
(a) Game hall SUPs and game hall business licenses expire not more than one (1) year, or such earlier time as
specifically provided in the SUP order, from the effective date of the SUP order. The permittee is responsible for
applying to renew the SUP and business license no less than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of SUP and
license.
(b) Renewal procedures are identical to the original application process, including but not limited to the
payment of all required fees; provided however, the requirements of section 4.13.003(f) relating to signage shall
not apply.
Sec. 4.13.009 Grounds for revocation of the SUP
Any of the following circumstances shall serve as grounds for the city to revoke or cancel a game hall SUP:
(1) Any violation of city zoning, fire, health, safety, building, plumbing or electrical codes;
(2) Any violation of the terms and conditions of the SUP;
(3) Delinquency in the payment of any tax, fee or assessment, including utility charges, due to the
city by the business licensee or owner of the premises;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/334
(4) Delinquent payment of gaming device occupational taxes, amusement taxes, or other fees to
the state, county, or the city;
(5) Conviction for a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude by the permittee, any owner, part
owner, shareholder, officer, director, manager or any person with any financial interest in the game
hall, the gaming devices, the premises, or any food concession;
(6) An excess number of requests for police or other emergency response at the premises or
excessive need for emergency response;
(7) Denial or termination of a similar license or permit by another governmental entity;
(8) The consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages in the business or premises;
(9) Admission to the premises being conditioned upon membership in a private club;
(10) Any occasion where the doors to the premises are locked during business hours; or
(11) Any violation of any provision of this article.
Sec. 4.13.010 Revocation procedures
(a) In the event any of the circumstances enumerated in section 4.13.009 exist, the city manager may
immediately cancel and revoke such SUP and instruct the permittee to cease all activity at the premises for
which the SUP was issued.
(b) Such notice of cancellation and revocation shall be written and personally delivered to any person
employed at the premises, posted on the front door of the premises, or mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the permittee at the address shown on the most recent SUP application.
(c) Any person whose SUP is revoked by the city manager may appeal to the city commission by filing a
written notice of appeal with the city manager within five (5) days of receipt of the cancellation notice. The
written notice of appeal shall set forth with specificity all facts and reasons which the permittee asserts as
grounds for withdrawing such cancellation.
(d) If a written notice of appeal is not timely filed, the action of the city manager shall be final on the sixth
calendar day following delivery of such notice.
(e) If a timely written notice of appeal is filed, it shall be heard by the city commission at a public hearing
during a regularly scheduled city commission not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from
the date the notice of appeal is received by the city manager, unless the time for hearing is extended for good
cause shown by either party or by mutual consent of the parties. In any event, written notice of the time, date,
and place of the hearing shall be provided to the permittee at least seven (7) days prior to the scheduled date of
such hearing.
(f) After written notice of the appeal is filed, the cancellation of the SUP shall be stayed pending the decision
on the appeal by the city commission unless the city manager files with the mayor an affidavit to the effect that
the continued operation of the game hall constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or morals of the
public and specifying the grounds of such opinion. Should the mayor, on the basis of such affidavit, determine
that probable cause exists for such opinion; the mayor shall order the SUP suspended pending the hearing before
the city commission. If the SUP is so suspended, all operations of the game hall during such suspension shall
immediately cease until such time as reinstated by the city commission.
(g) At least three (3) days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing, the city manager shall provide to
permittee, and the permittee to the city manager, a list of witnesses to be called by each party, and a written
memorandum of the expected testimony of each witness.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/334
(h) At any hearing on an appeal held by the city commission objecting to the cancellation of a SUP, the
permittee shall be afforded the right to be present and to confront and cross-examine any witnesses adverse to
the permittee. The permittee shall be permitted to offer witnesses in his or her own behalf. The permittee shall be
entitled to be represented by legal counsel employed by him or her and may provide for a record to be made of
the testimony at any such hearing at his or her own expense. All testimony given shall be under oath. The city
staff shall be afforded like privileges as the permittee. The city commission shall be the judge of the credibility
of the witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony. The mayor shall be the presiding officer at such
hearing.
(i) At the completion of the hearing, the city commission shall vote whether the action of the city manager
should be sustained and the SUP cancelled, the action of the city manager overruled and the SUP continue in full
force and effect, or the action of the city manager modified and the SUP suspended for a specific period of time
and/or such other conditions as set by the commission.
(j) The provisions hereof providing for the appeal of a cancellation of a SUP by action of the city manager do
not apply to the denial of a renewal application by the city commission.
Sec. 4.13.011 Penalties
(a) The operation of a game hall without an SUP constitutes a violation of the city's zoning ordinance and the
penalties as provided therein are applicable in addition to any additional penalties as provided herein.
(b) The operation of a gaming device without all appropriate permits and licenses required herein shall
constitute a class C misdemeanor, subject to a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day such
violation continues shall be a separate offense subject to separate penalty.
(c) Any gaming device located at a premises that has not obtained a game hall SUP or for which the required
occupational tax has not been paid and which is made available to any member of the public for operation for a
fee shall be seized and the gaming device and all monies within the gaming device forfeited to the city.
(d) The presence at any game hall of a gaming device for which the annual occupational tax has not been paid
or at a game hall for which a game hall SUP does not currently exist shall constitute a class C misdemeanor
subject to a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) per gaming device. Each day such violation continues
shall be a separate offense subject to a separate penalty. Such gaming devices shall be seized and the gaming
device and all monies within the gaming device forfeited to the city.
(e) Any violation of this article by an owner, operator, permittee, or licensee shall constitute grounds for
revocation of the SUP. Further, a violation of any condition hereby imposed shall render any gaming device
covered by this article a public nuisance and subject to abatement by the city in the manner for abatement of
public nuisances otherwise allowed by law.
(f) The penalties provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law and the power of
injunction as provided in Texas Local Government Code, section 211.012 and as may be amended, may be
exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed.
Sec. 4.13.012 Transition rules
All specific use permit applications currently pending with the city relating to game halls shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of this code and all related ordinances and regulations of the city as amended by
Ordinance 2011-10 from which this article derives, including but not limited to the required fees; provided
however, the requirements relating to posting of signs shall be in compliance with this code in effect as of the
date of filing such application. Within ten (10) days of the effective date hereof, the city manager or his or her
designated administrative official shall notify all pending applicants in writing of the amendments set forth
herein by both certified mail, return receipt requested and first-class mail. Such notification shall advise such
applicant that the pending application will be deemed automatically withdrawn and all deposits related to such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/334
pending application returned to the applicant unless within ten (10) days of the date of such notification that
such applicant files a written confirmation with the city indicating that such applicant desires to proceed on such
specific use permit application under the provisions of the code as amended by Ordinance 2011-10 and submits
all additional required deposits as provided herein.
(Ordinance 2011-10 adopted 7/12/11)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL†
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created; appointment; qualifications; salary
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Said office shall be filled by the city manager. The said fire marshal
shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office and shall be subject to removal at all times for any reason.
He shall receive a salary per month, to be fixed by the city commission at the time of his appointment. (1995
Code, sec. 5.201; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.02.002 Authority to investigate
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires,
together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss,
which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. (1995 Code, sec. 5.202)
Sec. 5.02.003 Authority to take testimony
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be recorded in writing; and if he shall be of
the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to
commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct with reference to such fire, he shall
cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to
the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses, and all of the
information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1995
Code, sec. 5.203)
Sec. 5.02.004 Authority to summon witnesses
The fire marshal has the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by
the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation and may require the production of any book,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/334
paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1995 Code, sec. 5.204)
Sec. 5.02.005 Unlawful to disobey
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
said fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper, or document touching any matters under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any proceedings of the fire marshal in the
matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under
investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal
to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall be
fined in a sum as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Provided,
however, that any person convicted shall have the right of appeal. (1995 Code, sec. 5.205)
Sec. 5.02.006 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other until they have been examined. (1995 Code, sec.
5.206)
Sec. 5.02.007 Authority to enter premises
The fire marshal has the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties
imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where
any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be
exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1995 Code, sec. 5.207)
Sec. 5.02.008 Inspections; order to remove or remedy certain conditions
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty quarterly, or more often, to enter
upon and make, or caused to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile,
manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any
building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any
cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so
occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or
dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including
chimneys, flues and pipes, with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting
devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline,
kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable and refuse materials, or
other conditions which may be dangerous in character, or liable to cause or promote fire, or create conditions
dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order
shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises. Provided, however, that
if said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by said order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the
mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and, unless by his authority the order is revoked, such
order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. (1995 Code, sec. 5.208)
Sec. 5.02.009 Penalty for violation
(a) Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same
when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/334
which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons, or their property therein, shall be punished by a
fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the
same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever,
including chimneys, flues and pipes with which they are connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire or
health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or
premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials,
refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of
others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall
create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or the occupants of such building, structure or premises, other
than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision in
section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1995 Code, sec. 5.209)
ARTICLE 5.03 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.03.001 Established
The volunteer fire department is hereby established for the purpose of preventing fires and to combat fires in or
around the city and is to be governed by the rules and regulations herein and any other further rules and
regulations as recommended by the fire chief of the volunteer fire department and approved by the city manager.
(Ordinance 2001-14, sec. 1, adopted 8/9/01)
Sec. 5.03.002 Bylaws to govern
The bylaws of the volunteer fire department, in division 2 of this article, are hereby adopted and shall govern the
operation of the volunteer fire department. (Ordinance 2001-14, sec. 2, adopted 8/9/01)
Sec. 5.03.003 Conformity with personnel policies
Although the volunteer fire department is not covered by the personnel policies of the city, each member of the
volunteer fire department will administer his or her duties as closely as possible in conformity with personnel
policies of the city, except that where such personnel polices are in conflict with this article, the terms and
provisions of this article shall prevail. Nothing herein shall be construed as designating any member of the
volunteer fire department as an employee of the city. (Ordinance 2001-14, sec. 3, adopted 8/9/01)
Sec. 5.03.004 Report of funds received
Any funds received by the volunteer fire department from any source in the form of grants, donations or
contributions will be reported to the city and designated for volunteer fire department use only. Expenditure of
such funds is subject to approval by the city manager. (Ordinance 2001-14, sec. 4, adopted 8/9/01)
Sec. 5.03.005 Appointment of fire chief
A fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager and shall preside over the volunteer fire department
according to the rules and regulations as set forth herein and such other and further rules as may be set forth
from time to time by the city commission or city manager. The fire chief shall report and be responsible to the
city manager. The position of fire chief shall be a volunteer position, and the fire chief shall fulfill the duties of
that office without compensation. Although a volunteer, the fire chief is subject to the personnel policies of the
city, to the extent possible. (Ordinance 2001-14, sec. 5, adopted 8/9/01)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/334
Sec. 5.03.006 Duties of fire chief
(a) The fire chief of the volunteer fire department shall perform or supervise certain duties, which include, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) Recruiting new members for the volunteer fire department.
(2) Supervision and scheduling of members in the volunteer fire department.
(3) Inventory and maintenance of all firefighting equipment.
(4) Preparation of a monthly report listing all fire calls made and of any unusual incidents and/or
accidents occurring in the process of combating fires.
(5) Training and education of new and existing members of the volunteer fire department.
(6) Preparation of an annual budget in August of each year and a semiannual report listing
suggested expenditures and/or needs of the volunteer fire department as it could impact the next
year's fiscal budget.
(7) Organize periodic fundraising drives in the community to support special needs of the
volunteer fire department.
(8) Prepare reports and/or data deemed necessary and relevant by the city manager.
(b) The fire chief may delegate any of the above duties to an appropriate officer of the volunteer fire
department as necessary.
(Ordinance 2001-14, sec. 6, adopted 8/9/01)
Secs. 5.03.007–5.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Bylaws
Part I. In General
Sec. 5.03.031 Title
This organization shall be known as the volunteer fire department, hereinafter referred to in these bylaws as the
department.
Sec. 5.03.032 Address of department
The department's address will be:
Central Fire Station
115 East Commercial Ave.
La Feria, Texas 78559
Sec. 5.03.033 Objective of department
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/334
The department's objective shall be the preservation and protection of life and property from fire and other
natural disasters including floods and storms as may occur in the city and in a designated surrounding rural area.
The department will also respond, in conjunction with the Harlingen Emergency Medical Service, to any
medical emergency for which its “first response” services are requested.
Secs. 5.03.034–5.03.055 Reserved
Part II. Internal Organization of Department
Sec. 5.03.056 Membership in department
The department shall be composed of 25 active members selected in accordance with procedures outlined in
section 5.03.006 of this article. Upon a two-thirds majority vote of all members, the department may recommend
an increase in the number of members to the city manager, who shall approve or deny the increase.
Sec. 5.03.057 Officers of the department
(a) The department shall have officers as follows:
(1) 1 chief.
(2) 2 assistant chiefs.
(3) 3 captains.
(4) 2 lieutenants.
(5) 1 sergeant-at-arms.
(6) 1 secretary.
(7) 1 treasurer.
(b) These officers, excluding the treasurer, comprise the executive board of the department.
Secs. 5.03.058–5.03.080 Reserved
Part III. Membership Process
Sec. 5.03.081 Initial application
Any person 18 years of age or older and of high moral standards may apply for membership. The applicant shall
be notified of the time to report for an interview with the executive board of the department. If the executive
board deems the applicant acceptable, it shall recommend appointment of the applicant to the city manager. If
appointed by the city manager, the applicant shall serve the department as a 90-day candidate.
Sec. 5.03.082 Restrictions for 90-day candidates
The purpose of this 90-day candidacy period is to introduce the 90-day candidate to the department and allow
members to become familiar with the 90-day candidate's skills and potential. A 90-day candidate will not be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/334
issued any department equipment. He/she will not be allowed to respond to any call using lights and sirens or be
involved in any department activities.
Sec. 5.03.083 Probationary membership
Upon successful completion of the 90-day candidacy period, the members of the department shall vote by secret
ballot on whether to recommend the 90-day candidate for acceptance as a probationary member. If a majority of
the members accepts the candidate, he/she will enter a 90-day period as a probationary firefighter. As a
probationary firefighter there will be no voting privileges. When the probationary member is allowed to begin
responding to calls, gear will be issued and driver training will begin. The member will not be allowed to drive
any department vehicle unless under supervision by a senior officer and the officer will be responsible for the
member's actions.
Sec. 5.03.084 Regular membership
Upon completion of the probationary period, the member will then be sworn in as a regular member.
Secs. 5.03.085–5.03.105 Reserved
Part IV. Election and Duties of Officers
Sec. 5.03.106 Procedure
Wherever these bylaws call for an election of a member or officer by the executive board or members of the
department, the election of such member or officer shall be a recommendation to the city manager that that
person be appointed to the position to which he or she was elected. The city manager shall then approve or deny
the appointment.
Sec. 5.03.107 Time of election of officers, term of office, replacement of officers, and eligibility
Election of officers shall take place at the first regular meeting of the department in September. Each term of
office shall be for two years. If any officer should resign or become unable to serve before his/her term is ended,
a new officer shall be elected for the remainder of the term at the next regular meeting of the department. To be
eligible to serve as an officer, a person must be a member of the department and have been so for at least one
year from the date of candidacy.
Sec. 5.03.108 Responsibilities of the fire chief
The primary duties of the chief of the department are outlined in section 5.03.006 of this article. He/she shall
cast the deciding vote to break any tie vote within department proceedings and is responsible for enforcing all
rules and bylaws of the department. If at all possible, the fire chief shall be present at all fires and training
sessions, taking charge or delegating authority for all activities and providing required direction and guidance to
satisfy mission requirements.
Sec. 5.03.109 Responsibilities of the assistant fire chiefs
(a) The department shall have two assistant fire chiefs of equal rank, one shall be appointed by the fire chief,
the other to be elected by the members of the fire department. The two assistant fire chiefs shall serve to the
authority delegated to them and any manner needed to assist the fire chief in effectively carrying out any/all
duties necessary to the department. The two assistant fire chiefs shall demand the positive support of all
members in regards to bylaws, regulations, and procedures/guidelines/SOP's. In the absence or incapacity of the
fire chief; the two assistant fire chiefs shall continue to carry out all department policies until advised different
by the city manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/334
(1) The fire chief will assign one assistant fire chief to be in charge of administrative support
services that include, but are not limited to: equipment, maintenance, apparatus, PPE, inventory
control, reports and reporting systems, etc.
(2) The fire chief will assign the other assistant fire chief to be in charge of training and safety
programs for the department. This includes, but is not limited to: maintaining records for training as a
department whole and individual basis, keeping inventory of all training materials/equipment,
regulating available programs to new as well as existing members, being held accountable for the
release of probationary members, etc.
(b) Both assistant fire chiefs shall be prepared to assume command at any incident necessary and carry out to
the best of their ability the incident command and National Incident Command System. The fire chief or the city
manager is the only officer who can relieve the assistant fire chiefs at any time of their command. These duties
may be discussed further in standard operating procedures/guidelines set by the fire chief.
Sec. 5.03.110 Responsibilities of captains
The department shall have three captains of equal rank. One captain shall be appointed by the fire chief and
assistant fire chief with the other two captains being elected by the department membership. The appointed
captain shall also be the training officer for the department. The two elected captains will have responsibility for
safety equipment and reports. The safety equipment officer will be responsible for checking and maintaining all
safety equipment and reporting all malfunctions to the fire chief. The reports officer shall insure all reports are
properly completed and filed and that all information be made available to the fire chief. Any questions arising
as to the division of these responsibilities will be settled by the fire chief.
Sec. 5.03.111 Responsibilities of lieutenants
There shall be two lieutenants of equal rank. These two lieutenants will be elected by the members of the
department and will be responsible for vehicle (including washing and servicing) and station (including cleaning
and painting) maintenance. These duties will be determined by the two lieutenants with any questions arising
being settled by the fire chief.
Sec. 5.03.112 Responsibilities of the sergeant-at-arms
The sergeant-at-arms shall be appointed by the fire chief and assistant fire chief. He/she will insure that order is
maintained during all meetings and will also assist the fire chief in the enforcement of department policies.
Sec. 5.03.113 Responsibilities of the secretary
The secretary shall be appointed by the newly elected executive board at the time of its election. He/she will
keep accurate records and minutes of all meetings and assist the fire chief in the planning of special events.
Sec. 5.03.114 Responsibilities of the treasurer
The treasurer shall be appointed by the newly elected executive board at the time of its election. He/she will
keep accurate records of department funds and transactions. The treasurer will prepare a monthly financial
summary to be presented at the following month's business meeting.
Secs. 5.03.115–5.03.130 Reserved
Part V. Removal of Officers
Sec. 5.03.131 Removal voting process
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/334
Any department officer, with the exception of the fire chief, may be relieved of his/her elected office by a
recommendation to the city manager by the members. Such a recommendation shall be made by a majority vote
of the members. The city manager shall then approve or deny the removal.
Secs. 5.03.132–5.03.155 Reserved
Part VI. Attendance
Sec. 5.03.156 Meetings
All members and candidates are required to attend a regular meeting every Tuesday at the central fire station,
unless excused by the fire chief or his/her appointed representative.
Sec. 5.03.157 Absence penalty
The executive board or the fire chief may make a recommendation to the city manager that any member or
candidate missing three or more consecutive meetings for an unexcused reason be removed from the active roll.
Sec. 5.03.158 Absence penalty appeal
Any member removed by the city manager due to excessive absences may appeal his/her removal within 30
days. The appeal shall be heard by the executive board at the regular meeting following the submission of an
appeal. Upon hearing the appeal, the executive board may make a recommendation to the city manager that the
removal be upheld or overturned. If no appeal is made or if the city manager upholds the removal, the member
will be dismissed from the department.
Secs. 5.03.159–5.03.180 Reserved
Part VII. Discipline Procedures
Sec. 5.03.181 Discipline procedures and categories of disciplinary action
(a) Membership participation in and the activities of the department are based on high moral character and
high moral standards. Any person felt to be in violation of these standards may be subjected to disciplinary
actions including but not limited to the following:
(1) A written reprimand.
(2) Probation.
(3) Demotion.
(4) Suspension.
(5) Dismissal.
(b) Upon a two/thirds majority vote, the executive board shall make a recommendation to the city manager
that one or more of the above penalties, or other appropriate penalties, be imposed upon a member. All
recommendations for disciplinary action, and all disciplinary actions imposed by the city manager shall be noted
and maintained in the permanent files of the executive board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/334
Sec. 5.03.182 Policy on reporting inappropriate behavior by a member
Any member witnessing or involved in an act he/she has reason to believe is inappropriate or unprofessional
shall submit an incident report to the executive board. This report must be filed with the executive board and be
reviewed within ten days. Any discipline taken will follow procedures stated in section 5.03.181.
Secs. 5.03.183–5.03.200 Reserved
Part VIII. Training of Members
Sec. 5.03.201 Responsibilities of the training officer
The responsibilities of the training officer for the department include:
(1) Keeping accurate and up-to-date records of all training activities completed by members of the
department and their eligibility for various certification programs.
(2) Enrolling students in all training sessions outside of the department.
Secs. 5.03.202–5.03.225 Reserved
Part IX. Use of Emergency Lights and Driving Procedures
Sec. 5.03.226 Generally
All members of the department may posses and use emergency lights and sirens to be used only when
responding to emergencies. All vehicles responding to an emergency will use appropriate driving procedures and
will obey all traffic laws.
Secs. 5.03.227–5.03.250 Reserved
Part X. Fundraising
Sec. 5.03.251 Responsibilities
It will be the responsibility of every member of the department, regardless of their rank, to assist the department
in sanctioned fundraisers.
Secs. 5.03.252–5.03.270 Reserved
Part XI. Fire Department Facilities
Sec. 5.03.271 Cleaning requirements
All department facilities must be kept clean at all times. It is important that anyone using these facilities empty
the ashtrays and pick up any debris or trash lying around. Anyone found violating this provision is subject to
disciplinary action.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/334
(Ordinance 2008-08 adopted 3/11/08)
ARTICLE 5.04 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES
Sec. 5.04.001 Approval of participation
The city hereby approves the participation of the fire prevention and emergency services associated with the city
in the mutual aid agreement in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. (Ordinance 95-8, sec. I, adopted 9/28/95)
Sec. 5.04.002 Fire chief to deploy services
The fire chief, or his designated representative, shall deploy all of the necessary services and personnel to carry
out the spirit, objectives and terms of the agreement. (Ordinance 95-8, sec. II, adopted 9/28/95)
ARTICLE 5.05 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.05.001 Discharge prohibited
No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall cast, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo,
grenade, cap or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. (1995 Code, sec. 7.201)
Sec. 5.05.002 Sale prohibited
No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall exhibit or have in his possession, with intent to give
away or sell or offer for sale or sell within the city, any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, cap or other
combustible fireworks of any kind in the city; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the sale of
any such article or articles by wholesalers to each other or to the sale of any such article or articles at wholesale
to merchants conducting business entirely without the city, or to the sale by wholesalers for private or public
demonstration as hereinafter provided. (1995 Code, sec. 7.202)
Sec. 5.05.003 Exceptions; permit
Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to the sale, storage or use of railroad track torpedoes, or other
signaling devices used by railroads, nor to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or
dealers in photographic supplies or prevent any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any
kind if conducted under the proper police supervision after application made and permit issued by the mayor of
the city for such demonstration. Said permit shall not be granted unless such demonstration or display shall be of
such a character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the mayor, after proper inspection, shall
not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. (1995 Code, sec. 7.203)
Sec. 5.05.004 Penalty for violation
Any person, firm, corporation, company or association who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or
suffer or allow the same to be violated, shall upon conviction therefor be subject to a fine as provided for in the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1995 Code, sec. 7.204)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/334
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY†
Sec. 6.02.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
Brush. Scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth.
Carrion. Dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl, or fish.
Filth. Any matter in a putrescent state.
Garbage. Decayable waste, including, but not limited to, vegetable, animal and fish offal, animal and fish
carcasses.
Impure or unwholesome matter. A putrescible or nonputrescible condition, object or matter which tends, may, or
could produce injury, death, illness or disease to human beings.
Junk. All worn out, worthless, or discarded material, including, but not limited to, old iron or other metal, glass,
and cordage.
Objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter. Any matter, condition, or object which is or should be
objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities.
Occupant. Any person claiming or having possessory control of any property.
Owner. A person having record title to real property.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation, or other entity.
Refuse. A mixed accumulation of worn out, used up, broken, rejected, or worthless materials and includes, but is
not limited to, garbage, rubbish, paper, or litter and other decayable or nondecayable waste.
Rubbish. Trash, debris, rubble, stone, useless fragments of building materials, or other miscellaneous useless
waste or rejected matter.
Trash and debris. Mounds of dirt; piles of leaves, grass, and weed clippings; paper trash; useless fragments of
building materials; rubble; furniture, other than furniture designed for outdoor use; useless household items and
appliances; items of salvage, such as scrap metal and wood; old barrels; old tires; objects that hold water for an
extended period of time; tree and brush trimmings; and other miscellaneous wastes or rejected matter.
Weeds. Vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary, but excluding shrubs,
bushes, and trees, cultivated flowers, and cultivated crops.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.02.002 Prohibited conditions
(a) The owner or occupant of any property or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, shall
not keep, store, allow, maintain, permit, or accumulate upon any property any refuse, trash and debris, stagnant
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/334
water, filth, carrion, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter, or objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary
matter that:
(1) Is visible from a street or alley;
(2) Creates or may create an insanitary condition likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes, rodents,
vermin, or disease-carrying pests; or
(3) Emits a noxious odor.
(b) The owner or occupant of any property or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, shall
not allow, maintain, or permit upon any property grass, weeds, brush, or other unsightly vegetation to grow
thereon to a height greater than twelve (12) inches. Such property shall include the area between the property
and the curb or edge of pavement of any adjacent street or alley.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.02.003 Abatement of prohibited conditions
(a) In the event that any owner or occupant of any property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, fails to
comply with the requirements of section 6.02.002 of this article, the city manager or designee shall give notice
of the violation to the owner as follows:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained:
(A) By publication at least once;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates.
(b) If the city mails a notice to the property owner in accordance with subsection (a) and the United States
Postal Service returns the notice as “refused,” “unclaimed” or if the address required by subsection (a)(2) was
used and the notice is returned as “not deliverable as addressed” or an equivalent marking, the validity of the
notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(c) In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner, by regular mail and a posting on the
property or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or
nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the
notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense
against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period
and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, the city may, without notice,
take any action permitted in this article and assess its expenses as provided in this article.
(d) If the owner or occupant of a property does not comply with the requirements of this article within seven
(7) days of notice of violation, the city may:
(1) Issue a citation to the owner or occupant for every day that the violation continues to exist;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/334
(2) Do the work or make the improvements required to abate the violation; and/or
(3) Pay for the work done or the improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the
property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.02.004 Assessment and collection of expenses for work done or improvements made by city
(a) The city may assess expenses incurred under this article against the real estate on which the work is done
or improvements made.
(b) In the event that the owner fails or refuses to pay the expense incurred under section 6.02.003(d) within
thirty (30) days after the first day of the month following the month in which the work was done, the city
manager or designee shall obtain a lien against the property by filing a statement of expenses incurred in abating
the violation with the county clerk of the county in which the subject property is located. The statement must
also state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the
filing of the statement with the county clerk.
(c) The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten (10) percent per
annum on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.
(d) The city's lien shall be privileged and shall be inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements.
(e) The city may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest
due. The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred
by the city in doing the work or making the improvements.
(f) The remedy provided by this section is in addition to the remedy provided by section 6.02.006 below.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.02.005 Authority to immediately abate dangerous weeds
(a) Notwithstanding any of the foregoing sections, the city may abate, without notification, weeds that:
(1) Have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person.
(b) The city must give notice, in the manner provided in section 6.02.003, to the property owner no later than
the tenth (10th) day after the date the city abates weeds under this section. The notification shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violation of this article that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's rights to request an administrative hearing regarding the
city's abatement of the weeds.
(c) The city, by and through its city manager or designee, shall conduct an administrative hearing on the
abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the thirtieth (30th) day after the date of the abatement of
the weeds, the owner files a written request for a hearing with the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/334
(d) The city shall conduct the administrative hearing not later than the twentieth (20th) day after the date a
request for hearing is filed. At the administrative hearing, the owner may testify or present any witnesses or
written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds.
(e) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section in the same manner and subject to the
same conditions as set forth in section 6.02.004 above.
(f) The authority granted the city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by section 6.02.003.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.02.006 Penalty for violation
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each continuing day's violation
under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not
preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to
it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 TECHNOLOGY FUND†
Sec. 7.02.001 Collection of fee
(a) A municipal court technology fee of $4.00 shall be assessed and collected from a defendant as court costs
for any conviction of a misdemeanor offense. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community
supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(b) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund as
provided under section 7.02.002.
(Ordinance 2000-15, sec. 3-6-10, adopted 8/10/00)
Sec. 7.02.002 Fund established; administration
(a) Pursuant to article 102.0172 of subchapter A, chapter 102, Code of Criminal Procedure, there is hereby
created and established a municipal court technology fund for the deposit of all funds collected as municipal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/334
court technology fees. The proceeds of the municipal court technology fund shall be used only to finance the
purchase of technology enhancements for the municipal court of the city, including, but not limited to:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; and
(8) Docket management systems.
(b) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city commission.
(Ordinance 2000-15, sec. 3-6-11, adopted 8/10/00)
ARTICLE 7.03 BUILDING SECURITY FUND*
Sec. 7.03.001 Established
There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (known in this article as the
fund) pursuant to article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.03.002 Fee assessed
The municipal court is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee of $3.00
against a defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. In this article, a person is
considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.03.003 Collection of fee
The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay the fee to the municipal
treasurer or to the person who discharges the duties delegated to the municipal treasurer for deposit into the
municipal court building security fund. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.03.004 Uses of fund
The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing items when used for the purpose of providing security
services for the building housing the municipal court, including:
(1) The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/334
(2) Handheld metal detectors;
(3) Walkthrough metal detectors;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when
they are providing appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices;
(10) The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; and
(11) Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.03.005 Administration of fund
The fund shall be administered by and under the direction of the city commission. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 7.04 COLLECTION FEE*
Sec. 7.04.001 Authorization of collection fee
(a) A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by art. 103.0031, Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure, in the amount of 30% of debts and accounts receivable, such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs other
than forfeited bonds, and restitution ordered paid by the municipal court or hearing officer serving the city when
such debt or account receivable is more than 60 days past due and has been referred to an attorney, private
vendor or collection firm for collection pursuant to a contract as authorized by the city commission.
(b) A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by art. 103.0031, Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure, in the amount of 30% of amounts in cases in which the accused has failed to appear:
(1) As promised, under subchapter A, chapter 543, Texas Transportation Code, or other law;
(2) In compliance with a lawful written notice to appear issued under art. 14.06(b), Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure, or other law;
(3) In compliance with a lawful summons issued under art. 15.03(b), Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure, or other law; or
(4) In compliance with a lawful order of the court or hearing officer serving the city;
when such amounts are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to an attorney, private vendor, or
collection agency for collection pursuant to a contract as authorized by the city commission.
Sec. 7.04.002 Waiver or reduction of collection fee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/334
The collection fee does not apply to a case that has been dismissed by a court of competent jurisdiction or to any
amount which has been satisfied through time served credit or community service. The collection fee may be
applied to any balance remaining after a partial credit for time served or community service if the balance is
more than sixty days past due. A defendant is not liable for the collection fee authorized under this resolution if
the court or hearing officer with original jurisdiction has determined that the defendant is indigent, or has
insufficient resources or income, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs.
Sec. 7.04.003 Calculation of collection amount and payment to court
Unless the a qualified collection contract provides otherwise, the court shall calculate the amount of any
collection fee due to the governmental entity or to the private attorney, private vendor or collection agency
performing the collection services and shall receive all fees, including the collection fee.
Sec. 7.04.004 Collection for failure to appear
With respect to cases in which the defendant has failed to appear as provided in section 7.04.001(b) above, the
amount to which the 30% collection fee applies is the amount to be paid that is communicated to the accused as
acceptable to the court under its standard policy for resolution of the case, if the accused voluntarily agrees to
pay that amount; or the amount ordered paid by the court after plea or trial.
Sec. 7.04.005 Proportional reduction of fee
If after entering into a contract with a private attorney, vendor or collection agency as described herein, a person
who owes the fine, fee, etc. as described herein pays less than the aggregate total to be collected, the allocation
to the state, the city and the private attorney, private vendor or collection agency shall be reduced proportionally.
Sec. 7.04.006 Definition of item that is past due and subject to collection
An item subject to collection services under this article is considered more than 60 days past due if it remains
unpaid after the 61st day after the following appropriate date:
(1) When such item is described in section 7.04.001(a) above, the date on which the debt, fine, fee,
or court cost or other amount due must be paid in full as determined by the court or hearing officer;
or
(2) With respect to an item described in section 7.04.001(b) above, the date by which the accused
promised to appear or was notified, summoned, or ordered to appear.
Sec. 7.04.007 Collection fee for limited purpose
The city may not use the additional 30% collection fee authorized hereunder for any purpose other than
compensating the private attorney, vendor or collection agency who earns the fee.
Sec. 7.04.008 Exclusion of bail bonds
This article does not apply to the collection of commercial bail bonds.
Sec. 7.04.009 Notice
A communication to the accused person regarding the amount of payment that is acceptable to the court under
the court's standard policy for resolution of a case must include a notice of the person's right to enter a plea or go
to trial on any offense charged.
(Ordinance 2011-08 adopted 5/24/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/334
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Adoption of state law
The Penal Code of the state shall be and the same is hereby in all things adopted as the law in this city, in all
criminal cases in which punishment is by fine only, and where such cases arise within the territorial limits of the
city. (1995 Code, art. 7.300)
Sec. 8.01.002 Handbill distribution
(a) The distributing, sticking, placing or affixing any paper, handbills or other printed or written matter in or
upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, parks or other public grounds or appurtenances thereto, of the
city; or in or upon any automobile, street marker, post, electrical light standard or pole, or other object, whether
moveable or immovable located thereon, shall be declared to be a nuisance.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit or cause to be committed a nuisance as defined by
subsection (a) hereof.
(c) Any person or persons who shall commit a nuisance as defined by subsection (a) of this section or who
shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1995 Code, art. 7.100)
Sec. 8.01.003 Discharge of firearms
(a) It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, air gun, BB gun, or any similar toy gun projecting lead or
any missile in the city, except in a regularly established shooting gallery, provided that this section shall not be
construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duties nor to
prohibit any person from discharging a firearm while acting in lawful defense of life of property.
(b) Any person who shall violate this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009 of this code for
each such offense.
(1995 Code, art. 7.600)
State law references–Authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 229.001;
disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.01; weapons, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, ch. 46.
ARTICLE 8.02 CURFEW*
Sec. 8.02.001 Juvenile defined
For the purposes of this article, juvenile means a person less than 17 years of age.
Sec. 8.02.002 Children on streets at night
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/334
It shall be unlawful for a juvenile to be or remain upon any street, alley or other public place in the city during
the curfew hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Friday
and Saturday.
Sec. 8.02.003 Permitting children to violate curfew
It shall be unlawful for a parent, or anyone having the legal care and custody of a juvenile, to permit the juvenile
to violate section 8.02.002.
Sec. 8.02.004 Detention of violators
An officer of the police department witnessing a juvenile violating the provisions of section 8.02.002 shall detain
such juvenile until the parent or guardian of such juvenile shall take him or her into custody. The police
department, if possible, shall immediately notify the parent or guardian of a juvenile taken into custody.
Sec. 8.02.005 Delinquent juveniles
If it shall appear to an officer detaining a juvenile under this article that such juvenile is, due to lack of proper
parental care, growing up in vagrancy, or is incorrigible, or has no home, such juvenile shall be placed in the
care of the county child welfare board.
Sec. 8.02.006 Penalties
A violation of section 8.02.002 is a class C misdemeanor. A violation of section 8.02.003 is a class C
misdemeanor.
Sec. 8.02.007 Defenses
It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of sections 8.02.002 and 8.02.003 that the juvenile was:
(1) Accompanied by a parent or guardian, or other person having custody of such juvenile;
(2) Performing or returning home from a duty directed by a parent, guardian or other person
having custody of such juvenile, and traveling by a direct route;
(3) Performing or returning home from a duty directed by the juvenile's employer, and traveling by
a direct route;
(4) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(5) On a sidewalk abutting the juvenile's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor and the neighbor does not complain to the police about the juvenile's presence;
(6) Attending or returning home from an official school or religious activity, and traveling by a
direct route;
(7) Exercising rights granted by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution; or
(8) Married, had been married, or otherwise had the disabilities of minority removed in accordance
with chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
(Ordinance 2014-01 adopted 1/14/14)
ARTICLE 8.03 NOISE*
Sec. 8.03.001 Restrictions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/334
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to create or cause to be created any loud or disrupting noise
by any means within the city limits between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday
and the hours of 10 p.m. on Saturday night to the hour of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday morning.
(b) Loud or disrupting noise is any noise created by natural or mechanical or electrical means whereby the
sound of which can be heard at a distance of over twenty-five (25) feet at a level or which is of such an intensity
or duration so as to be likely to be disturbing to persons or citizens of ordinary sensibilities of the city so as to
prevent that citizen from obtaining the reasonable and necessary sleep, rest, and relaxation normally and
reasonably required to maintain a person's health.
(c) Loud or disrupting noise can be created or caused by raising one's voice to a shout or yell, whistling,
clapping hands, stomping or kicking, or by the playing of radios, stereos, CD players, phonographs, television
sets, or like devices, or by the revving of motor vehicles or motorcycle engines, lawn mowers, weed eaters, gas
or electric power tools, or any other like objects, or by the playing of any musical instrument.
(1995 Code, sec. 7.801)
Sec. 8.03.002 Penalty for violation
Any person or persons violating section 8.03.001 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision in
section 1.01.009 of this code. (1995 Code, sec. 7.802)
ARTICLE 8.04 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
Chief of police. The head of the police department, as designated by the city manager. (Ordinance 2000-09, sec.
1, adopted 5/11/00)
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled and does not have lawfully attached to it both an unexpired
license plate and a valid unexpired motor vehicle inspection certificate, and is either:
(1) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(2) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(A) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(B) 10 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance 2010-07 adopted 6/8/10)
Motor vehicle demolisher. A person in the business of:
(1) Converting motor vehicles into processed scrap or scrap metal; or
(2) Wrecking or dismantling motor vehicles.
Police department. The police department of the city.
(Ordinance 2000-09, sec. 1, adopted 5/11/00)
Sec. 8.04.002 Nuisance
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/334
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates a fire hazard;
(5) Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
(6) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development; and
(7) Is a public nuisance.
(Ordinance 2000-09, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/00)
Sec. 8.04.003 Offense
(a) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described in section 8.04.002.
(b) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with the general
penalty in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 2000-09, sec. 3, adopted 5/11/00)
Sec. 8.04.004 Authority to abate nuisances
(a) The police department is hereby authorized to abate said nuisances according to procedures adopted in
section 8.04.005 of this article.
(b) The city commission hereby appoints the chief of police as the official designated to conduct hearings
according to the procedure adopted in section 8.04.005 of this article and to administer procedures for abatement
and removal of a public nuisance.
(c) The chief of police is authorized to enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain
information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance.
(Ordinance 2000-09, sec. 4, adopted 5/11/00)
Sec. 8.04.005 Abatement procedures
(a) If a junked vehicle is discovered on public or private property or a public right-of-way, the police
department shall place a sticker on the vehicle identifying the vehicle as a nuisance. The sticker shall identify the
police department officer identifying the nuisance, the date and time of identification, a description of the
vehicle, the location of the vehicle and the license plate number and vehicle identification number, if
identifiable.
(b) As soon as practical after identification of the junked vehicle as a nuisance, the police department shall
provide notice of the nature of the nuisance, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to:
(1) The last known registered owner of the vehicle;
(2) Each lienholder of record; and
(3) The last known owner or occupant of:
(A) The property on which the vehicle is located; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/334
(B) If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-ofway.
(c) The notice shall:
(1) Contain all the information contained on the sticker placed on the identified vehicle pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section;
(2) State that the nuisance must be abated or removed not later than the 10th calendar day after the
date on which the notice was mailed;
(3) State that any request for a hearing to challenge the identification must be made before the 10th
calendar day after the date on which the notice was mailed; and
(4) Specify the location, date, and time at which a hearing will be held to determine whether the
public nuisance may be removed.
(d) After the return receipt has been returned to the police department via the U.S. Postal Service, the owner
of the identified vehicle shall abate said nuisance within 10 calendar days. If the notice is undelivered, action to
abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return.
(e) If any person for whom notice is required under subsection (b) of this section fails to abate the nuisance or
request a hearing before the 11th day after the date on which the notice was mailed, the chief of police shall
conduct a public hearing at the location, date and time specified in the notice to determine if the identified
vehicle may be removed.
(f) If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under subsection (b) of this section, the
originally scheduled hearing date shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the
service of the notice.
(g) The relocation of the identified vehicle to another location in the city after the commencement of this
procedure shall have no effect on this procedure if the identified vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new
location.
(h) If, at the hearing, the chief of police determines that the nuisance was properly identified and that notice
was delivered to all persons so entitled in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, the chief of police shall
order the removal of the identified nuisance. If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the
order must include the vehicle's:
(1) Description;
(2) Vehicle identification number; and
(3) License plate number.
(Ordinance 2000-09, sec. 5, adopted 5/11/00)
Sec. 8.04.006 Owner's abatement of violation
The owner of an identified nuisance vehicle may abate the nuisance by:
(1) The nuisance can be removed from the city limits within 10 calendar days of the date on which
notice was mailed in accordance with section 8.04.005(b);
(2) Making the vehicle operable, with current and valid inspection and registration stickers
lawfully displayed on the vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/334
(3) Storing the vehicle inside a completely enclosed building in a lawful manner so that the vehicle
cannot be seen from the public right-of-way, or other public or private property.
(Ordinance 2000-09, sec. 7, adopted 5/11/00)
Sec. 8.04.007 Disposal
(a) A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle
demolisher, or other such suitable site.
(b) The city may operate a disposal site if the city commission determines that commercial disposition of
junked vehicles is not available or is inadequate. The city may:
(1) Finally dispose of a junked vehicle or vehicle part; or
(2) Transfer it to another disposal site if the disposal is scrap or salvage only.
(Ordinance 2000-09, sec. 8, adopted 5/11/00)
Sec. 8.04.008 Authority to remove traffic obstructions not affected
Nothing in this article shall affect statutes that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property
which constitutes an obstruction to traffic. (Ordinance 2000-09, sec. 9, adopted 5/11/00)
ARTICLE 8.05 RESIDENCE AND MATRICULATION RESTRICTIONS ON REGISTERED SEX
OFFENDERS
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meaning defined as follows,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Child. An individual younger than seventeen (17) years of age.
Child safety zone. All city parks and public ways within 300 feet of a city park.
College. Any public or private college, university, junior college, or technical or vocational training center.
Day care facility. Includes a child care institution, a day care center, and/or a group day care home, as those
terms are defined by section 42.002, Human Resources Code.
Loiter. Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining in or around a college,
school, day care facility, city park or playground or public way adjacent thereto.
Park or playground. Any land, including improvements to the land that is administered, operated or managed by
the city for the use of the general public as a recreational area, including, without limitation:
(1) Land owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is designated by the unit of local
government for use solely or primarily for children's recreation; and
(2) City recreational areas, including, but not limited to, a forest preserve, conservation area,
jogging trail, hiking trail, water park, lake, campground, swimming pool, soccer field or baseball
field under the jurisdiction of a unit of local government.
Public way. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not
limited to, streets, common areas of schools, shopping centers, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, transportation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/334
facilities, theaters, restaurants, shops, bowling alleys, taverns, cafes, arcades, and similar areas that are open to
the use of the public.
Residence. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or more days in the
aggregate, during any calendar year.
School. A private or public elementary or secondary school.
Sex offender.
(1) A person who pursuant Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. article 42.12, section 9A(a)(2), has been
convicted or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for an offense under any one of the
following provisions of the Texas Penal Code:
(A) V.T.C.A., Penal Code section 21.11 (indecency with a child);
(B) V.T.C.A., Penal Code section 43.25 (sexual performance by a child);
(C) V.T.C.A., Penal Code section 43.26 (possession or promotion of child pornography);
(D) V.T.C.A., Penal Code section 22.021 (aggravated sexual assault);
(E) V.T.C.A., Penal Code section 22.04 (injury to a child, elderly individual, or disabled
individual);
(F) V.T.C.A., Penal Code section 22.011 (sexual assault); and/or
(2) A person who has been convicted or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for an
offense described as a reportable conviction or adjudication pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. article
62.01(5);
(3) A person who has been convicted or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for an
offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code sections 43.251 (employment harmful to children) and/or
43.05(2) (compelling prostitution);
(4) A person who has been convicted or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for an
offense under any substantially similar federal law or law of another state, or law of a foreign
country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice, or the attempt to commit a sex offense; and/or
(5) A person who has registered as a child sex offender or was/is required to register as a child sex
offender by any state law, federal law, law of a foreign country, the Uniform Code of Military Justice,
or pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., chapter 62, is required to register as a child sex offender.
Sec. 8.05.002 Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for a sex offender to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence,
to establish a residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of the real property comprising a college, school, day
care facility, park or playground.
(1) The distance of one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured on a straight line from the closest
boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the college, school, day
care facility, park or playground.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly be present in any college, school, day care
facility, city park or playground, or any public festival or celebration.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/334
(c) It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly loiter on a public way within three hundred (300)
feet of a college, school, day care facility, city park or playground.
Sec. 8.05.003 Exceptions
A person does not commit an offense under section 8.05.002 if the person:
(1) Is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility or other correctional institution
located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the real property comprising a school, day care facility,
park or playground;
(2) Has established and continues to maintain the residence prior to the effective date of this
article;
(3) Has established and continues to maintain the residence prior to the effective date of this article
and, subsequently a school, day care facility, park or playground is constructed or located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the sexual offender's residence;
(4) Is under eighteen (18) years of age or a ward under a guardianship, who resides with a parent
or guardian;
(5) Has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under chapter 62, Texas
Code of Criminal Procedure;
(6) Has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required, reversed on appeal or
pardoned;
(7) Is present at a college, school, day care facility, city park or playground in connection with
attendance of any class, seminar or educational program in which he is enrolled or otherwise required
to attend;
(8) Is present at a college, school, day care facility, city park or playground in the presence of any
child for which the child sex offender is the parent or legal guardian or to attend an official academic,
extracurricular or athletic event in which any child or legal ward of the child sex offender is a
participant.
Sec. 8.05.004 Enforcement
If a police officer reasonably believes that a child sex offender is in a city park or playground or has established
a residence in violation of this article, the officer shall require the child sex offender to provide his/her name,
address, and telephone number. If it is established that the individual is a child sex offender, then the officer shall
notify the child sex offender that he/she is in violation of this article.
Sec. 8.05.005 Penalties
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be fined
an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), each day of such violations constituting a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 2009-02 adopted 3/10/09)
CHAPTER 9
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/334
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 9.01.001 Hindering city officials
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to interfere with, molest, or
otherwise hinder any city official in the performance of his or her duty or duties while acting within the lawful
scope of his or her duties and in the performance of duly authorized city business.
(b) This prohibition shall apply to all city officials generally and shall specifically extend to the city's animal
control officer, solid waste collection workers, utility workers, maintenance workers, etc.
(c) This section shall in no way limit the authority of the city to take actions under V.T.C.A., Penal Code,
including disorderly conduct, profanity, and/or assault.
(d) Any person, firm, corporation or association who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty
in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 95-9, secs. I, II, adopted 10/26/95)
ARTICLE 9.02 PERSONNEL POLICIES MANUAL
Sec. 9.02.001 Saved from repeal
Though not reproduced herein, the duly adopted personnel policies manual pertaining to employees of the city is
hereby specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. (1995
Code, art. 8.600)
ARTICLE 9.03 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.03.001 Marshal and deputy marshal abolished
The office of city marshal and the office of deputy marshal are hereby terminated, and any and all ordinances
making provisions for such offices are hereby in all things repealed. (1995 Code, sec. 8.101)
Sec. 9.03.002 Chief of police created
In accord with article 1161 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the state, as amended in 1953, and in accord with
article 999a, the office of chief of police is hereby created and shall be filled by the city commission from time
to time by the employment by the commission of a competent person to perform the duties of such office. The
term of office of such chief of police shall be at the will of the city commission, in accord with said article 1161.
The salary of the chief of police shall be set from time to time by the city commission. The duties of the chief of
police shall be such as are generally performed by a chief of police as head administrative police officer of a
city, and his duties shall include, but not be limited to, those duties ordinarily performed by a city marshal in a
general law city or town, as provided under article 999 of the Revised Statutes of the state. (1995 Code, sec.
8.102)
Sec. 9.03.003 Appointment of police officers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/334
Provision is hereby made for appointment of such police officers, to be commonly known as policemen, as the
city commission shall consider necessary to properly enforce the laws and to insure safety for the members of
the public. Such police officers may be recommended by the chief of police but they shall be approved and
employed by the city commission, and their salaries shall be set by the city commission and their terms of office
shall be at the will of the city commission. Their duties shall be those duties ordinarily performed by police
officers under the administration of the chief of police. (1995 Code, sec. 8.103)
Secs. 9.03.004–9.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Reserve Force*
Sec. 9.03.031 Created
There is hereby created and established in the city, pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 341.012,
a police reserve capability, which shall be composed of not more than ten (10) officers. Each officer shall be a
fully trained and currently certified peace officer. The number of officers may be less than ten (10) officers. This
number shall be in the complete and sole discretion of the chief of police. The police reserve capability will
augment and supplement the city police department. All activities and operations of the police reserves shall
come under the direct control and supervision of the chief of police. Because each officer must be a fully trained
and currently certified peace officer, there is no necessity that any reserve officer be approved by the city
commission prior to allowing such officer to carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. (1995 Code, sec.
8.201)
Sec. 9.03.032 Selection of officers
The police reserve force shall consist only of individuals who are certified peace officers and who meet the
minimum licensing requirements of section. 211.80 of the state commission on law enforcement officer
standards and education (TCLEOSE) or successor requirements or agencies. Such reserve officers shall satisfy
any other requirement needed for certification as a peace officer. (1995 Code, sec. 8.202)
Sec. 9.03.033 Powers, duties and responsibilities
A city police reserve officer shall:
(1) Have the same powers of arrest as members of the police department when on duty.
(2) Have the same authority to issue traffic tickets, enforce city ordinances, and protect the peace
and dignity of this state when on duty.
(3) Be required to perform a minimum of thirty-two (32) hours of duty per month. No
compensation shall be paid for this service to any reserve officer.
(1995 Code, sec. 8.203)
Sec. 9.03.034 Identification of officers and benefits
Each city police reserve officer will be issued one badge and other appropriate credentials identifying him or her
as a police reserve officer. In addition, one uniform consisting of one pair of uniform trousers and one short
sleeve uniform shirt will be issued. These articles must be used only when on duty scheduled by the police chief
or his representative. These articles are to be returned to the chief of police upon separation as a police reserve
officer. Termination of service of a reserve police officer will be at the discretion of the city's police chief. No
employee benefits except worker's compensation will accrue as a police reserve officer. (1995 Code, sec. 8.204)
ARTICLE 9.04 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/334
Sec. 9.04.001 Participation
(a) The city commission of the city, on behalf of said city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the
city and all of the employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created participate in the Texas
Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act.
(b) The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the city covered in said system.
(1995 Code, sec. 8.501)
Sec. 9.04.002 Eligible employees
Each person who becomes an employee of the city on or after the effective date of participation and whose
position shall require more than 1,000 hours per year shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System as a condition of their employment. (1995 Code, sec. 8.502)
Sec. 9.04.003 Rate of contributions
In accordance with the provisions of the TMRS Act, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement
System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed
at the rate of five percent (5%) of the full earnings of each employee of said departments. (1995 Code, sec.
8.503)
Sec. 9.04.004 Prior service credits
(a) Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed “prior service credit” (as defined in section
853.101 of the TMRS Act) at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) of the “base credit” of such member,
calculated in the manner prescribed in section 853.105 of said act.
(b) For each month of current service rendered to the city by each of its employees who are members of Texas
Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such
member, at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that is 100% of such member's accumulated deposits for such
month of employment, and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality
accumulation fund.
(1995 Code, sec. 8.504)
Sec. 9.04.005 Remittance of contributions
The city finance director is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be
deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of
the TMRS Act, and the said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf
of the city the prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating
departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior
service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the
provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System. (1995 Code, sec. 8.505)
Sec. 9.04.006 Supplemental death benefits
(a) The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits for each of the city's employees who
are members of said system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits for annuitants
whose last covered employment was as an employee of the city, in the amounts and on the terms provided for in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/334
sections 852.004, 854.601 through 854.605, 855.314, 855.408, and 855.502 of the Government Code, as
amended.
(b) The city is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of adoption of this section
and of the participation of the city in said fund.
(1995 Code, sec. 8.506)
Sec. 9.04.007 Updated service credits and increase in retirement annuities (1998)
(a) Authorization of updated service credits.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.401 through 853.404 of subtitle G of title 8,
Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service
credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar
year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date
had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated
service credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(2) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the
system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has
unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of
January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits
pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said section
853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section.
(3) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated
service credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the
TMRS Act).
(4) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior
service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part
of the same service.
(5) In accordance with the provision of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the
deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on
account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the
full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(b) Increase in retirement annuities.
(1) On terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to
allow and to provide for payment of the increase below stated in monthly benefits payable by the
system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current
service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An
annuity increased under this subsection replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted
to the same person.
(2) The amount of the annuity increase under this subsection is computed as the sum of the prior
service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose
service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index
for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the
person's retirement of the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/334
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this subsection exceeds all previously granted
increases to an annuitant in an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality
accumulation fund of the system.
(c) Dates of allowance and increase. The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement
annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1998, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the
system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder
on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of section
853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the
determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(Ordinance 97-05 adopted 9/25/97)
Sec. 9.04.008 Updated service credits and increase in retirement annuities (1999)
(a) Authorization of updated service credits.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of subtitle G of title 8,
Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”) each member of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service
credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such
allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36
months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit”
(as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(2) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the
system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has
unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of
January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits
pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said section
853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section.
(3) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated
service credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the
TMRS Act).
(4) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior
service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part
of the same service.
(5) In accordance with the provision of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the
deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on
account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the
full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(b) Increase in retirement annuities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/334
(1) On terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to
allow and to provide for payment of the increase below stated in monthly benefits payable by the
system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current
service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service from such employees to the city. An
annuity increased under this subsection replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted
to the same person.
(2) The amount of the annuity increase under this subsection is computed as the sum of the prior
service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose
service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in the Consumer Price
Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
of the person's retirement of the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this subsection exceeds all previously granted
increases to an annuitant in an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality
accumulation fund of the system.
(c) Dates of allowance and increases. The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in
retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1999, subject to approval by the board of trustees
of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made
hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of
section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has
made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(Ordinance 98-15 adopted 8/13/98)
Sec. 9.04.009 Additional plan provisions (2002)
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of section 854.202(g) of subtitle G of title 8, Texas Government Code, as
amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the city adopts the following provisions
affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the
“system”):
(1) Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a
service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system
performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under section 854.202(g)
of the TMRS Act.
(2) Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has:
(A) Prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and
(B) Held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act,
chapter 551, Texas Government Code.
(3) The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted
and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(b) This section shall become effective on the first day of August, 2002.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/334
(Ordinance 2002-06, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/25/02)
Sec. 9.04.010 Authorization of restricted prior service credit (2003)
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.305 of subtitle G of title 8, Texas Government Code, as
amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System
(hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall
receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities
described in said section 853.305 provided that
(1) The person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service; and
(2) The service meets the requirements of said section 853.305.
(b) The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for
retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and
may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits.
(c) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action
required under said section 853.305 while still an employee of this city.
(d) This section shall become effective on October 1, 2003.
(Ordinance 2003-09, secs. 1, 2, adopted 8/28/03)
Sec. 9.04.011 Terminated previous memberships (2003)
(a) Pursuant to section 853.003 of subtitle G of title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, the city
hereby elects to allow any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is an employee of this city
on the 28th day of August, 2003, who has terminated a previous membership in said system by withdrawal of
deposits while absent from service, but who has at least 24 months of credited service as an employee of this city
since resuming membership to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal
charge of five percent (5%) of such amount for each year from date of such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and
thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at date of
termination of earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as an employee of
this city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and hereby assumes the obligations arising
out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such
credits shall be charged to this city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. The five percent (5%) per
annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in said
municipality accumulation fund, and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be
credited to his or her individual account in the employees' savings fund of the system.
(b) This section shall become effective on the 28th day of August, 2003, which is a date on or after the date
set forth in subsection (a) above.
(Ordinance 2003-10, secs. 1, 2, adopted 8/28/03)
Sec. 9.04.012 Active service in armed forces (2003)
(a) Pursuant to section 853.502, subchapter F of chapter 853, title 8, Government Code, as amended, the city
hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement
System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the
United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall
be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said subchapter F, and
the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in section 853.505.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/334
(b) In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas
Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount
equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The city agrees that its account
in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount
equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current
service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit.
(c) This section shall become effective on the 1st day of October, 2003.
(Ordinance 2003-11, secs. 1–3, adopted 8/28/03)
Sec. 9.04.013 Updated service credits and increase in retirement annuities (2004)
(a) Authorization of updated service credits.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of subtitle G of title 8,
Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service
credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar
year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date
had at least 36 months of edited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated
service credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(2) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the
system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has
unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of
January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits
pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said section
853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section.
(3) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated
service credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the
TMRS Act).
(4) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior
service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part
of the same service.
(5) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the
deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on
account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the
full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(b) Increase in retirement annuities.
(1) On terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to
allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the
system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current
service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An
annuity increased under this subsection replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted
to the same person.
(2) The amount of the annuity increase under this subsection is computed as the sum of the prior
service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/334
service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in the Consumer Price
Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date
of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the
same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the
amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this subsection exceeds all previously granted
increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality
accumulation fund of the system.
(c) Dates of allowances and increases. The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in
retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2004, subject to approval by the board of trustees
of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made
hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of
section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has
made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(d) Increased deposit rate. All employees of the city, who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System, shall make deposits to the system at the rate of 7% of their individual earnings effective 1st day of
October, 2003.
(e) Effective date. Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this section shall be and become
effective on the 1st day of October, 2003.
(Ordinance 2003-12, secs. 1–3, adopted 8/28/03)
Sec. 9.04.014 Current service and prior service contributions (2011)
Pursuant to section 855.407(g) of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service
contributions to its account in the municipal accumulation fund of the system at such combined rate of the total
compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the system, as the system's actuary shall
annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the
city under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out
of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the
combined rate of city contributions. (Ordinance 2010-11 adopted 7/27/10)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/334
Ordinance 2008-02, the subdivision ordinance of the city, adopted on January 10, 2008, is included at the end of
this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the subdivision ordinance and the technicalities involved in
adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only nonsubstantive formatting and
style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and subsections have been retained
as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a history note
following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the material is unchanged from the
original. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other material added for
purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets.
EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 1: INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSE
The purpose of these subdivision regulations are [is] to provide for the orderly, safe, and healthful development
of the area within the city and within the area surrounding the city and to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the community and its surrounding areas. It is the intention of the City Commission that the standards
and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the platting and developing of
subdivisions in the City of La Feria and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and other derivations shall have the
meaning ascribed to them hereafter [hereinafter]. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are construed in
accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. Any office referred to in this
ordinance by title means the person employed or appointed by the city in that position, or his or her duly
authorized representative.
Alley - a minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which
is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street;
City - the City of La Feria, Texas;
City Commission - the governing body of the City of La Feria, Texas;
City engineer - The term “city engineer” shall apply only to such registered professional engineer or firm of
registered professional consulting engineers that has been specifically designated as such by the city commission
to act on behalf of the city on engineering related matters.
Commission - the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its successors (formerly the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission - TNRCC).
Crosswalk - public right-of-way, which provides pedestrian circulation;
Cul-de-sac - a street having but one (1) outlet to another street, termination of the opposite end by a vehicular
turnaround;
Dead-end street - a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet;
Dedication - A gift or donation of property by the owner to the City.
Developer: An individual, partnership, corporation or governmental entity undertaking the subdivision or
improvement of land and other activities covered by these regulations, including the preparation of a subdivision
plat showing the layout of the land and the public improvements involved therein. The term “developer” is
intended to include the term “subdivider” even though personnel in successive stages of a project may vary.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/334
Easement: An interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation.
Engineer - a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as
heretofore, or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering;
(Ordinance 2008-02 adopted 1/10/08)
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction - The unincorporated area outside of the City which is contiguous to and within five
(5) miles of the corporate limits of the City and not a part of any other city and in which area the City may
enjoin the violation of its subdivision ordinance. (Ordinance 2011-09 adopted 6/14/11)
Final plat - (also record plat or filing plat) - the official and authentic map of any given subdivision of land
prepared form [from] actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a surveyor or engineer
with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner and all boundaries, corners and curves of the land
division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. Angular
measurements and bearings shall be accurate to the nearest minute. Distances shall be accurate to the nearest
tenth (10th) of a foot;
Lot - an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which is, or in the future may be
offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement, which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and
which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been
properly filed for record;
May - the word “may” is merely directory;
Mobile home - means any structure transportable in one or more sections, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to
utilities.
Mobile home park - is a type of development where land is owned under one ownership and individual lots or
spaces are leased or rented, with or without mobile homes on them, to other persons for the purposes of placing
or maintaining a mobile home thereon. A mobile home park, for these purposes, shall be defined as any lot,
tract, or parcel of land where more than one mobile home is located.
Pavement width - the portion of a street available for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Where curbs are laid, it is
the portion between the faces of the curbs;
Person - any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, or political subdivision;
Planning and Zoning Commission - the appointed Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of La Feria.
Preliminary plat - the phrase “preliminary plat” shall be any of any lot, tract or parcel of land that is not to be
recorded for record, but is only a proposed division of land for review and study by the city. It shall include but
is not limited to topography and drainage features;
Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer - means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be
used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer
or recreational vehicle by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory-equipped for the road, it shall have a
body width not exceeding eight feet and a body lengthy [length] not exceeding state maximums.
Recreational Vehicle Park - means any development site, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended
to be used for the purpose of providing short-term occupancy of camper vehicle[s], recreational vehicles, tents or
trailers.
Shall - the word “shall” is always mandatory;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/334
Sidewalk: A paved pedestrian way generally located within public street right-of-way, but outside of the
roadway, and built in accordance with city specifications.
Street - a public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land;
(1) Major thoroughfares (also commonly referred to as arterial streets, primary thoroughfares, etc.)
provide vehicular movement from one neighborhood to another, to distant points within the urban
area or to freeways or highways leading to other communities;
(2) Collector streets (also commonly referred to as feeder streets, secondary thoroughfares, etc.)
provide vehicular circulation within neighborhoods and from minor streets to major thoroughfares.
Due to similarity of traffic volume and wheel loadings, streets through commercial and industrial
areas are frequently constructed to the same design as collector streets;
(3) Local residential streets (also commonly referred to as minor thoroughfares or streets, etc.) are
primarily direct vehicular access to abutting residential property;
Structure: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Subdivision - the word “subdivision” or “addition” shall be any division of any lot, tract, or parcel of land into
two (2) or more lots or sites for the purpose of sale, lease, or rental. It also includes the resubdivision or
replatting of land, lots, or tracts. Division of land for agricultural purposes, in parcels of five (5) acres or more
shall not be included within this definition, unless any such division includes the planning and development of a
new street or access easement.
Surveyor - a licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by state statute to practice
the profession of surveying;
Utility easement - an interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility
corporation, for installing and maintaining utilities across, over[,] on or under private land, together with the
right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for maintenance of said utilities.
SECTION 3: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
3-1. The city will not permit the installation of septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision except in accordance
with Section 10 of this ordinance.
3-2. No building permit shall be issued by the city for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final
plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the
standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
3-3. The city may allow sectional development of an approved final plat, provided that the section of the final
plat meets all the requirements of this ordinance in full as though it were a subdivision within itself.
3-4. The city shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any
subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record; nor in which the standards
contained herein, or referred to herein, have not been complied with in full.
3-5. The city shall not authorize any other person nor shall the city itself sell or supply any water or
wastewater service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in
which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
3-6. In behalf of the city, the city attorney shall, when directed by the City Commission, institute appropriate
action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this ordinance or the standards referred to
herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/334
3-7. The provisions of this ordinance shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits to any lots
upon which building exists and was in existence prior to passage of these regulations, or to prohibit the repair,
maintenance or installation of any street or public utility services for, to, or abutting any lot or tract where such
lot or tract was in existence and the last recorded conveyance of which was prior to passage of these regulations.
3-8. No subdivided land shall be sold or conveyed until the subdivider has received approval of a final plat of
the tract and has filed and recorded with the Cameron County Clerk a legally approved plat.
3-9. For residential subdivisions, there shall be no more than one single-family dwelling per lot. This shall be
noted on the face of the final plat and included in the language on the deeds and contracts for deeds.
SECTION 4: IMPROVEMENTS GENERALLY
The subdivider shall furnish, install and/or construct the water and sewage systems and the street and drainage
facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. All such facilities shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with all city ordinances and standards. Where considered necessary by the city, the
facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by the design criteria in order to provide for future growth and
expansion or to conform to the city's master plan.
SECTION 5: PRELIMINARY PLAT
5-1. PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE
Prior to submitting a plat, the subdivider shall be responsible for checking on proper zoning and subdivision
regulations and improvements requirements and then consult early and informally with the city manager before
formal application of the preliminary plat for its approval in order to save time and money.
5-2. PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS
(a) Plat Prepared by Surveyor, Engineer or Land Planner; Conference - A preliminary plat shall be prepared
by a surveyor, engineer, or land planner. The plat shall conform to these subdivision regulations and the city's
zoning regulations.
(b) Timing and Copies Required - The subdivider shall submit six (6) blue or black line copies of the
preliminary plat to the city manager at least fourteen (14) days prior to the planning and zoning commission
meeting at which the plat is to be considered.
(c) Form - The preliminary plat shall be drawn on 24" x 36" at a scale appropriate for that size sheet. The
preferred scale is 1" = 100" [1" = 100']. In cases of large developments a scale of 1" = 200' may be used if
approved by the city manager, but is the smallest scale to be permitted.
(d) Content of Preliminary Plat
(1) Name and address of the owner, subdivider or developer, engineer, surveyor, or land planner;
(2) Proposed name of the subdivision;
(3) Names of adjacent subdivisions or owners of adjacent parcels of unsubdivided land. The
platting of adjoining property and streets shall also be shown;
(4) An accurate boundary survey of the property and a metes and bounds description;
(5) A north point, scale of plat, and date of preparation;
(6) The location, dimensions, name, and description of all streets, alleys, easements, lots and other
cities proposed within the subdivision. Where the proposed subdivision is a unit of a larger tract
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/334
proposed for future development, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire
tract showing the tentative layout of streets, blocks, drainage, and utility improvements. The overall
layout, if approved by the planning and zoning commission, shall be attached to the smaller approved
subdivision and made a part of the permanent records. Thereafter, plats of subsequent units of such
subdivision shall conform to the approved overall layout unless it is amended by the city;
(7) Contours at intervals of five (5) vertical feet. If contours at that interval do not give adequate
terrain description, then the interval will be reduced to two (2) vertical feet or as directed by the city
engineer;
(8) Preliminary drainage proposals including drainage areas affecting the property;
(9) Existing and proposed utility service to the property;
(10) Existing public utility easements;
(11) Any land uses proposed other than single family lots such as schools, parks, church and
apartments;
(12) Number assigned to each lot and number or letter assigned to each block;
(13) Front building setback lines shown on all lots and sites and side building lines at street
intersections;
5-3 PROCESS THE PRELIMINARY PLAT
(a) Upon receiving six (6) copies of the preliminary plat and the required filing fees, the city manager will
inform the subdivider of the time of the next planning and zoning commission meeting at which the preliminary
plat will be considered. Upon receipt, the city manager will provide for the review of the plat by the appropriate
officials, being the city engineer, water and wastewater superintendent, and any other officials he or she deems
appropriate. Two (2) of the six (6) copies will be provided to the city engineer for his or her review. The city
engineer will then return one (1) copy back to the city manager with his or her comments and recommendations.
The city manager shall also ensure that the preliminary plat is checked against the city's zoning and building
regulations. Following the staff review, the preliminary plat will then be placed on the agenda for its
consideration of approval by the planning and zoning commission.
(b) Within thirty (30) days after the preliminary plat is formally filed, the planning and zoning commission
shall approve or disapprove such preliminary plat or conditionally approve it with modifications. The
conditional approval of the preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission does not in any manner
constitute the acceptance of the subdivision nor the improvement placed therein, but is merely an authorization
to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be
noted on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat along with references to any conditions determined and attached
thereto. One (1) copy shall be returned to the developer and the other copy retained as a permanent record of the
city. Approval of the preliminary plat, if granted, shall be valid for not longer than one (1) year after the date of
approval of the preliminary plat unless the final plat has been approved and recorded within the one-year period.
(c) Approval of the preliminary plat does not permit the beginning of any proposed subdivision
improvements. No construction work shall begin prior to approval of the final plat of the proposed subdivision
by the both planning and zoning commission and the City Commission.
5-4. PRELIMINARY PLAT FILING FEES
The following schedule of fees and charges shall be collected by the city when any preliminary plat is tendered
to the city for consideration of approval. Such fees and charges shall accompany the application of the proposed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/334
plat and no action of the planning and zoning commission shall be valid until the filing fee has been paid. This
fee shall not be refunded to the subdivider should the plat be disapproved.
(a) Inside City Limits:
$100.00 per plat plus $1.00 per lot[.]
(b) Outside City Limits in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction:
$200.00 per plat plus $1.00 per lot[.]
(Ordinance 2008-02 adopted 1/10/08)
SECTION 6: FINAL PLAT
6-1 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS
(a) Conformance with Preliminary Plat - The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, and
incorporating all conditions imposed by the planning and zoning commission.
(b) Timing and Copies Required - The subdivider shall submit one (1) mylar (sepia) copy and ten (10) blue or
black line copies of the final plat and one (1) copy of the construction plans to the city manager at least fourteen
(14) days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the final plat is to be considered.
(c) Form - The final plat shall be drawn on 24" x 36" at a scale appropriate for that size sheet, but a 1" = 100'
is the smallest scale that will be permitted. Where more than one (1) sheet is necessary to accommodate the
entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. If
desired by the subdivider and approved by the planning and zoning commission, the final plat may constitute
only that portion of the approved preliminary plat, which is proposed to be recorded and developed; however,
such portion shall conform to all requirements.
(d) Content of Final Plat
(1) All requirements of preliminary plat;
(2) The exact location, dimensions, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys,
reservations, easements, or other public right[s]-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or
contiguous with its boundary or forming such boundary, with accurate dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles and radii area, and central angle, degree of curvature[,] tangent distance and length
of all curves where appropriate;
(3) The exact location, grade, dimensions, description, and name of all proposed streets, alleys,
drainage, rights-of-way, parks, other public areas, reservations, easement or other right-of-way,
blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection
angles and radii area, and central angles, degree of curvature, tangent distance and length of all
curves where appropriate;
(4) Owner's acknowledgment of the dedication to public use of streets, alleys, parks, rights-of-way,
easements, and other public places shown on the final plat.
The State of Texas
County of Cameron
I (We), the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat and designated herein as the
______________ Subdivision to the City of La Feria, Texas and whose name is subscribed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/334
hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains,
easements, water lines, wastewater lines, storm sewers, fire hydrants and public places which
are installed or which I (we) will cause to be installed thereon, shown or not shown, if required
otherwise to be installed or dedicated under the subdivision approval process of the City of La
Feria, all the same for the purposes therein expressed, either on the plat hereof or on the official
minutes of the applicable authorities of the City of La Feria.
Owner
(5) A certification by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the preparation of the final plat and
supporting data, attesting to its accuracy and that all survey work around the boundary area as well as
within the subdivision shall have an error closure of no more than one foot in five thousand feet
(1/5,000') or less;
(6) All survey monuments shall be shown on the plat.
(7) All deed restrictions that are to be filed with the plat shall be shown on or submitted separately
with the plat;
(8) Tax certificates from all applicable taxing entities;
(9) The final plats shall be accompanied by complete sets of construction plans and profiles for all
street and drainage improvements and water and sanitary wastewater improvements;
(10) A waiver of claim for damages against the city occasioned by the establishment of grades or
the alteration of the surface of any portion of existing streets and alleys to conform to the grades
established in the subdivision;
(11) The following certifications shall be placed on the final plat:
THE LA FERIA PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION ON ________________, ______
VOTED AFFIRMATIVELY TO RECOMMEND THIS PLAT TO THE CITY COMMISSION
FOR APPROVAL AND FOR FILING OF RECORD.
Chairman, La Feria Planning & Zoning Commission Date
THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF LA FERIA ON ________________, ______
VOTED AFFIRMATIVELY TO APPROVE THIS PLAT FOR FILING OR RECORD.
Mayor, City of La Feria Date
(12) If the subdivision is “residential,” a note containing the following shall be included on the
final plat: “No more than one single family residential dwelling per lot is permitted.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/334
(e) Final Engineering Report The final plat shall be accompanied by an engineering report bearing the signed
and dated seal of a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. The engineering report shall discuss
the availability and methodology of providing water facilities and wastewater treatment service to individual lots
within the subdivision. A detailed cost estimate per lot acceptable to the City shall be provided for those
unconstructed water supply and distribution facilities and for wastewater collection and treatment facilities,
which are necessary to serve each lot of the subdivision. The plan shall include a construction schedule for each
significant element needed to provide adequate water or wastewater facilities. If financial guarantees are to be
provided under Section 9-3 of this Ordinance, the schedule shall include the start dates and completion dates.
(1) Public water systems.
(A) Where water supplies are to be provided by an existing public water system, the
subdivider shall furnish an executed contractual agreement in substantially the form attached in
Appendix B to this ordinance between the subdivider and the retail public utility to the effect
that the retail public utility has or will have the ability to supply the total flow anticipated from
the ultimate development and occupancy of the proposed subdivision for a minimum of 30
years and that the subdivider has provided for the payment of costs or fees for the connection of
each individual lot to the public water system, including water meters, water acquisition fees, or
other necessary expenses required by the retail public utility. Before final plat approval, plans
and specifications for the proposed water facilities shall have been approved by all entities
having jurisdiction over the proposed project, which may include the Commission and the
county health department in addition to the responsible departments of the City. If groundwater
is to be the source of the water supply, the final engineering report shall include a groundwater
availability study, that complies with the requirements of 30 TAC §§ 230.1 through 230.11 for
the water availability for a public water supply system and certifies the long term (30 years)
quantity and quality of available groundwater supplies relative to the ultimate needs of the
subdivision.
(B) Where there is no existing retail public utility to construct and maintain the proposed
water facilities, the subdivider shall establish a retail public utility and obtain a Certificate of
Convenience and Necessity (CCN) from the Commission and include evidence of the CCN
issuance with the plat. Before final plat approval, plans and specifications for the proposed
water facilities shall have been approved by all entities having jurisdiction over the proposed
project. If groundwater is to be the source of the water supply, the final engineering report shall
include a groundwater availability study, that complies with the requirements of 30 TAC §§
230.1 through 230.11 for water availability for a public water supply system and certifies the
long term (30 years) quantity and quality of available groundwater supplies relative to the
ultimate needs of the subdivision. If surface water is the source of supply then the final
engineering report shall include evidence that sufficient water rights have been obtained and
dedicated, either through acquisition or wholesale water supply agreement that will provide a
sufficient supply to serve the needs of the subdivision for a term of not less than 30 years.
(2) Where individual wells are proposed for the supply of drinking water to residences, the final
engineering report shall include the quantitative and qualitative results of sampling the test wells in
accordance with Section 9-13 of [appendix A of] this Ordinance. The results of such analyses shall be
made available to the prospective property owners. If the water quality of the test well required
pursuant to Section 9-13 of [appendix A of] this Ordinance does not meet the water quality standards
as set forth in that section without treatment by an identified and commercially available water
treatment system, then the final report must state the type of treatment system that will treat the water
produced from the well to the specified water quality standards, the location of at least one
commercial establishment within the county at which the system is available for purchase, and the
cost of such system, the cost of installation of the system, and the estimated monthly maintenance
cost of the treatment system. The final engineering report shall include a groundwater availability
study, that complies with the requirements of 30 TAC §§ 230.1 through 230.11 for water availability
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/334
for a public water supply system and certifies the long term (30 years) quantity and quality of
available groundwater supplies relative to the ultimate needs of the subdivision. The description of
the required sanitary control easement shall be included.
(3) Organized Sewerage Facilities
(A) Where wastewater treatment is to be provided by an existing retail public utility, the
subdivider shall furnish evidence of a contractual agreement in substantially the form attached
in Appendix C [to this ordinance] between the subdivider and must provide that the retail public
utility has or will have the ability to treat the total flow anticipated for a minimum of 30 years
from the ultimate development and that the subdivider has paid the cost of all fees associated
with connection to the wastewater collection and treatment system have been paid so that
service is immediately available to each lot. Before final plat approval, an appropriate permit to
dispose of wastes shall have been obtained from the Commission and plans and specifications
for the proposed wastewater collection and treatment facilities shall have been approved by all
entities having jurisdiction over the proposed project.
(B) Where there is no existing retail public utility to construct and maintain the proposed
sewerage facilities, the subdivider shall establish a retail public utility and obtain a CCN from
the Commission. Before final plat approval, a wastewater treatment permit authorizing the
treatment of the wastewater for the ultimate build-out population of the subdivision shall have
been obtained from the Commission and plans and specifications for the proposed sewerage
facilities shall have been approved by all entities having jurisdiction over the proposed project.
(4) On-Site Sewerage Facilities (OSSF) Where private on-site sewerage facilities are proposed, the
final engineering report shall include planning materials required by 30 TAC, §285.4(c), including
the site evaluation described by 30 TAC, §285.30 and all other information required by applicable
OSSF regulations.
6-2. PROCESSING THE FINAL PLAT AND CONSTRUCTION PLANS
(a) Upon receiving the one (1) mylar copy and the ten (10) copies of the final plat, a copy of the construction
plans, and the required plat filing fees, the city manager will inform the subdivider of the time of the next
planning and zoning commission meeting at which the final plat will be considered. Upon receipt, the city
manager will provide for the review of the final plat by the appropriate officials, being the city engineer, water
and wastewater superintendent, and any other officials he or she deems appropriate to determine if the plat and
proposed improvements conform to this ordinance and any required special conditions. Two (2) of the ten (10)
copies of the proposed final plat will be provided to the city engineer for his or her comments and
recommendations. The city engineer will then return one (1) copy to the city manager with his or her comments,
if any. The city manager shall also insure that the final plat is checked against the approved preliminary plat for
the subject property for compliance. After the final plat has been reviewed by both the city engineer and city
staff the final plat will then be placed on the agenda for its consideration of approval by the planning and zoning
commission. If desired by the subdivider and approved by the city, the final plat may constitute only that portion
of the approved preliminary plat, which he or she proposes to record and develop.
(b) Within thirty (30) days after the subdivider formally files the final plat, the planning and zoning
commission shall approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve with enumerated conditions such plat. If the
final plat is disapproved or conditionally approved, the city manager shall inform the subdivider in writing of the
reasons or of any required revisions.
(c) Upon approval or conditional approval by the planning and zoning commission, the final plat will be
forwarded to the city commission for approval. Within thirty (30) days after receiving the final plat and
recommendations from the planning and zoning commission, the city commission shall approve, disapprove, or
conditionally approve with enumerated conditions such plat. If the final plat is disapproved or conditionally
approved, the city manager shall inform the subdivider in writing of the reasons or of any required revisions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/334
Upon approval by the city commission, four (4) complete sets of the final plat and construction plans, and
profile sheets and a compact disk (CD) media, in Adobe Acrobat portable document format (pdf) of the final
plat, construction plans and profile sheets will be submitted to the city manager for the city's use in performing
inspections of the subdivision's development in order to determine its compliance with all approved
requirements.
6-3. ACCEPTANCE AND RECORDING FINAL PLAT
(a) After the City Commission has approved the subdivision plat, and if the subdivider chooses to file a
financial guarantee with the City of La Feria in lieu of constructing the required improvements, (if outside the
city limits, the financial guarantee shall be filed with the County and proof of such filing shall be provided to the
City of La Feria), the City Manager shall cause the filing of the plat with the County Clerk of the County in
which the property is located. The filing of the final plat shall occur after receiving written consent from the
developer and specific approval from the City Commission. A preconstruction conference with the developer
and/or his designee shall be held prior to commencement of construction to ensure proper compliance with the
provisions of the code and approval and acceptance of the improvements.
(b) After the City Commission has approved the subdivision plat, the subdivider may choose to construct the
required infrastructure instead of filing a financial guarantee with the City or the County. Prior to installing the
required infrastructure, a preconstruction conference shall be held to ensure proper compliance with provisions
of the code. The infrastructure shall be inspected and tested during construction in accordance with the policies
and standards of the City. After installation and testing of all required infrastructure improvements, the City
Commission shall review the subdivision plat for final approval. Failure to pass all inspections and testing will
prevent final approval of the subdivision plat by the City Commission. The City Manager shall cause the filing
of the final plat with the County Clerk's Office of the County in which the property is located after installation of
all infrastructure improvements, improvements passing all inspections and testing, and final approval by the City
Commission.
(c) Building permits will only be issued after the copy of the recorded plat is received from the county clerk.
Certificates of Occupancy will not be issued until it is determined that all of the improvements including streets,
drainage, water, and sanitary wastewater have been constructed according to approved plans and that these
facilities have been accepted by the City for ownership and maintenance. The City will not accept any street,
drainage improvement, water line or wastewater line for maintenance until an acceptable one (1) year
maintenance bond for all of the facilities in said subdivision has been presented to the City.
6-4. FINAL PLAT FILING FEES
The following schedule of fees and charges shall be collected by the city when any final plat is tendered to the
city for consideration and approval. Such fees and charges shall accompany the application of the proposed plat
and no action of the city commission shall be valid until the filing fee has been paid. This fee shall not be
refunded to the subdivider should the plat be disapproved.
(a) Inside City Limits:
$150.00 per plat plus $1.00 per lot[.]
(b) Outside City Limits in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction:
$250.00 per plat plus $1.00 per lot[.]
SECTION 7: REPLATS
7-1. PROCEDURES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/334
(a) Any person who wishes to revise a subdivision replat which has been previously filed for record must
make an application of the proposed revised plat to the planning and zoning commission. The replat of the
subdivision shall meet all the requirements for a subdivision that may be pertinent. However, if the subdivision
as replatted does not require any appreciable alteration or improvement of utility installations, streets, alleys,
building setback lines, etc., then no engineering plans will be required. No preliminary plats will be required for
any replats.
(b) In the event the proposed replat involves property that has been previously developed and limited by deed
restrictions or zoned as single family or duplex residential use then the following special requirements must be
adhered to. Public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Commission are required.
(1) Publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in La Feria.
(2) By written notice to the owners of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within
200 feet of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in
the case of a subdivision within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the most recently approved county tax
roll of the property upon which the replat is requested. The written notice may be delivered by
depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository
within the boundaries of the City of La Feria.
(c) If the proposed replat requires a variance and is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed
replat must receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members present
of the City Commission. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of
the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending 200 feet
from that area, but within the original subdivision must be filed with the City Commission, or both, prior to the
close of the public hearing.
7-2. REPLAT FEES
The fee for replatting property shall be as follows:
(a) Inside City Limits - $250.00[.]
(b) Outside City Limits in ETJ - $350.00[.]
SECTION 8. ADMINISTRATIVE PLATS
(a) The City Manager may approve and issue an amending plat, which may be recorded and is controlling
over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is
solely for one or more of the following purposes:
(1) to correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
(2) to add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
(3) to correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
(4) to indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer
or surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
(5) to show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character
or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
(6) to correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the
municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names,
and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/334
(7) to correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
(A) both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) neither lot is abolished[;]
(C) the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(D) the amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other
owners in the plat;
(8) to relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvement on a lot line or easement;
(9) to relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
(A) the owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(C) the amendment does not increase the number of lots;
(10) to make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the subdivision
or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if:
(A) the changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality;
(B) the changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
(C) the area covered by the changes is located in an area that the municipal planning
commission or other appropriate governing body of the municipality has approved, after a
public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or
(11) to replat one or more lost [lots] fronting on an existing street if:
(A) the owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
(C) the amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
(D) the amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary
the extension of municipal facilities.
(b) Notice, a hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an
amending plat.
SECTION 9. MAINTENANCE BOND
9-1. If the subdivider chooses to construct the required improvements prior to recording of the final plat, all
such construction shall be inspected while in progress by the appropriate city officials, and must be approved
upon completion by the Director of Public Works, the water and wastewater superintendent, and the city
manager.
9-2. Upon completion of all improvements in accordance with city specifications and standards, and their
acceptance by the city, the subdivider or developer or his, her, or their contractors shall furnish the city with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/334
either a letter of credit for maintenance or a maintenance bond executed by a corporate surety holding a permit
from the State of Texas to act as surety or other surety acceptable to the city. Such letter of credit or bond shall
be conditioned that the subdivider or developer shall warrant such improvements in good condition for a period
of twelve (12) months. The amount shall equal to ten percent (10%) of the contract cost of all improvements and
shall be in effect one (1) year from date of completion and acceptance by the city.
9-3. FINANCIAL GUARANTEES FOR IMPROVEMENTS
(a) Applicability. If an adequate public or nonpublic water systems or wastewater facility is not available from
a retail public utility, or are not constructed by the subdivider, to serve lots intended for residential purposes of
five acres or less at the time final plat approval is sought, then the City shall require the owner of the subdivided
tract to execute an agreement with the City in substantially the form attached in Appendix D secured by a bond,
irrevocable letter of credit, or other alternative financial guarantee such as cash deposit which meets the
requirements set forth below.
(b) Bonds. A bond that is submitted in compliance with paragraph (a) of this section shall meet the following
requirements.
(1) The bond or financial guarantee shall be payable to the mayor of the City, in his official
capacity, or the mayor's successor in office.
(2) The bond or financial guarantee shall be in the amount of 110% of the total development costs.
(3) The bond shall be executed with sureties as may be approved by the City. The City shall
establish criteria for acceptability of the surety companies issuing bonds that include but are not
limited to:
(A) registration with the Secretary of State and be authorized to do business in Texas;
(B) authorization to issue bonds in the amount required by the City; and
(C) rating of at least B from Best's Key Rating Guide; or if the surety been a surety company,
the surety company must demonstrate eligibility to participate in the surety bond guarantee
program of the Small Business Administration and must be an approved surety company listed
in the current United States Department of Treasury Circular 570. Such bonds shall meet the
criteria contained in the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of
Treasury.
(c) Letter of credit. A letter of credit that is submitted in compliance with paragraph (a) of this section shall
meet the following requirements:
(1) Any letter of credit submitted as a financial guarantee for combined amounts greater than
$10,000 and less than $250,000 must be from financial institutions, which meet the following
qualifications.
(A) Bank qualifications:
(i) must be federally insured;
(ii) Sheshunoff rating must be 10 or better and primary capital must be at least 6.0% of
total assets; and
(iii) total assets must be at least $25 million.
(B) Savings and loan association qualifications:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/334
(i) must be federally insured;
(ii) tangible capital must be at least 1.5% of total assets and total assets must be greater
than $25 million or tangible capital must be at least 3.0% of total assets if total assets are
less than $25 million; and
(iii) Sheshunoff rating must be 30 or better.
(C) (i) the letter of credit must be 110% collateralized by an investment instrument
that would meet the qualifications for a City investment; and
(ii) the investment instrument must be registered in the City's name and the City must
receive safekeeping receipts for all collateral before the letter of credit is accepted.
(2) Any letter of credit submitted as a financial guarantee for combined amounts greater than
$250,000 must be from financial institutions that meet the following qualifications:
(A) Bank qualifications:
(i) must be federally insured;
(ii) Sheshunoff rating must be thirty or better and primary capital must be at least 7.0%
of total assets; and
(iii) total assets must be at least $75 million.
(B) Savings and loan association qualifications:
(i) must be federally insured;
(ii) tangible capital must be at least 3.0% of total assets and total assets must be greater
than $75 million or tangible capital must be at least 5.0% of total assets if total assets are
less than $75 million; and
(iii) Sheshunoff rating must be 30 or better.
(C) (i) the letter of credit must be 110% collateralized by an investment instrument
that would meet the qualifications for a City investment; and
(ii) the investment instrument must be registered in the City's name and the City must
receive safekeeping receipts for all collateral before the letter of credit is accepted.
(3) The letter of credit shall list as sole beneficiary the mayor of the City, in his official capacity, or
the mayor's successor in office, and must be approved by the city.
(4) The letter of credit shall be conditioned upon installation or construction of water and
wastewater facilities meeting the criteria established under Appendix A of this ordinance and upon
construction of facilities within the time stated on the plat, or on the document attached to the plat for
the subdivision, or within any extension of time granted by the City.
(d) Financial guarantee. The City will determine the amount of the bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit
required to ensure proper construction of adequate water and wastewater facilities in the subdivision.
(e) Alternative to City accepting a financial guarantee. The City may approve a final plat under this section
without receiving a financial guarantee in the name of the City if the City has executed an interlocal agreement
with the County that imposes the obligation on the County to assume obligations to enforce the terms of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/334
financial guarantee under the conditions set forth therein and complete construction of the facilities identified in
the construction agreement.
SECTION 10: UNAVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC WATER AND/OR SEWAGE UTILITIES
If a proposed subdivision is located beyond the drainage area of an approved sewage collection system or
beyond the service area of an approved water distribution system the subdivider shall be required to furnish,
with his or her preliminary plat, satisfactory evidence, including (but without limitation) the results of soil tests
and borings, and statements from local and state health authorities, water engineers, and other proper officials,
that water satisfactory for human consumption may be obtained from surface or subsurface water sources on the
land/or that soil conditions are such that satisfactory sewage disposal can be provided by the use of approved
septic tanks or developer installed sewage treatment systems. Construction of private utilities shall be in
[accordance with] 30 TAC Chapter 285, 30 TAC Chapter 317, Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 366.
(Ordinance 2008-16 adopted 6/10/08)
SECTION 11: STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
The design and construction standards found in Appendix A hereof shall govern the construction of all
subdivision improvements as well as establishing standards for materials to be used unless otherwise stipulated
by the city.
SECTION 12: OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
Where it is necessary, in order to properly serve the subdivision, that extension of existing city utilities or that
drainage facilities be constructed outside the subdivision, which extensions or such facilities are herein referred
to as “off-site improvements,” the developer shall install such off-site improvements of such a size as to
adequately serve the area being subdivided, at his or her own expense. However, if the city should require the
construction of off-site improvements of a size greater than needed to serve the subdivision, then the city shall
within one (1) year after date of approval of such construction, reimburse the developer for any increased cost of
such facilities. In no event shall the city participate in the cost of water or wastewater mains six inches (6") or
smaller.
SECTION 13: LIABILITY OF CITY
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this ordinance shall be liable or have any
liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this ordinance.
SECTION 14: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
Whenever the standards and specifications in this ordinance conflict with those contained in another ordinance,
the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern.
SECTION 15: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, any person violating any provision of this ordinance
within the jurisdiction of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violations of this ordinance.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this chapter [ordinance] within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city, but outside the corporate limits of the city, shall not be guilty of a misdemeanor within the meaning of
subsection (a) in this section, nor shall be fined in relation thereto. However, the city may institute an action in
the district court to enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter [ordinance] in such extraterritorial
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/334
jurisdiction, the district court having been empowered to grant any or all types of injunctive relief in such cases
under section 4 of article 970a, Vernon's Revised Civil Statutes.
SECTION 16: CITY ATTORNEY'S AUTHORITY
On behalf of the city, the city attorney, when directed by the City Commission, shall institute appropriate action
in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this ordinance or the standards referred to herein
with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city as such jurisdiction is determined under the Municipal Annexation Act, or within any area subject to all or a
part of the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 17: SEVERABILITY
That it is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
this ordinance shall be declared [unconstitutional, such] unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted
by the City Commission without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraphs or section.
SECTION 18: EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE
This ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after its passage and the publication of its caption, as the
law in such cases provides.
(Ordinance 2008-02 adopted 1/10/08)
Appendix A
MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
The minimum design standards for subdivisions are intended to establish a quality of construction and
environmental design that will reduce maintenance costs to acceptable limits and to provide service that is both
adequate and convenient. There may be from time to time situations that will dictate requirements in excess of
those given. The city commission will have final authority in determining when additional requirements are in
order.
SECTION 1: GENERAL
1-1. The city shall specify the area required for the allocation of parks and other public spaces that are
essential to the proper development of the area. Parkland or cash in lieu of parkland shall be required of the
subdivider or developer in accordance with the city's parkland dedication ordinance.
1-2. All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such a manner that it will not be necessary
to disturb any curb, gutter, street pavement, or drainage structures when connections are made.
1-3. All utility lines that pass under a street or alley shall be installed before the street or alley is paved.
1-4. The developer shall furnish the city with one (1) set of “as built” plans for all paving, drainage structures,
water mains, and wastewater mains within sixty (60) days after completion of construction.
SECTION 2: LOTS
2-1. The size, width, depth, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the neighborhood in which
the subdivision is located and for the type of development and use contemplated. All lots shall front upon a
public street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/334
2-2. Lot sizes, set back lines, rear yards, and side yards shall conform with the city's zoning ordinance, where
applicable.
2-3. Where lots are not regulated by the city's zoning ordinance, the minimum dimensions for interior
residential lots shall be fifty feet (50') for width and one hundred and ten feet (110') for depth; provided, that a
decrease in depth may be made if the lot width is increased so as to provide for a minimum lot area of six
thousand (6,000) square feet. The minimum width of residential corner lots not adjacent to a collector street shall
be sixty feet (60') and the minimum area of corner lots shall be six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet.
Where adjacent to a collector street, the minimum width of lots shall be seventy feet (70') and the minimum area
for the corner lot shall be seven thousand seven hundred (7,700) square feet.
2-4. Where a residential lot abuts a highway, railroad right-of-way, high-pressure gas line, electric
transmission line (69 KVA or higher), or an industrial or commercial area, an additional lot depth or width of at
least ten feet (10') adjacent to such incompatible [use] shall be required.
2-5. There shall be no more than one single family or mobile home dwelling per lot.
SECTION 3: BLOCKS
Block lengths and widths shall be provided at such intervals as to best serve traffic adequately and to meet
existing streets, or to comply with customary subdivision practices. In no case shall block lengths exceed
fourteen hundred feet (1,400) or be less than five hundred feet (500') long in residential areas or exceed eighteen
hundred feet (1,800) long in commercial and industrial areas or be less than nine hundred feet (900') long. Block
widths shall be such as to allow for two tiers of lots back to back, except where abutting a major street or
thoroughfare or where prevented by topographical conditions or the size of the property.
SECTION 4: STREET AND CROSSWALKS
4-1. Private streets which serve more than one residential lot or more multifamily structures owned by more
than one person are prohibited, except in approved mobile home parks. All other streets shall be dedicated to the
city.
4-2. Major thoroughfares shall have a right-of-way of eighty feet (80') and a paving width of forty-eight feet
(48'). Collector streets shall have a right-of-way width of sixty feet (60') and a paving width of thirty-nine feet
(39'). Local residential streets shall have a right-of-way width of fifty feet (50') and a paving width of twentynine
feet (29'). Paving width is determined from face of curb to face of curb.
4-3. The minimum acceptable pavement surface shall be as follows:
Street Classification Subgrade Base Surface
Major Thoroughfare Lime stabilization as
recommended by soil
report
12" flexible Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid,
200 lb. Per sq. yd. -orreinforced
concrete. The
final design of which shall
be approved by the City
Engineer.
Collector Street Lime stabilization as 8" flexible Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/334
recommended by soil
report
150 lb. Per sq. yd. -orreinforced
concrete. The
final design of which shall
be approved by the City
Engineer.
Local Residential
Street
Lime stabilization as
recommended by soil
report
6" flexible 1-1/2" rock asphalt -or-
Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid,
125 lb. Per sq. yd. -orreinforced
concrete. The
final design of which shall
be approved by the City
Engineer.
A soil report with recommendation by a registered professional engineer shall be submitted with the design data.
4-4. Existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued, and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets
and in alignment therewith.
4-5. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make
provisions for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas.
4-6. Street jogs (or offsets) with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five feet (125') shall be
avoided.
4-7. Half streets shall be prohibited;
4-8. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable, giving due regard to terrain,
topography, site distances, and safety.
4-9. Dead end streets shall be prohibited except as short stubs to permit future expansion.
4-10. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') in length, and shall have a minimum of right-ofway
radius of fifty feet (50').
4-11. Curbs and gutters shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all interior streets and on the
subdivision side of all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision.
4-12. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets, unless
the new streets are a continuation of or in alignment with existing streets, in which case names of existing streets
shall be used.
4-13. STREET SIGNS:
Within city limits: Within the corporate limits of the city, street signs will be furnished and installed by the city
at each intersection; and the subdivider shall pay to the city such sum as computed by the City for street sign
material, before final approval for recording. Cost of labor for installation of the signs will be paid by the city.
Outside city limits: In subdivisions lying beyond the corporate limits and within the extraterritorial jurisdictions
of the city, street name signs shall be installed by the subdivider at his expense. Such signs shall be of a standard
type approved by the city and shall be installed in accordance with the standards approved by the city engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/334
4-14. Street lights shall be installed by the subdivider at all street intersections and along streets approximately
three hundred feet (300') apart.
4-15. Pedestrian crosswalks not more than eight feet (8') wide with not less than four feet (4') of paved surface
shall be dedicated in subdivisions where deemed necessary by the city commission to provide access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers or other neighborhood facilities.
4-16. All pedestrian crosswalks and street construction materials and workmanship shall be in accordance
with the city's development and construction standards.
SECTION 5: ALLEYS
(1) The flexible pavement section for alleys shall be:
(a) Residential - 10' width (minimum) - Lime stabilized subgrade as recommended by the soil
report, 6" compacted caliche base (minimum) and 125 lbs. Per square yard HMAC pavement
(minimum).
(b) Commercial - 18' width (minimum) - Lime stabilized subgrade as recommended by the soil
report, 8' [8"] compacted caliche base (minimum) and 150 lbs. per square yard HMAC pavement
(minimum).
SECTION 6: UTILITY EASEMENTS
Easements at least ten feet (10') wide, five feet (5') on each side of the rear lot lines or side lot lines, shall be
provided wherever necessary for utilities. Width of easements shall be determined based on space needs.
SECTION 7: SIDEWALKS
Sidewalks, when required, shall be concrete and have a width of not less than four feet (4') and thickness of not
less than four inches (4"). Sidewalks shall be constructed one foot (1') from the property line within the street
right-of-way. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the city's development and construction
standards. Sidewalks shall be as nearly parallel to the street as possible and be located so they are at least three
feet (3') from the curb or in line with existing sidewalks in the area. No sidewalk is required until a lot is
improved, but at the time of such improvement, a sidewalk complying with these provisions shall be provided on
such lot.
SECTION 8: STORM DRAINAGE
8-1. Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed at the expense of the subdivider or developer. The
subdivider or developer shall be solely responsible for the design and installation of drainage facilities so as to
prevent flooding or like damages to any adjoining property.
8-2. Stormwater runoff shall be computed by the Rational Method which is an analysis of the runoff problem
for each drainage area long [along] rational lines and includes the analysis of the flow of stormwater from the
surface on which it falls to the inlet that leads to the storm sewer and then through the storm sewer, culvert,
and/or channel to the point of disposal. The formula for calculation of runoff by the rational method is Q = CIA.
Q = the maximum rate of runoff discharge expressed as cubic feet per second.
C = a runoff coefficient which varies with the topography land use and
moisture content of the soil. The runoff coefficient shall be based on the
ultimate use of the land and shall be selected from below:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/334
For slopes less
than 2%
Business areas (downtown) 0.80
Industrial area (light) 0.75
Residential areas (single family & some
multifamily)
0.50
Park area 0.30
I = rainfall intensity in inches per hour determined form [from] the Weather
Bureau rainfall curve by arriving at the time of concentration and a
rainfall frequency and then reading the chart accordingly. Time of
concentration or duration of rainfall shall be calculated by the data shown
in Table I.
A = the drainage area, in acres. Tributary to the point under design calculated
from the drainage map of the area. This drainage map shall be submitted
with any drainage plans submitted for consideration by the city.
TABLE I
DATA FOR COMPUTING TIME OF CONCENTRATION
Velocity of Runoff in Ft./Sec. For Slope in Percent:
Description of
Watercourse
0% to 3%
V in ft./sec.
4% to 7%
V in ft./sec.
8% to 11%
V in ft./sec.
over 12%
V in ft./sec.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/334
Brush land 1.0 2.0 3.0 3.5
Pasture 1.5 3.0 4.0 4.5
Cultivated 2.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
Pavement 5.0 12.0 15.5 18.0
Channels Determine V by Mannings Formula
Storm Sewers Determine V by Mannings Formula
TABLE II
AVERAGE VELOCITY OF THE RUNOFF FOR CALCULATING TIME OF CONCENTRATION OR
DURATION OF RAINFALL
These average velocities in this table shall be sued [used] unless the designer shows calculation of velocities by
streets using the gutter velocities as follows:
% Slope of Gutter Assumed Velocity-Ft./Sec.
1 % or less 2.0
1% to 3% 3.0
3% to 5% 4.3
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/334
5% to 8% 5.4
8% to 10% 6.4
Using the average velocities from this table the designer shall calculate the time of concentration by the
following formula unless more data is shown on the plans for calculating time of concentration.
where:
T = Time of concentration in minutes for use in determining rainfall
intensity (I).
D = Distance in feet form [from] point of concentration to upper end
of drainage area under consideration.
V = Velocity in feet per second from this table or velocity calculated
by designer by streets and/or storm sewers.
“Inlet
Time”
= 10 minutes for property zoned for multifamily, business, or
industrial and 15 minutes for property zoned for parks, schools,
single family residential and duplex.
8-3. Streets shall be designed to accommodate a ten (10) year frequency storm and underground storm drains
shall be designed to accommodate a twenty-five (25) year frequency storm. In addition to the storm drainage
pipe, the City and/or the City Engineer may direct the onsite stormwater detention facilities as required-based on
the selected design storm.
8-4. Design of all bridges, culverts, underpasses and open channels are to be based on a twenty-five (25) year
frequency;
8-5. The ten (10) year storm runoff may be carried in the streets at a depth up to the curb height that is to the
full capacity of the street. When the ten (10) year storm runoff exceeds the street capacity then storm drains must
be added;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/334
8-6. Sufficient and adequate inlets are to be installed to allow entry of required quantity of water into storm
sewers. Inlet openings shall be about five inches (5") high. Openings shall be as determined on the basis of one
(1) linear foot of inlet per cubic foot per second of stormwater to be picked up except at the sag of a street where
emergency overflow is provided, one and one-half (1-1/2) cubic foot per second per foot of inlet opening will be
allowed;
8-7. Street grades shall be such that excessive soil deposition from too low a water velocity or pavement
scouring from too high a velocity is to be avoided as far as practical. Street grades are normally to be not less
than one and one-half feet (1-1/2') fall per thousand linear feet and fall never be less than one-foot (1') fall per
thousand linear feet;
8-8. Concrete valley gutters shall be provided to carry the water flow across all intersections where necessary
so as not to impede stormwater flow;
8-9. Where water is dumped from a street directly into an open watercourse, it shall be dumped through an
approved type of inlet and outlet;
8-10. An open ditch or natural drainage way through a subdivision may be left at its current location, but a
study must be made by a Registered Professional Engineer knowledgeable about drainage to determine the limits
of the potential for flooding for a twenty-five (25) year storm in the drainage basin. No permanent structure may
be built within the flood plain except in accordance with the city's zoning ordinance. Buildings adjacent to the
flood plain must have a finish floor elevation two feet (2') minimum above the twenty-five (25) year water
surface. An alternate to this is to provide a concrete lined channel. The bottom width of the channel and the
other dimensions as well as all engineering details shall be provided by a Registered Professional Engineer. As a
guide, in general, the height of the lining shall be adequate for the calculated depth of the twenty-five (25) year
storm plus a two foot (2') freeboard. Walls are to be four inch (4") concrete walls sloped not steeper than one
foot (1') vertically to one and one-half feet (1-1/2') horizontally. All concrete slabs are to be reinforced with a
minimum of 6" x 6" x 6["] gauge wire mesh, and provided with proper weep holes or other pressure relief
measures.
8-11. In new subdivisions the developer shall provide all the necessary easements and rights-of-way required
for drainage structures, including storm sewers and open lined channels. The easement width for storm sewer
pipe shall be not less than ten feet (10'), and the easement width for open channels shall be at least twenty feet
(20') wider than the top of the channel, fifteen feet (15') of which shall be on one side to serve as access way for
maintenance purposes.
8-12. The construction of all drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the city's development and
construction standards. All concrete used in drainage structures shall, at a minimum, develop a compressive
strength of three thousand (3,000) p.s.i. in twenty-eight (28) days.
SECTION 9: PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM
9-1. All subdivisions shall be connected to the city's water system and all water mains must be constructed in
accordance with rules and regulations for public water systems as published by the Texas Department of Health,
Water Hygiene Division and must meet the city's development and construction standards.
9-2. All water mains shall be AWWA C-900, Class 100 (DR-25) polyvinyl chloride pipe with cast iron outside
dimensions and meet the material standards specified in the city's development and construction standards.
9-3. All water services shall be a minimum of three-quarter inch (3/4") diameter. Type “k” copper with
corporate stop at main and curb stop behind curb line.
9-4. Water system extensions shall be designed to provide for a domestic supply of at least one hundred fifty
(150) gallons per capita per day, plus an approved fire flow delivered at a minimum pressure of forty (40)
pounds per square inch.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/334
9-5. All mains installed within a subdivision must extend to the borders of the subdivision, as required for
future extensions of the systems, regardless of whether or not such extensions are required for service within the
subdivisions.
9-6. Valves shall be located so that no more than about eight hundred feet (800') of a residential line of five
hundred feet (500') of a business district line would be shut down during a water line break. Two (2) valves will
be required at each tee and three (3) at each cross. A lesser number of valves may be used if proper shut down
control can be provided.
9-7. Fire hydrants shall be provided at locations such that all residential areas of development are located
within a five hundred foot (500') radius from a fire hydrant and served by a six inch (6") or larger water main
and commercial areas of development are located within a three-hundred foot (300') radius and served by an
eight inch (8") or larger water main.
9-8. The minimum size of water main shall be six inches (6") for residential development and eight inches
(8") for commercial development. The minimum main size for industrial development shall be determined by
the city engineer, but in no event, less than eight inches (8").
9-9. All water system installations shall be constructed in accordance with the city's development and
construction standards at the developer's expense.
9-10. Water service connections shall be provided for each lot at the time the water lines are installed and shall
be within one inch (1") vertical distance of the natural grade of the vicinity. Water service connection locations
for each lot shall be marked with a “W” stamped in a 4" letter into the curb.
9-11. All tees shall be “mechanical” and wrapped in plastic sheeting prior to thrust blocking being poured.
Water lines shall be “looped” whenever possible to ensure adequate pressure and to prevent stagnation in deadend
lines.
9-12. Subdividers who propose to supply drinking water by connecting to an existing public water system
must provide a written agreement with the retail public utility in substantially the form attached in Appendix B
of this ordinance. The agreement must provide that the retail public utility has or will have the ability to supply
the total flow anticipated from the ultimate development and occupancy of the proposed subdivision for a
minimum of 30 years. The agreement must reflect that the subdivider has paid the cost of water meters and other
necessary connection equipment, membership fees, water rights acquisition costs, or other fees associated with
connection to the public water system so that service is available to each lot upon completion of construction of
the water facilities described on the final plat. If groundwater is to be the source of the water supply, the
subdivider shall have prepared and provide a copy of a groundwater availability study that complies with the
requirements of 30 TAC §§230.1 through 230.11 for the water availability for a public water supply system and
certifies the long term (30 years) quantity and quality of available groundwater supplies relative to the ultimate
needs of the subdivision.
9-13. The water quality of the water produced from test well must meet the standards of water quality required
for community water systems as set forth in 30 TAC, §§290.103, 290.105, 290.106 and 290.110, either (1)
without any treatment to the water; or (2) with treatment by an identified and commercially available water
treatment system.
SECTION 10: PUBLIC WASTEWATER SYSTEM
10-1. All subdivisions shall be connected to the city's sanitary wastewater system and all sanitary wastewater
mains shall be designed in accordance with the latest rules and regulations as published by the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission and must meet the city's development and construction standards. On-site
sewage treatment systems may be permitted in the developments where public wastewater is not readily
available or when such developments are located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction; provided, such lots are least
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/334
one-half acre net in size and where percolation tests reveal that soil conditions are such that satisfactory sewage
disposal can be provided.
10-2. All wastewater lines shall be designed with consideration for serving the full drainage area subject to
collection by the wastewater in question except as modified by the city because of the projected rate of
development or the financial feasibility of the proposed extension.
10-3. In determining the population equivalent for design purposes, undeveloped areas shall be estimated at
not less than five (5) persons per acre. The contributing sewage shall be estimated on the basis of an average
flow of one hundred (100) gallons per person per day plus infiltration of one thousand (1,000) gallons per acre
per day. Laterals and minor wastewater lines shall be designed such that when flowing full they will transport
wastewater at a rate approximately four times the system design daily average flow. Main trunk, interceptor, and
outfall shall be designed to convey expected peak flow.
10-4. The minimum size of wastewater main shall be six inches (6") for residential development and eight
inches (8") for commercial development. The minimum main size for industrial development shall be
determined by the city engineer, but in no event, less than eight inches (8").
10-5. All sanitary wastewater mains, services, and fittings shall be either polyvinyl chloride (PVC) wastewater
pipe and meet the material standards as specified in the city's development and construction standards.
10-6. All wastewater lines shall be designed with hydraulic slopes sufficient to give mean velocities, when
flowing full or half full, of not less than two feet (2') per second nor more than five feet (5') per second based on
Kutter's or Manning's formulas using an “n” valve of 0.013, as set forth in the latest edition of the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission's rules and regulations.
10-7. Wastewater lines shall be designed in straight alignment wherever possible. Where horizontal curvature
must be used, the smallest radius shall be one hundred feet (100').
10-8. Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in grade, alignment, or size of wastewater lines and at all
intersections of wastewater lines except service wastewater lines and at the ends of all wastewater lines that will
be extended. The maximum allowable distance between manholes shall be four-hundred feet (400').
10-9. All lateral and wastewater mains installed within a subdivision must extend to the borders of the
subdivision, as required for future extensions of the collection system, regardless whether or not such extensions
are required for service within the subdivision.
10-10. All wastewater system construction shall be at the developer's expense and shall be in accordance with
the latest edition of the Commission Rules.
10-11. All manholes shall be constructed of fiberglass.
10-12. Where wastewater lines are installed, sanitary wastewater service connections shall be provided for
each lot with two-way cleanouts provided at the property lines. All service connections, when completely
installed, for future locating purposes, shall be within one inch (1") vertical distance of the natural grade of the
vicinity. Wastewater service connection locations for each lot shall be marked with an “S” stamped in a 4" letter
into the curb.
10-13. Subdividers who propose to dispose of wastewater by connecting to an existing permitted facility must
provide a written agreement in substantially the form attached in Appendix C [of this ordinance] with the retail
public utility. The agreement must provide that the retail public utility has or will have the ability to treat the
total flow anticipated from the ultimate development and occupancy of the proposed subdivision for a minimum
of 30 years. The agreement must reflect that the subdivider has paid the cost of all fees associated with
connection to the wastewater collection and treatment system have been paid so that service is available to each
lot upon completion of construction of the wastewater facilities described on the final plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/334
(Ordinance 2008-16 adopted 6/10/08)
Appendix B
SAMPLE WATER SERVICE AGREEMENT
AGREEMENT REGARDING WATER SERVICE FOR THE PROPOSED
SUBDIVISION
PARTIES: This agreement is by and between the Utility provider and the Subdivider, to wit: The Utility provider
is the governing body or owner of a retail public utility which supplies drinking water and is known as .
The subdivider is who is the owner, or the authorized agent of the owner, of a tract of land in
Cameron County, Texas that is being proposed to be divided into a subdivision known as .
TERMS: This agreement is entered into in partial satisfaction of requirements under the Texas Water
Development Board's Economically Distressed Areas Program Model Subdivision Rules. The subdivider has
prepared a plat of the Subdivision for submission to the City of La Feria for its approval. The subdivider plans to
construct for the subdivision a drinking water distribution system to be connected to the Utility's public water
system. The Utility has reviewed the plans for the subdivision and has estimated the water flow anticipated to be
needed by the subdivision under fully built-out conditions (the anticipated water flow) to be approximately
gallons per day.
The utility covenants that it has or will have the ability to provide the anticipated water flow for at least thirty
years, or that it will provide that water flow. These covenants will be in effect until thirty years after the plat of
the subdivision has been recorded and the subdivision's water distribution system has been connected to the
Utility's water supply system.
The subdivider covenants that the water distribution system will be constructed as shown in the plans and as
provided for through the plat approval process so that the residents of the lots of the Subdivision may receive
water service from the Utility. Upon completion of the water distribution system and upon its approval and
acceptance by the Utility, the Subdivider will convey to the Utility all right and title to the water distribution
system.
The Subdivider has paid the Utility the sum of $ which represents the total costs of water meters, water
right acquisition fees, and all membership or other fees associated with connecting the individual lots in the
Subdivision to the Utility's water supply system.
The above provisions notwithstanding, this agreement shall no longer be in effect if the plat of the Subdivision is
not approved by the City of La Feria or by any other entity whose approval is required.
By affixing his/her signature to this Agreement, the person signing for the Utility warrants that he/she is
authorized to sign this Agreement on behalf of the Utility. By affixing his/her signature to this Agreement, the
person signing for the Subdivider warrants that he/she is authorized to sign this Agreement on behalf of the
Subdivider.
This Agreement is effective on , 20 .
For The Utility:
By:
Printed Name:
Office or Position:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/334
Date:
For The Subdivider:
By:
Printed Name:
Office or Position:
Date:
Appendix C
SAMPLE WASTEWATER SERVICE AGREEMENT
AGREEMENT REGARDING WASTEWATER SERVICE FOR THE PROPOSED
SUBDIVISION
PARTIES: This agreement is by and between the Utility provider and the Subdivider, to wit: The Utility provider
is the governing body or owner of a retail public utility which supplies wastewater collection and treatment and
is known as _ .
The subdivider is who is the owner, or the authorized agent of the owner, of a tract of land in
Cameron County, Texas that is being proposed to be divided into a subdivision known as .
TERMS: This agreement is entered into in partial satisfaction of requirements under the Texas Water
Development Board's Economically Distressed Areas Program Model Subdivision Rules. The subdivider has
prepared a plat of the Subdivision for submission to the City of La Feria for its approval. The subdivider plans to
construct for the subdivision a wastewater collection system to be connected to the Utility's wastewater
treatment system. Such wastewater will consist of domestic sewage, i.e., waterborne human waste and waste
from domestic activities such as bathing, washing and food preparation. The Utility has reviewed the plans for
the subdivision and has estimated the wastewater flow projected from the subdivision under fully built-out
conditions (the anticipated wastewater flow) to be approximately gallons per day.
The utility covenants that it has or will have the ability to treat the projected wastewater flow and that it will
treat the flow for at least thirty years. These covenants will be in effect until thirty years after the plat of the
subdivision has been recorded and the subdivision's wastewater collection system has been connected to the
Utility's wastewater treatment system.
The subdivider covenants that the wastewater collection system will be constructed as shown in the plans and as
provided for through the plat approval process so that the residents of the lots of the Subdivision may receive
wastewater service from the Utility. Upon completion of the wastewater collection system and upon its approval
and acceptance by the Utility, the Subdivider will convey to the Utility all right and title to the wastewater
collection system.
The Subdivider has paid the Utility the sum of $ which represents the total costs of tap fees, capital
recovery charges, and all membership or other fees associated with connecting the individual lots in the
Subdivision to the Utility's wastewater collection system.
The above provisions notwithstanding, this agreement shall no longer be in effect if the plat of the Subdivision is
not approved by the City of La Feria or by any other entity whose approval is required.
By affixing his/her signature to this Agreement, the person signing for the Utility warrants that he/she is
authorized to sign this Agreement on behalf of the Utility. By affixing his/her signature to this Agreement, the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/334
person signing for the Subdivider warrants that he/she is authorized to sign this Agreement on behalf of the
Subdivider.
This Agreement is effective on , 20 .
For The Utility:
By:
Printed Name:
Office or Position:
Date:
For The Subdivider:
By:
Printed Name:
Office or Position:
Date:
Appendix D
SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENT SAMPLE FORM
1. Parties. This Subdivision Construction Agreement (the Agreement) is by and between the City of La Feria
and the Subdivider. The Subdivider is __ , who is the owner, or the authorized agent or owner, of a
tract of land located within the geographic area and jurisdiction of the City.
2. Effective Date. This agreement is effective on the date the City approves the final plat for the subdivision
described in paragraph 3 of this agreement.
RECITALS
3. Subdivider is the owner of the land included in the proposed final subdivision plat of the subdivision, more
particularly described by metes and bounds attached as Exhibit A.
4. Subdivider seeks authorization from the City to subdivide the Property in accordance with the requirements
imposed by Texas statute and the City's Ordinances, regulations, and other requirements; and
5. City Ordinances require the completion of various improvements in connection with the development of the
subdivision to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community and to limit the harmful effects of
substandard subdivisions; and
6. The purpose of this agreement is to protect the City from the expense of completing subdivision
improvements required to be installed by the Subdivider; and
7. This agreement is authorized by and consistent with state law and the City's ordinances, regulations, and
other requirements governing development of a subdivision.
IN CONSIDERATION of the foregoing recitals and mutual covenants, promises, and obligations by parties set
forth in this Agreement, the parties agree as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/334
SUBDIVIDER'S OBLIGATIONS
8. Improvements. The subdivider agrees to construct and install, at Subdivider's expense, all subdivision
improvements required to comply with the City's ordinances, regulations and policies governing subdivision
approval, specifically including without limitation those improvements shown on the final plat of the
subdivision, as approved by the City of La Feria. All improvements shall be constructed in conformity with
Appendix A of this ordinance and are subject to inspection, certification and acceptance by the City.
9. Completion. Unless a different time period is specified by the La Feria City Commission for a particular
improvement during the plat approval process, construction of all of the improvements shall be completed no
later than one year from the effective date. Upon completion of the construction of the improvements, the
Subdivider agrees to provide the City with a complete set of construction plans (“as built”) within sixty days of
construction completion.
10. Warranty. The Subdivider warrants the improvements constructed by Subdivider or Subdivider's agents,
contractors, employees, tenants, or licensee will be free from defects for a period of one (1) year from the date
the City accepts the dedication of a completed improvement or group of improvements (the Warranty Period), as
such improvements or group of improvements is separately identified and listed on Exhibit B, except the
Subdivider does not warrant the Improvements for defects caused by events outside the control of the Subdivider
or the Subdivider's agents, contractors, employees, tenants, or licensees. The Subdivider agrees to repair any
damage to the Improvement before and during the Warranty Period due to private construction-related activities.
As a condition of the City's acceptance of dedication of any of the Improvements, the City may require the
Subdivider to post a maintenance bond or other financial security acceptable to the City to secure the warranty
established by this Agreement. If the improvements have been completed but not accepted, and neither the
Subdivider nor Issuer is then in default under this Agreement or the Letter of Credit, at the written request of the
Subdivider or the Issuer the City shall complete, execute, and deliver to the Issuer a reduction letter documenting
that the Stated Amount has been reduced to an amount equal to the face amount of the maintenance bond or
other financial security acceptable to the City.
11. Security. To secure the performance of Subdivider's obligations under this Agreement, Subdivider agrees
to provide adequate financial guarantees of performance in the form of a surety bond acceptable to the City, a
cash deposit to be held by the City escrow, or an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of Dollars
($ ) (the Stated Amount), which amount is 110% of the estimated total cost of constructing each of the
improvements as shown on Exhibit B. If a letter of credit is provided pursuant to this Agreement, it shall be in a
standard form acceptable to the City, shall have an expiration date no earlier than one year from the date of its
issuance, and shall be issued by a financial institution having a rating equivalent to the minimum acceptable
rating established under the City's financial institution rating system in effect at the time the initial letter of credit
is issued pursuant to this Agreement (the Issuer). During the term of this Agreement and subject to the terms of
Paragraph 22 of this Agreement, the City may revise the standard form letter of credit it reasonably considers
acceptable and necessary to secure the performance of Subdivider's obligations under this agreement. A letter of
credit satisfying the criteria of this Paragraph (and any substitute or confirming letter of credit) is referenced to
in this Agreement as the “letter of credit.”
12. Reduction In Letter of Credit. After the acceptance of any improvement, the amount, which the City is
entitled to draw on the Letter of Credit, shall be reduced by an amount equal to ninety percent (90%) of the
Quoted cost of the accepted improvement, as shown on Exhibit B. Upon completion of an improvement, at the
written request of Subdivider or Issuer, and if neither the Subdivider nor Issuer is then [in] default under this
agreement or the Letter of Credit, the City shall complete, execute, and deliver to the Issuer a reduction letter
verifying the acceptance of the improvement and documenting that the stated amount has been reduced by
stating the balance of the stated amount remaining after the reduction required by the first sentence of this
Paragraph. No later than sixty (60) days after its receipt of a written request to reduce the stated amount
submitted by the Subdivider or the Issuer, the City shall determine the estimated remaining cost and shall
complete, execute, and deliver to the Issuer a reduction letter documenting that the Stated Amount has been
reduced to the estimated remaining cost if the City determines the stated amount exceeds the estimated
remaining cost. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the City shall not be required to authorize reductions in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/334
the stated amount more frequently than every ninety - (90) days. As used in this paragraph, “Estimated
Remaining Cost” means amount the City estimated to be the cost of completing all improvements, which are
incomplete as of the time of such estimate.
CITY'S OBLIGATIONS
13. Inspections and Certificate. The City agrees to inspect improvements during and at the completion of
construction and, if completed in accordance with the standards and specifications for such improvements, to
certify the improvements as being in compliance with City standards and specifications. The inspections and
certifications will be conducted in accordance with standard City policies and requirements. The Subdivider
grants the City, its agents, employees, officers, and contractors an easement and license to enter the property to
perform such inspections as it deems appropriate.
14. Notice of Defect. The City will provide timely notice to the Subdivider whenever inspections reveals that
an improvement is not constructed or completed in accordance with the standards and specifications for health
or safety, and the notice of defect includes a statement explaining why the defect creates such immediate and
substantial harm, the cure period may be shortened to no less than five (5) days and the City may declare a
default under this Agreement if not satisfied that the defect is cured after the cure period. Any cure period should
be reasonable in relation to the nature of the default.
15. Use of Proceeds. The City will disburse funds drawn under the Letter of Credit only for the purposes of
completing the improvements in conformance with the City's requirements and specifications for the
improvements, or to correct defects in or failures of the improvements. The Subdivider has no claim or rights
under this Agreement to funds drawn under the Letter of Credit or any accrued interest earned on the funds. All
funds obtained by the City pursuant to one or more draws under the Letter of Credits shall be maintained by the
City in an interest bearing account or accounts until such funds, together with accrued thereon (the escrowed
funds), are disbursed by the City. The City may disperse all or portions of the escrowed funds as improvements
are completed and accepted by the City, or in accordance with the terms of a written construction contract
between the City and a third party for the construction of improvements. Escrowed funds not used or held by the
City for the purpose of completing an improvement or correcting defects in or failures of improvements,
together with interest accrued thereon, shall be paid by the City to the Issuer of the Letter of Credit no later than
sixty (60) days following the City's acceptance of the improvement or its decision not to complete the
improvement using escrowed funds, whichever date is earlier.
16. Return of Excess Escrowed Funds. No later than sixty - (60) days after its receipt of a written request from
the Subdivider or the Issuer to return excess escrowed funds to the Issuer, the City shall disburse to the Issuer
from the escrowed funds all excess escrowed funds. For purposes of this paragraph, “Excess Escrowed Funds”
means the amount of escrowed funds exceeding one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of
constructing improvements the City intends to construct but which have not been accepted, as such, cost is
shown on Exhibit B. Notwithstanding the first sentence in this paragraph, the City shall not be required to
disburse excess escrowed funds more frequently than every ninety - (90) days.
17. Cost Participation by City. If the City and Subdivider agree the City will participate in the expense of
installing any of the Improvements, the respective benefits and obligations of the parties shall by [be] governed
by the terms of that agreement [and] shall control to the extent of any inconsistency with this Agreement.
18. Conditions of Draw on Security. The City may draw upon any financial guarantee posted in accordance
with Paragraph 11 upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
(a) Subdivider's failure to construct the Improvements in accordance with Paragraph 8 of this
Agreement;
(b) Subdivider's failure to renew or replace the Letter of Credit at least forty-five (45) days prior to
the expiration date of the Letter of Credit;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/334
(c) Subdivider's failure to replace or confirm the Letter of Credit if the Issuer fails to maintain the
minimum rating acceptable to the City, in accordance with Paragraph 11 of this Agreement; or
(d) Issuer's acquisition of the Property or a portion of the Property, through foreclosure or an
assignment or conveyance in lieu of foreclosure.
The City shall provide written notice of the occurrence of one or more of the above events to the Subdivider,
with a copy provided to the Issuer. Where a Letter of Credit has been provided as the financial guarantee, with
respect to an event described by subparagraph (a), the City shall provide notice to the Subdivider and the Issuer
of the specific default and the notice shall include a statement that the City intends to perform some or all of
Subdivider's obligation under Paragraph 8 for specified Improvements if the failure is not cured. The notice with
respect to a default under subparagraph (a) shall be given no less than twenty (20) days before presentation of a
draft on the Letter of Credit, unless, in the reasonable opinion of the City, the failure creates an immediate and
substantial harm to the public health or safety, in which case the notice shall state why the failure creates an
immediate and substantial harm to the public health or safety, and shall be given no less than five (5) days before
presentation of a draft on the Letter of Credit. In the event of a draw based on subparagraph (a), the City shall be
entitled to draw in the amount it considers necessary to perform Subdivider's obligations under Paragraph 8, up
to the amount allocated according to Exhibit B for any improvements it states its intent to construct or complete.
In accordance with the standards and specifications for such improvement. The Subdivider hereby grants to the
City, its successors, assigns, agents, contractors, and employees, a nonexclusive right and easement to enter the
Property for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and repairing such Improvements. Where a Letter of
Credit has been provided as the financial guarantee, with respect to an event described by subparagraphs (b), (c)
or (d) the notice shall be given no less than twenty (20) days before presentation of a draft on the Letter of
Credit. In lieu of honoring a draft based on an event described in subparagraphs (b) or (c), the Issuer of the
Subdivider may deliver to the City a substitute Letter of Credit if the event is described by subparagraph (b) or a
substitute or confirming Letter of Credit if the event is described by subparagraph (c). If the Issuer has acquired
all or a portion of the Property through foreclosure or an assignment or conveyance in lieu of foreclosure, in lieu
of honoring draft based on an event described in subparagraph (d), the issuer may deliver to the City a substitute
or confirming Letter of Credit.
19. Procedures for Drawing on the Letter of Credit. The City may draw upon the Letter of Credit in
accordance with Paragraph 18 by submitting a draft to the Issuer in compliance with the terms of the Letter of
Credit governing such draft. The Letter of Credit must be surrendered upon presentation of any draft, which
exhausts the Stated Amount of such Letter of Credit. The City may not draft under a Letter of Credit unless it
has substantially complied with all its obligations to the Issuer under this Agreement and has properly completed
and executed the draft in strict accordance with the terms of the Letter of Credit.
20. Measures of Damages. The measure of damages for breach of this Agreement by the Subdivider is the
reasonable coast [cost] of completing the Improvements in conformance with the City's requirements,
procedures, and specifications. For Improvements upon, which construction has not begun, the estimated cost of
the Improvements shown on Exhibit B will be prima facie evidence of the minimum cost of completion;
however, neither that amount or the amount of the Letter of Credit establishes the maximum amount of the
Subdivider's liability.
21. Remedies. The remedies available to the City, the Subdivider, and Issuer under this Agreement and the
laws of Texas are cumulative in nature.
22. Provisions for the Benefit of Issuer. The provisions of Paragraph[s] 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22,
23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, and 36 of this Agreement for the benefit of the Issuer may not be modified,
released, diminished, or impaired by the parties without prior written consent of the Issuer.
23. Third Party Rights. No person or entity who or which is not a party to this Agreement shall have any right
of action under this Agreement, nor shall any such person or entity other than the City (including without
limitation a trustee in bankruptcy) have any interest in or claim to funds drawn on the Letter of Credit and held
in escrow by the City in accordance with this Agreement. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Issuer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/334
shall have a right to enforce any provision of this Agreement where the Issuer is specifically named as a
beneficiary of such provision pursuant to Paragraph 22.
24. Indemnification. The Subdivider herby [hereby] expressly agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless
from and against all claims, demands, costs, and liability of every kind and nature, including reasonable
attorney's fees for the defense of such claims and demands, arising from any breach on the part of Subdivider of
any provision in this Agreement, or from any act or negligence of Subdivider or Subdivider's agents, contracts
[contractors], employees, tenants, or licensees in the construction of the Improvements. The Subdivider further
agrees to aid and defend the City if the City is named as a defendant in an action arising from any breach on the
part of Subdivider of any provision in this Agreement, or from any act of negligence of Subdivider or
Subdivider's agents, contractors, employees, tenants, or licensees in the construction of the Improvements,
except where such suit is brought by the Subdivider. The Subdivider is not an employee or agent of the City.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this agreement, the Subdivider does not agree to
indemnify and hold the City harmless from any claims, demands, costs, or liabilities arising from any act or
negligence of the City, its agents, contractors, employees, tenants, or licensees.
25. No Waiver. No Waiver of any provision of this Agreement will be deemed or constitute a waiver of any
other provision, nor will it be deemed or constitute continuing waiver unless expressly provided for by a written
amendment to this Agreement; nor will the waiver of any default under this agreement be deemed a waiver of
any subsequent defaults of the same type. The failure at any time to enforce this Agreement or covenant by the
City, the Subdivider, or the Issuer, their heirs, successors, or assigns, whether any violations thereof are known
or not, shall not constitute a waiver or estoppels of the right to do so.
26. Attorney's Fees. Should either party or the Issuer, to the extent Issuer is named as specific beneficiary, be
required to resort to litigation to enforce the terms of this agreement, the prevailing party, plaintiff or defendant,
shall be entitled to recover its costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and expert witness fees,
from the other party. If the court awards relief to both parties, each will bear its own costs in the entirety.
27. Assignability. The benefits and burdens of this Agreement are personal obligations of the Subdivider and
are binding on the heirs, successors, and assigns [of] Subdivider. The Subdivider's obligations under this
Agreement may not be assigned without the express written approval of the City. The City's written approval
may not be withheld if the Subdivider's assignee explicitly assumes all obligations of the Subdivider under this
Agreement and has posted the required security. The City agrees to release or reduce, as appropriate, the Letter
of Credit provided by the Subdivider if it accepts substitute security for all or any portion of the Improvements.
The City, in its sole discretion, may assign some or all of its rights under this Agreement, and any such
assignment shall be effective upon notice to the Subdivider and the Issuer.
28. Expiration. This Agreement shall terminate upon the expiration of the approval of the proposed final plat
of the Subdivision is vacated by the Subdivider.
29. Notice. Any notice required or permitted by this Agreement is effective when personally delivered in
writing or three (3) days after notice is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service, postage prepaid, certified with
return receipt requested, and addressed as follows:
if to Subdivider
Attn:
Printed Name:
Office or Position:
Address:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/334
if to City:
Attn:
Printed Name:
Office or Position:
Address:
if to the Issuer: at Issuer's address shown on the Letter of Credit.
The parties may, from time to time, change their respective addresses listed above to any other location in the
United States for the purpose of notice under this Agreement. A party's change of address shall be effective
when notice of the change is provided to the other party in accordance with the provisions of this Paragraph.
30. Severability. If any part, term, or provision of this Agreement is held by the courts to be illegal, invalid, or
otherwise unenforceable, such illegality, invalidity, or enforceability shall not affect the validity of any other
part, term, or provision vas [sic] never part of this Agreement.
31. Personal Jurisdiction and Venue. Personal jurisdiction and venue for any civil action commenced by either
party to this Agreement or the Issuer, whether arising out of or relating to the Agreement or the Letter of Credit,
will be deemed to be proper only if such action is commenced in District Court for Cameron County, Texas, or
the United States District Court for the ___________ District of Texas, ____ Division. The
Subdivider expressly waives any right to bring such an action in or to remove such an action to any other court,
whether state or federal. The Issuer, by providing a Letter of Credit pursuant to the terms of-this Agreement,
expressly waives any right to bring such an action in or to remove such an action to any other court, whether
state or federal.
32. Release Upon Completion. Upon acceptance of all Improvements, the City agrees: (a) to complete,
execute and deliver to the Subdivider and the Issuer a release in recordable form releasing the Subdivider and
Subdivider's heirs, successors and assigns, and the Property from all provisions of this Agreement except those
contained in Paragraph 10, and (b) to return to the Issuer the Letter of Credit and any escrowed funds not
expended or obligated by the City for the completion of the Improvements.
33. Captions Immaterial. The numbering, order, and captions or headings of the paragraphs of the agreement
are for convenience only and shall not be considered in construing this agreement.
34. Entire Agreement. This Agreement contains the entire agreement between the parties and correctly sets
forth the rights, duties, and obligations of each to the other as of the Effective Date. Any oral representations or
modifications concerning this Agreement shall be of no force or effect excepting a subsequent written
modification executed by both parties.
35. Authorization to Complete Blanks. By signing and delivering this agreement to the appropriate official of
the City, the Subdivider authorizes completion of this Agreement by filling in the Effective Date below.
36. Binding Agreement. The execution and delivery of this agreement and the performance of the transactions
completed thereby have been duly authorized by all necessary corporate and governmental action of the City.
This Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by each party, and constitutes a legal, valid, and binding
obligation of each party enforceable in accordance with the terms as of the effective Date. These representations
and agreements are for the benefit of the Issuer, and have been relied on by the Issuer in issuing the Letter of
Credit.
EXECUTED by the parties to be effective as of the day of , 2001.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/334
City Official
Subdivider
Witness
Witness
EXHIBIT A: METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY
EXHIBIT B: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
Subdivision Improvements. Subdivider and City agree the following improvements are required in connection
with the approval and development of the Subdivision (collectively, the Subdivision Improvements). Subdivider
agrees to deliver a financial guarantee acceptable in forma [form] and substance to the City in an amount equal
to the Estimated Cost of Completion listed below as follows:
Description of
Improvement(s)
Estimated Cost of
Completion
a)
b)
c)
(Ordinance 2008-02 adopted 1/10/08)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 11.01.001 Fee for tax certificates
The fee for each tax certificate prepared by the city tax collector will be as provided for in section A11.01.001 of
the fee schedule in appendix A to this code. (1995 Code, sec. 1.805)
Sec. 11.01.002 Goods in transit
All such goods in transit personal property as defined by the amendments to Texas Tax Code, section 11.253
under Senate Bill 1, shall be, and are, hereby declared to be taxable by the city for tax year 2012 and for every
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/334
year thereafter, all as provided for and in accordance with Texas Tax Code, section 11.253. (Ordinance 2011-20
adopted 11/15/11)
ARTICLE 11.02 AD VALOREM TAXES†
Sec. 11.02.001 Penalty for delinquency
(a) Ad valorem taxes that become delinquent on or after February 1 of any year but not later than May 1 of
that year and that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an
additional penalty to defray costs of collection. The amount of such additional penalty shall be in the amount of
the maximum such penalty authorized by the applicable provisions of the Texas Property Tax Code as such may
be amended from time to time. (Ordinance 2005-08, sec. 1.801, adopted 4/14/05)
(b) An additional penalty on delinquent taxes for tax years 2010 and subsequent years is hereby authorized
and imposed, as provided by section 33.11, Texas Tax Code, in the amount of 20% of the delinquent tax, penalty
and interest if the tax becomes delinquent on February 1 of a year and remains delinquent on the 60th day
thereafter. (Ordinance 2010-03 adopted 4/27/10)
Sec. 11.02.002 Exemption for charitable organizations
The city hereby adopts the local option property tax exemption for organizations engaged primarily in charitable
activities. (Ordinance 2002-02 adopted 3/26/02)
Sec. 11.02.003 Residence homestead tax freeze for elderly or disabled individuals
(a) Effective with the tax year 2006, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead
of a person who is disabled or is sixty-five years of age or older shall not be increased while it remains the
residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or sixty-five years of age or older and
receives a residence homestead exemption on said homestead.
(b) If the person who is disabled or sixty-five years of age or older dies in a year in which the person received
a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence shall not be
increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is fifty-five
years of age or older at the time of the person's death, subject to any exceptions provided by general law.
(c) Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) to the contrary, taxes on the residence homestead may be
increased to the extent the value of the homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other
than improvements made to comply with governmental requirements.
(Ordinance 2005-12, sec. 1, adopted 8/11/05)
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAXES*
Sec. 11.03.001 Telecommunications service tax
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this
section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other
telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot
be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section 321.210(a), is hereby
repealed by the city as authorized by section 321.210(b) thereof.
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local
sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/334
(d) The city manager shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States registered or certified mail
a copy of this section along with a copy of the minutes of the city commission's vote and discussion on this
article.
(1995 Code, sec. 1.804)
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX†
Sec. 11.04.001 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Consideration. The cost of the room in a hotel, but shall not include the cost of any food served or personal
services rendered to the occupant of such room, not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for
occupancy; and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other government agency.
Convention center complex or convention facilities. Centers, civic center buildings, auditoriums, exhibition
halls, and coliseums that are owned by the city or other governmental entity or that are managed in whole or part
by the city, hotels owned by the city. The term includes parking areas or facilities that are for the parking or
storage of conveyances and that are located at or in the vicinity of other convention center facilities.
Hotel. Any building in which the public may for a consideration obtain sleeping accommodations. The term
shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, apartments or
other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration; but such term shall not be defined so as to include
hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession of any room in a hotel for any purpose.
Occupant. Anyone who for a consideration uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel
under lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement.
Permanent resident. Any person who has the right to use or possess a room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive
days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any
hotel.
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarter of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of
January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter
being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November
and December.
(Ordinance 2000-07, sec. 1, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 11.04.002 Levy; exceptions
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space that is ordinarily used for
sleeping, furnished in any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to
be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or utility to such hotel,
exclusive of other occupation taxes imposed by other governmental agencies.
(b) No tax is imposed under this section upon a permanent resident.
(Ordinance 2000-07, sec. 2, adopted 4/13/00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/334
Sec. 11.04.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel in the city shall collect the tax imposed by
this article for the city. (Ordinance 2000-07, sec. 3, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 11.04.004 Reports; remittance of tax
(a) On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required to collect the
tax imposed under this article shall file a report with the finance director of the city showing the consideration
paid for all room occupancies for the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies,
and any other information as the director of finance may reasonably require, which report shall be in writing.
Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filling such report. (Ordinance 2000-07,
sec. 4, adopted 4/13/00)
(b) At the end of each quarter, each hotel shall provide a copy of the quarterly report filed with the state
comptroller to the city. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.04.005 Procedures for collection
The tax collector shall have the power to promulgate such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably
necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this article and shall, upon the request of any person owning,
operating, managing or controlling any hotel, furnish a copy of such procedures, rules and regulations for the
guidance of such person and facilities that collect such tax as such collection is required in this article. Such
procedures, rules and regulations shall be published and maintained on file with the city collector to be available
to any person required to make reports and collect, pay the taxes to the city as herein provided for. The tax
collector shall be permitted to have access to books and records during reasonable business hours, as shall be
necessary to enable the director of finance to determine the correctness of the amount due under the provisions
of this article, or to determine whether a report should have been filed and the amount, if necessary, of taxes due.
(Ordinance 2000-07, sec. 5, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 11.04.006 Use of revenue
(a) Revenue from the hotel occupancy tax may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel
industry, and that use is limited to the following:
(1) The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing,
operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers, or both;
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention
delegates or registrants;
(3) Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and
convention delegates or registrants to the city or its vicinity;
(4) The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including
instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied
fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape
and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and
exhibition of these major art forms; and
(5) Historical restoration and preservation projects or advertising and conducting solicitations and
promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites
or museums:
(A) At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor information
centers; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/334
(B) Located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists and
convention delegates.
(b) The city may pledge a portion of the revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax to the payment of any
bonds which the city may issue pursuant to the provisions of Texas Government Code section 1504.002, if such
bonds are issued solely for one or more of the purposes set forth in the tax revenue code equal to at least onehalf
of one percent of the cost of occupancy, and may reserve all of the tax revenue from the cost of the
occupancy of hotel rooms for the purpose of advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint
potential users with public meeting and convention facilities and for promotion of tourism and advertising of the
city and its facilities, either by the city or through contract with persons or organizations selected by the city.
(Ordinance 2000-07, sec. 6, adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 11.04.007 Violations and penalties
If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein, to make reports as
required in this article and pay to the tax collector the tax imposed herein shall fail to collect such tax, file such
report or pay such tax, or file a false report, or if any such person shall violate any of the provisions of this
article, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 2000-07, sec. 7,
adopted 4/13/00)
ARTICLE 11.05 TAX INCREMENT REINVESTMENT ZONES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 11.05.001–11.05.015 Reserved
Division 2. Zone One
Sec. 11.05.016 Findings
(a) The city hereby finds and declares that:
(1) Improvements in the zone will significantly enhance the value of all the taxable real property in
the zone and will be of general benefit to the city; and
(2) The zone meets the requirements of section 311.005 of the Tax Increment Financing Act (the
act), being that the zone area is predominantly open, and because of obsolete platting, deterioration of
structures or site improvements, or other factors, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of
the city; and
(Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 8, adopted 12/13/07)
(b) The city, pursuant to the act, further finds and declares that:
(1) The zone shall be a contiguous or noncontiguous geographic area that is in the corporate limits
of the city, in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or in both, as the city commission shall from
time to time determine to be in the best interest of the city and the zone; (Ordinance 2012-02 adopted
2/14/12)
(2) Less than ten percent (10%) of the property in the proposed zone is used for residential
purposes, as the term “residential” is defined in section 311.006(d) of the act;
(3) The total appraised value of the taxable real property in the proposed zone or in existing
reinvestment zones, if any, does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total appraised value of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/334
taxable real property in the city and in industrial districts, if any, created by the city;
(4) The proposed zone does not contain more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total appraised
value of real property taxable by the county and the La Feria Independent School District; and
(5) The development or redevelopment within the boundaries of the proposed zone will not occur
solely through private investment in the reasonably foreseeable future.
(Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 8, adopted 12/13/07)
Sec. 11.05.017 Designation of a section 311.005(a) zone
The zone is designated pursuant to section 311.005(a) of the act. (Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 9, adopted 12/13/07)
Sec. 11.05.018 Designating the area as a reinvestment zone
The area described in section 11.05.019 below and more commonly referred to as the “La Feria Development
Project” and officially assigned the name as designated in section 11.05.022 below (which reinvestment zone so
described, named and designated is hereinafter referred to as the zone, is hereby designated as a tax increment
reinvestment zone. (Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/07)
Sec. 11.05.019 Description of the boundaries of the reinvestment zone
Attached to Ordinance 2012-02 as exhibit A, which is incorporated herein by reference for all purposes, is a map
of “City of La Feria - TIRZ No.1 Property Owner's Association” with the parcels, area and boundaries of the
zone outlined in blue with the additional area added to the zone by Ordinance 2012-02 specifically identified by
the properties crosshatched in red thereon. (Ordinance 2012-02 adopted 2/14/12)
Sec. 11.05.020 Board of directors; creation and composition
(a) There is hereby created a board of directors (the board) for the zone, with all the rights powers and duties
as provided by the act to such boards or by action of the city commission. Pursuant to section 311.009(a) of the
Texas Tax Code the board shall consist of not less than five (5) and not more than fifteen (15) members.
(b) Each taxing unit other than the city that levies taxes on real property in the zone may appoint one member
to the board. A unit may waive its right to appoint a member. The city shall appoint the remaining directors.
(c) Appointees shall be for a two-year term. Upon expiration of their respective terms of office, replacements
to the board shall be appointed. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by the respective taxing unit making such
appointments for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 3, adopted 12/13/07)
Sec. 11.05.021 Effective and termination date
The zone shall take effect on January 1, 2007 and continue till its termination date of December 31, 2036 unless
otherwise terminated earlier as a result of payment in full of all project costs, tax increment bonds, if any,
including interest on said bonds as authorized or permitted by law. (Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 4, adopted
12/13/07; Ordinance 2008-11 adopted 4/8/08)
Sec. 11.05.022 Assigning a name to the zone
The tax increment reinvestment zone created hereby is assigned the name of “Reinvestment Zone Number One,
City of La Feria, Texas.” (Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 5, adopted 12/13/07)
Sec. 11.05.023 Tax increment base
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/334
The tax increment base for the zone is the total assessed value of all real property taxable by the city and located
in the zone, determined as of January 1, 2007, the year in which the zone was designated as a reinvestment zone
(the tax increment base). (Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 6, adopted 12/13/07)
Sec. 11.05.024 Establishment of a tax increment fund
There is hereby created and established in the depository bank of the city, a fund to be called the “Reinvestment
Zone Number One, City of La Feria, Texas Tax Increment Fund” (herein called the tax increment fund). Money
in the tax increment fund, from whatever source, may be disbursed from the tax increment fund, invested, and
paid as permitted by the act or by any agreements entered into pursuant to the act, or as otherwise authorized by
law. (Ordinance 2007-15, sec. 7, adopted 12/13/07)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Special fee for defensive driving course completion
(a) A fee as provided for in section A12.01.001 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code is hereby
established and will be charged by the municipal court on all traffic violations which result in a violator
requesting and receiving court approval to attend a defensive driving course as part of the court's adjudication of
his/her case.
(b) Ten dollars ($10.00) of the fee will be forwarded to the state in accordance with established law.
(1995 Code, art. 10.1100)
State law reference–Additional court fees for driving safety course, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 103.021.
Sec. 12.01.002 Special fee for administration of enforcement of Chapter 702 of the Texas Transportation
Code
(a) A special “scofflaw” fee as provided in section A12.01.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code
is hereby established and will be charged by the city (directly or through its municipal court) to any owner of a
vehicle who has an outstanding warrant from the city for failure to appear or failure to pay a fine on a complaint
that involves the violation of a traffic law in the city.
(b) Such “scofflaw” fee shall be collected by the city, or by its duly designated agent as provided under any
authorized interlocal agreement relating to the enforcement of chapter 702 of the Texas Transportation Code, at
such time as such vehicle owner attempts to renew such vehicles registration. Such “scofflaw” fee shall only be
used to cover the cost of enforcement of chapter 702 of the Texas Transportation Code and shall only be
collected in compliance with the provisions of applicable law
(Ordinance 2011-23 adopted 12/6/11)
ARTICLE 12.02 SPEED†
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/334
Sec. 12.02.001 Maximum limit
(a) No automobile shall be driven or propelled along the streets, alleys, or other public places of the city at a
greater rate of speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, unless specifically posted otherwise.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1995 Code, art. 10.200)
State law reference–Maximum speed requirement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.351.
Secs. 12.02.002–12.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Specific Limits
Sec. 12.02.031 FM 506
(a) The maximum vehicular speed limit along FM 506 from Expressway 83 north approximately 1/10 mile is
thirty (30) miles per hour. From that point, 1/10 mile north of Expressway 83 to the north city limits, the
maximum vehicular speed shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. (Ordinance 99-10, sec. 1, adopted 7/22/99)
(b) The maximum vehicular speed limit on South Main Street (FM 506) from Chelo Drive to approximately
.25 mile south of Dodd Lane is hereby reduced from fifty-five miles per hour to forty miles per hour. (Ordinance
2008-25 adopted 9/16/08)
Sec. 12.02.032 Business 83
The maximum vehicular speed limit along Business 83 from 211 feet east of Parker Road to three hundred
seventy feet (370') east of South Kansas City Road shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour. From that point, three
hundred seventy feet (370') east of South Kansas City Road to the east city limits boundary the speed shall be
fifty (50) miles per hour. (Ordinance 99-10, sec. 2, adopted 7/22/99)
Sec. 12.02.033 Bearfield Lane
The maximum vehicular speed limit on Bearfield Lane is reduced from twenty miles per hour to fifteen miles
per hour. (Ordinance 2005-06, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/05)
Sec. 12.02.034 FM Road 2556
(a) The speed limit for vehicular traffic traveling northbound on the portion of FM 2556 that lies within the
city limits from Memorial Drive to the south shall be 45 miles per hour and from Memorial Drive north 0.334
miles, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour.
(b) The speed limit for vehicular traffic traveling southbound on the portion of FM 2556 that lies within the
city limits from Expressway 83 to Memorial Drive, shall be 50 miles per hour and from Memorial Drive south to
the city limits, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour.
(Ordinance 2007-07 adopted 8/13/07)
Sec. 12.02.035 Citrus Drive
The speed limit for vehicular traffic traveling on Citrus Drive shall be reduced from thirty (30) miles per hour to
twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ordinance 2009-15 adopted 10/13/09)
Sec. 12.02.036 Pancho Maples Drive
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/334
The maximum vehicular speed limit on Pancho Maples Drive between FM 506 and Rabb Road is twenty-five
(25) miles per hour. (Ordinance 2014-07 adopted 8/12/14)
Secs. 12.02.037–12.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. School Zones
Sec. 12.02.061 Limits established
(a) The following areas are hereby designated as “school zones” and traffic traveling through all those areas
except those located on FM 506 (Main Street) and Business Highway 83 during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. shall not exceed a speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
Those vehicles traveling along FM 506 (Main Street) and Business Highway 83 within the designated school
zones shall not exceed twenty miles per hour while the beacons are flashing:
Street: From: To:
FM 506 (Main Street) 200' north of Jessamine
Avenue
South Park Drive
Jessamine Avenue FM 506 (Main Street) Canal Street
West Street Jessamine Avenue Magnolia Avenue
Cypress Avenue West Street Canal Street
Spruce Avenue West Street Canal Street
South Canal Cypress Avenue Verbena Avenue (Lion's
Lane)
Business Highway 83 450' west of Canal Street 200' east of West Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/334
North Canal Street Business Highway 83 Expressway 83 eastbound
frontage
Villarreal Street Fourth Street Sixth Street
Fourth Street West Street Canal Street
Fifth Street Villarreal Street 200' East of Villarreal Street
Sixth Street Canal Street 650' East of Canal Street
Seventh Street Canal Street 650' East of Canal Street
Eighth Street Canal Street 650' East of Canal Street
Ninth Street Canal Street 650' East of Canal Street
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions herein shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 98-23 adopted 11/19/98)
Sec. 12.02.062 Noemi Dominguez Elementary School
(a) The maximum vehicular speed for areas within the school zone shall be twenty (20) miles per hour.
(b) The hours the school zone shall be in effect shall be from 7:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. on school days only.
(c) The violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any convicted violators will
be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(d) A map showing the school zone boundaries is attached to Ordinance 2003-08 as exhibit “A.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/334
(e) The city manager is hereby directed to cause the installation of appropriate signage to regulate traffic
within the school zone.
(Ordinance 2003-08, secs. 1–5, adopted 7/31/03)
ARTICLE 12.03 PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Parking near intersection of alley and street
(a) No person operating a motor vehicle on the alleys in the city shall park any such vehicle or any part of
vehicle within a distance of twenty (20) feet from the place of intersection of a street with another street, and no
person operating a motor vehicle in the city shall park such vehicle or any part thereof within ten (10) feet of the
point where an alley and street intersect.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1995 Code, art. 10.600)
Sec. 12.03.002 Parking of trailers and semitrailers
No trailer, semitrailer and similar commercial vehicle, as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section
502.001, shall be parked, left standing, or otherwise be unattended on any public street, public thoroughfare or
alleyway, within the corporate limits of the city, except that trailers, semitrailers and similar commercial vehicles
may stop, stand or remain idle, when and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of property, cargo,
materials or other transported goods. (Ordinance 95-6 adopted 8/24/95)
Sec. 12.03.003 Parking in front of city hall
(a) A total of five (5) able-bodied (nonhandicapped) parking spaces on the north side of Commercial Avenue
in front of city hall and two (2) able-bodied (nonhandicapped) parking spaces on the south side of Commercial
Avenue in front of city hall, as depicted in exhibit A attached to Ordinance 2011-04 and made a part hereof, shall
be limited to fifteen (15) minutes parking per visit between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday, when city hall is opened for business.
(b) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be fined, upon
conviction, not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 4/26/11)
Sec. 12.03.004 On-street handicapped parking
(a) The city manager shall have the authority to develop and implement reasonable rules, regulations and
policies related to the issuance of any on-street handicapped parking designations as provided herein.
(b) Requests for on-street handicapped parking shall be made on an application form obtainable from and
returnable to the city manager. The city manager shall examine all requests received for on-street handicapped
parking designations to determine the validity and need for such designation taking into account, among other
things, the street width, number of cars regularly using the street for parking, traffic patterns and such other
matters as the city manager deems to relate to such request.
(c) If the city manager determines the request should be granted, the city manager shall so notify the
applicant. The city manager shall direct signage to be installed and the adjacent curb to be painted designating
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/334
the area to be used by persons displaying official handicapped parking insignias provided by the state.
(d) The city manager shall retain the right to cancel such parking area at any time the city manager determines
that circumstances have changed and that such designated parking area is no longer in the best interest of the city
or its citizens.
(e) In approving any application, installing such signage and painting any designated area, the city shall not be
deemed responsible for installing any curb cuts related to wheelchair access to and from such area. Any such
required access in addition to the existing driveway curb cuts in the area shall be the responsibility of the
applicant after receiving written consent from the city.
(f) Violation of any applicable laws of the state and/or ordinances of the city relating to handicapped parking
spaces shall be punishable by such fines and penalties as currently exist under existing laws and ordinances
related thereto.
(Ordinance 2005-05, art. 10.1200, adopted 2/24/05)
State law reference–Privileged parking for persons with disabilities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 681.
Secs. 12.03.005–12.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. No Parking Zones
Sec. 12.03.031 West Commercial Avenue and North Main Street
(a) A no-parking zone is hereby established along the south side of West Commercial Avenue, beginning at
the southwest corner of Main Street and West Commercial Avenue and going seventy-seven feet (77') west.
(b) A no-parking zone is hereby established along the west side of North Main Street (FM 506), beginning at
the southwest corner of West Commercial Avenue and North Main Street, going fifty-five feet (55') south.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or failing to comply with any of the requirements
herein, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine as provided for in the general penalty in section
1.01.009 of this code.
(d) The city manager or his designated representative shall cause signage and markings to be placed at the
designated no-parking zones indicating the locations of such zones.
(Ordinance 2001-25, secs. 1–4, adopted 12/27/01)
ARTICLE 12.04 STOP INTERSECTIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.04.001 Signs ratified
All properly signed stop intersections now existing in the city are hereby ratified. (1995 Code, art. 10.300)
Secs. 12.04.002–12.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Four-Way Stops
Sec. 12.04.031 North Canal and Fourth Streets
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/334
The intersection of North Canal and Fourth Streets is hereby established as a four-way stop intersection. (1995
Code, art. 10.1000)
Sec. 12.04.032 West Magnolia and West Street
A four-way stop is hereby established at the intersection of West Magnolia and West Street.
Sec. 12.04.033 East Verbena and East Street
A four-way stop is hereby established at the intersection of East Verbena and East Street.
(Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 5/10/11)
Secs. 12.04.034–12.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Three-Way Stops
Sec. 12.04.061 East Street and Lilac Avenue
The city manager, or his designee, is hereby directed to install stop signs at the intersection of East Street and
Lilac Avenue requiring all traffic approaching the intersection to stop. (Ordinance 99-09 adopted 7/8/99)
Sec. 12.04.062 Angelita Drive and West Street
A three-way stop is hereby found to be warranted and is hereby established at the intersection of Angelita Drive
and West Street. (Ordinance 2006-02, sec. 1, adopted 2/9/06)
Sec. 12.04.063 South Willow and Pancho Maples Drive
A three-way stop is hereby established at the intersection of South Willow and Pancho Maples Drive.
(Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 5/10/11)
ARTICLE 12.05 SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS
Sec. 12.05.001 South Canal Street and South Park Drive
(a) A three-way stop is hereby established at the intersection of South Canal Street and South Park Drive.
(b) No-parking zones along South Park Drive near the campus driveways are also hereby established.
(c) The city manager is hereby directed to cause appropriate regulatory traffic signage to be installed at the
intersection and designate the no-parking zones.
(d) Any person violating any provision of this section or failing to comply with any requirements herein, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine as provided for in the general penalty in section 1.01.009 of this
code.
(Ordinance 2003-05, secs. 1–4, adopted 2/27/03)
Sec. 12.05.002 Verbena and Jessamine Avenues
(a) Between the hours of 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. of each day that school is legally in session at La Feria High
School, in the city, no person shall operate a motor vehicle on Verbena Avenue from Main Street to West Street,
in the city, unless such person is a teacher or a student in the La Feria School System, or is transporting a
student, or students, or a teacher, or teachers, to or from school, or unless such person at that time has business
of some other nature to transact in connection with the operation of the La Feria School System; and any person
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/334
legally operating a motor vehicle on said portion of Verbena Avenue, at such time, may park such vehicle in the
angle parking spaces provided as marked on the north side of Verbena Avenue, or parallel to the curb on the
south side of said street.
(b) Between the hours of 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. on school days only, no vehicle shall be parked on the south side
of Jessamine Avenue from Main Street to West Street. Vehicles bringing students, or others, to the school
grounds and picking up students, or others, may stop along this south side for unloading and loading, and a
vehicle shall not be deemed parked so long as the operator thereon remains with said vehicle.
(c) On the north side of Jessamine Avenue from Main Street to West Street, vehicles may be parked only
parallel to the curb, provided such parking does not interfere with normal entry and exit from existing residential
driveways.
(d) Appropriate signs shall be erected on Verbena Avenue and Jessamine Avenue to regulate traffic in
accordance with the terms of this section.
(1995 Code, art. 10.400)
Sec. 12.05.003 Commercial Avenue
(a) East Commercial Avenue, from South Main Street to East Street is hereby designated and established as a
one-way street eastbound.
(b) Diagonal parking shall be established on both sides of said avenue.
(c) Diagonal parking shall be established on the south side of East Oleander Street from East Street to South
Main Street.
(d) Said streets shall be appropriately marked for said action.
(1995 Code, art. 10.700)
Sec. 12.05.004 South Main Street
(a) No person operating a motor vehicle on South Main Street, in the city, shall make a U-turn with said motor
vehicle at any place on said street south of Highway 83 except at the place where said street intersects with
another street, except that no U-turns shall be made at the intersection of South Main Street and Oleander
Avenue.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1995 Code, art. 10.500)
Sec. 12.05.005 East First Street
All vehicular traffic approaching the railroad spur located on East First Street between FM 506 and Parker Road
is required to stop and yield the right-of-way to any train traffic using the railroad spur. (Ordinance 2006-03, sec.
1, adopted 2/23/06)
Sec. 12.05.006 Parker Road
(a) Vehicles other than passenger and light truck vehicles are hereby prohibited from driving on Parker Road,
from Business 83, south to the city limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/334
(b) Vehicles with tandem wheels or more than two axles are hereby prohibited from driving on Parker Road,
from Business 83, south to the city limits.
(c) Vehicles with tandem wheels or more than two axles are hereby prohibited from driving south from
Business 83 through Parker Road, to the city limits, unless providing services directly to properties abutting
Parker Road within the defined boundaries.
(d) The city manager is authorized to take legal action to recover damages against any trucking or transport
service that exceeds the speed, weight classification of the road, and exceeds vehicular load as mandated by the
state highway department.
(e) The city manager is hereby authorized to direct the installation of appropriate signage alerting the public to
the prohibition.
(Ordinance 2007-13 adopted 11/5/07)
Sec. 12.05.007 Pancho Maples Drive
(a) Vehicles with tandem wheels or more than two (2) axles are hereby prohibited from driving on Pancho
Maples Drive between Canal Street and Rabb Road unless providing services directly to properties along such
portion of Pancho Maples Drive.
(b) The city manager is authorized to take legal action to recover damages against any owner of a vehicle that
violates exceeds the use limitations as provided herein.
(Ordinance 2014-07 adopted 8/12/14)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 13.02 UTILITIES BOARD
Sec. 13.02.001 Created
The utilities board is set up as an independent unit to supervise the administration of the water and sewer system.
The board is self-perpetuating with each appointment to last eight (8) years, thus assuring a nonpolitical future
and a continuous policy. (1995 Code, sec. 8.701)
Sec. 13.02.002 Appointment; vacancies
All vacancies in membership, whether occasioned by expiration of term or otherwise, shall be filled by a
majority vote of members of the city commission. Permanent removal of any member of the board from the city
shall vacate his membership. Members shall be eligible for reelection for additional terms. (1995 Code, sec.
8.702)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/334
Sec. 13.02.003 Authority
Subject to the provisions and restrictions contained in specific bond issuance ordinances, the board shall have
complete authority and control of the management and operation of the water and sewer system and the
expenditure and application of the revenues of the system. (1995 Code, sec. 8.703)
Sec. 13.02.004 Organization
The board shall meet for the purpose of organization and shall organize through the election of one of its
members as chairman and one as vice-chairman. The board may make such regulations and bylaws for the
orderly handling of its affairs as it may in its discretion see fit and shall thereafter operate and manage the
system with the same freedom and in the same manner as ordinarily enjoyed and followed by the board of
directors of a private corporation operating property of a similar nature. (1995 Code, sec. 8.704)
Sec. 13.02.005 Bond
The board shall obtain and keep continually in force an employee's fidelity and indemnity bond of the so-called
blanket type written by a solvent and recognized indemnity company covering losses to the amount of not less
than $5,000.00. (1995 Code, sec. 8.705)
Sec. 13.02.006 Officers and employees
The board shall elect and appoint all officers and employees which it may consider desirable, including an
attorney or attorneys and a general manager for the system, and such appointment or approval of employees
shall not conflict with the city commission's employee work schedules and employment program and the
supervision thereof. (1995 Code, sec. 8.706)
Sec. 13.02.007 Compensation; liability
The members of the board may receive an annual compensation not exceeding $120.00 each and shall be
reimbursed for all reasonable and properly authorized expenditures made in carrying out their duties as members
of the board. The members of the board shall not be personally liable for any act or omission not willfully
fraudulent or malicious. (1995 Code, sec. 8.707)
Sec. 13.02.008 Absence and removal from board
Any member of the board other than the mayor who shall be continuously absent from all meetings of the board
for a period of three (3) consecutive months shall, unless he shall have been granted a leave of absence by the
unanimous vote of the remaining members of the board, be considered to have vacated his office. Any member
of the board other than the mayor may by vote of the other three (3) remaining members of the board be
removed from office, but only for adequate cause. (1995 Code, sec. 8.708)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWERS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 13.03.001–13.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Rates, Charges and Billing
Sec. 13.03.031 Compliance with rules and regulations required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to take from any main lateral or pipe any water placed therein by the
city waterworks system for any use or purpose in violation of any rule made by the board of directors of the city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/334
waterworks system.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly provide false information to the city where such
information is used by the city in the management or maintenance of the waterworks system.
Sec. 13.03.032 Basis for water rates
It is hereby determined and declared necessary for the city to levy and collect monthly charges from all persons
and entities receiving, using, and consuming fresh water from the lines of the city waterworks system and those
using the sanitary sewer system provided by the city's waterworks system. The monthly charges shall be based
on a water volume-consumed basis for all users.
Sec. 13.03.033 Water meters
A mechanical device for the measuring of water delivered through it, known as a water meter, as selected by the
city waterworks system, from time to time, shall be installed on every water line delivering water to every
person and entity purchasing and having water delivered to it from the lines of the city waterworks system, and
such meters and their reporting information shall be used in the usual and ordinary manner for determining the
monthly water consumption by each such person or entity having water delivered to it, as the basis for the
foregoing monthly charges.
Sec. 13.03.034 Definitions
Billing month. The period time beginning with the 21st day of a month and ending with the 20th day of the
following month, for which a customer receives a single bill for water and sewer services. A billing month bears
the name of the month containing the last day of this period.
Commercial customer. An account with a single meter for the purpose of retail, commercial, personal services,
excavation, manufacturing and industrial operations and uses and generally not used as a single residence.
Customer. A residential customer, commercial customer, master meter/retail customer, or institutional customer.
Institutional customer. An account with a meter which services a place having a curriculum for the purpose of
giving instruction, training or education in a service, art, trade or for general knowledge, and generally does not
include those accounts (meters) used for food service, personal services, or recreation.
Master meter/retail customer. An account with a meter which measures the volume of water utilized by a parcel
of land which is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation,
and has been developed as a multifamily dwelling designed for 5 or more single families or single housekeeping
units or for rental of lots to tenants with mobile homes or recreational vehicles, as described in the city's zoning
ordinance.
Residential customer. An account with a single meter for a home or residence occupied by a single-family,
individual or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, or an account with a single
meter servicing a multifamily dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more than four such single
families or housekeeping units.
Vacation period. The period of vacation time indicated by a residential customer submitting a vacation plan
application.
Sec. 13.03.035 Vacation plan
(a) A residential customer may apply to be billed for water and sewer service under a vacation plan. For any
billing month falling completely within the vacation period, a residential customer billed under the vacation plan
will pay the vacation rates as set forth in section A13.03.036(1)(C) and section A13.03.037(1)(C).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/334
(b) To be eligible for billing under the vacation plan, the residential customer must:
(1) Submit a vacation plan application at least 5 days prior to the first day of any billing month to
be billed under the vacation plan;
(2) Ensure that the residence remains unoccupied during the entire vacation period;
(3) Allow the consumption of water only for yard and plant maintenance during the entire vacation
period;
(4) Not allow water consumption to exceed 1,500 gallons in any billing month billed under the
vacation plan;
(5) Not allow any other person to use the residential customer's brush or garbage collection
facilities or areas; and
(6) The residential unit must be located within the city limits.
(c) The number of consecutive billing months billed under the vacation plan in any calendar year shall not
exceed three (3). The use of service after the three (3) months shall be billed at the full rate.
Sec. 13.03.036 Water rates
In addition to other relevant factors, all water charges shall be based on the volume of water flowing through the
customer's water meter. For all customers, the monthly charge shall be as provided in section A13.03.036 of the
fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
Sec. 13.03.037 Sewer rates
In addition to other relevant factors, all sanitary sewer charges shall be based on the customer's usage as
measured by volume of water flowing through the customer's water meter. For all customers, the monthly
charges shall be as provided in section A13.03.037 of the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
Sec. 13.03.038 Water connection fees
Connection of water service shall be based on the size and location of the connection. The fees for 5/8", 1", 2",
3", 4" and 6" connections inside and outside the city limits shall be as provided in section A13.03.038 of the fee
schedule found in appendix A to this code.
Sec. 13.03.039 Sanitary sewer connection fees
Connection of sanitary sewer service shall be based on the size and location of the connection. The fee for a 4",
6", 8", and 10" connections inside and outside the city limits shall be as provided in section A13.03.039 of the
fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
Sec. 13.03.040 Deposits and activation fees
(a) Water meter deposit required. Payment of a water meter deposit shall be required prior to provision of
water and sewer service to any customer. The amount of the deposit is based on the size of the meter as provided
in section A13.03.040 of the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(b) Activation fee. Payment of an activation fee as provided in section A13.03.040 of the fee schedule found
in appendix A to this code shall be required prior to the creation of any customer account or provision of water
and sewer service to any customer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/334
(c) Service deposit refund. Service deposits may be refunded when service is terminated and the account is
fully paid. Deposits shall not be transferable between customers.
(d) Authority of the city manager. The city manager of the system is authorized to increase the amount of any
deposit required by this section when in his/her discretion the deposit is in gross disparity with other deposits
required in similar circumstances, or the deposit is not sufficient to protect the interest of the system. Failure of
the customer to make a deposit at the request of the city manager as required herein, will subject that customer to
termination of services.
Sec. 13.03.041 Payment of bills
(a) Due date. All water and sanitary sewer bills are due in full upon receipt of the bill and payment must be
made by the 10th day of the month. Payments delivered by the United States Postal Service and postmarked no
later than the 10th day of the month will be considered timely if actually received by the city no later than the
17th day of the month.
(b) Late charge. The city will impose a late charge of 10% of any delinquency remaining after the close of
business day on the 10th of the month following the mailing of water and sanitary sewer bills.
(c) Termination of service. Any delinquency remaining after the close of business day on the 17th day of the
month exceeding $10.00 will subject a customer to termination of service. Upon payment of all delinquent
amounts and a delinquent account reconnect fee as provided in section A13.03.041 of the fee schedule found in
appendix A to this code, a customer may have service reestablished. The city manager of the city waterworks
system is authorized, at his/her discretion, to require an additional water meter deposit for frequently delinquent
accounts. Any reconnection of service completed after regular working hours shall be assessed at a fee as
provided in section A13.03.041 of the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(d) Extension of time to pay bill before termination of service. The city manager is authorized to grant an
extension of time for payment of bills if a customer requests such an extension in writing and demonstrates
extreme hardship. A customer granted such an extension shall be exempt from termination of service for the
duration of the extension. Extensions shall be for a short period of time and may be revoked by the city manager
at any time. Notwithstanding the grant of such an extension, any payment made after its due date shall not be
considered timely and all applicable late charges will be imposed.
Sec. 13.03.042 Establishment of customer assistance fund
The city manager is hereby authorized to set aside $1,000.00 per fiscal year to assist customers who do not have
any other means to pay their utility bill to the city. To be eligible to receive assistance, the customer will be
required to file an application with the finance director of the city on a form prescribed by the city. The finance
director shall review the application and make a recommendation to the city manager for approval or denial of
the assistance. The city manager's decision shall be final.
(Ordinance 2012-11 adopted 9/11/12)
Sec. 13.03.043 Extra charge on water accounts for emergency services, firefighting and public safety
equipment
(a) There is hereby established a schedule of charges which the city shall bill to the holder of each of its water
accounts as set forth in section A13.03.043 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code.
(b) The foregoing charges shall be included in the water bills which the city issues on a monthly basis, and
shall be due and payable as stated in those water bills.
(c) The city shall use the revenue it shall receive from billing the foregoing charges for construction and
maintenance of emergency services, facilities, acquisition of firefighting equipment and acquisition of public
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/334
safety equipment.
(Ordinance 97-08, secs. 1–3, adopted 11/20/97)
Sec. 13.03.044 Utility expansion fee
(a) When an application for a water or wastewater tap connection is made, a fee as provided for in section
A13.03.044 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code will be required by each person, firm, or corporation
making such application. This utility expansion fee per water and/or wastewater connection will be required for
each single-family dwelling and for each dwelling unit within a multifamily dwelling or apartment building, and
for each commercial or industrial connection. Said utility expansion fee will be paid prior to any connections
being made and will be paid at city hall.
(b) Said utility expansion fees collected will be placed in an interest-bearing account, and said fees will be
used only for future water and wastewater system improvements or expansions.
(c) Said utility expansion fees will not be refundable.
(d) The application of those utility expansion fees established by subsections (a) through (c) shall be restricted
to:
(1) Service requests for property outside city limits; and
(2) Service requests for property inside the city limits not included in an approved city plat which
is on file in the county clerk's office. Any alteration of an existing approved city plat on file in the
county clerk's office could result in the utility expansion fees being applicable, the determination of
same being a responsibility of the city utilities board.
(3) [Service requests] which place a significant demand on existing plant capacity. Normally, the
fee will apply to all requests for services other than single-family residences, a final determination of
same being a responsibility of the utilities board.
(1995 Code, art. 11.500)
Secs. 13.03.045–13.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Connection to City Sewer
Sec. 13.03.071 Connection mandatory
The owner, tenant or other occupant of any property within the area defined by the city's certificate of
convenience and necessity (CCN), as authorized by the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ),
whenever such property lies within one hundred feet (100') of a city sanitary sewer line and is occupied or used
as a place of residence by human beings, shall be connected to the city's sanitary sewer system through an
acceptable, suitable and proper connection. This mandatory connection shall take place no later than ninety (90)
days after the sanitary sewer lines are installed within the defined one-hundred-foot distance. (Ordinance 98-21,
sec. 11.102, adopted 11/12/98)
Sec. 13.03.072 Penalty for violation
(a) Each day's violation of any provision of this division shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(b) Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this division, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined according to the general penalty in section 1.01.009 of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/334
(1995 Code, sec. 11.103)
Secs. 13.03.073–13.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. Grease Interceptors
Sec. 13.03.091 Applicability and prohibitions
(a) This article shall apply to all commercial, industrial and institutional users of the city's wastewater
collection and treatment system, whether such user is located within or without the municipal boundaries of the
city. Grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
(b) As required by the 2003 and 2006 International Plumbing Codes, or subsequently adopted codes, facilities
generating fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or service must
design, install, operate, and maintain grease interceptors. These facilities include but are not limited to
restaurants, schools, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, convenience stores,
prisons, nursing homes, and other facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff. This
requirement applies to newly proposed or constructed food establishments and existing facilities which are
expanded or renovated to include a food service facility. Grease interceptors shall be installed and inspected
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, either original or amended.
(c) No person may allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil,
mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the wastewater system in such amounts
as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the
city's treatment works into the environment.
Sec. 13.03.092 Definitions
Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a wastewater or stormwater system from any nondomestic source.
Fats, oils, and greases (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain
multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical
test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to
herein as “grease” or “greases.”
Generator. Any person, whether natural or fictitious, who owns or operates a facility or premises at which a
grease interceptor is located or required.
Grease interceptor. A device, typically located outside of the building, designed to use differences in specific
gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater
entering the public sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settable solids,
generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the interceptor and entering the
public sanitary sewer collection system. Grease interceptors normally range from 500 gallons to 2,000 gallons.
Grease interceptor waste. Material collected in and from a grease interceptor located in the sanitary sewer
service line of a commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the
solids resulting from de-watering processes.
Grease trap. A small reservoir built into the wastewater piping a short distance from the grease producing area,
such as a 50 gallon under the sink model.
Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources
inhibits or disrupts the flow of wastewater, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the city's TPDES permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/334
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies.
TPDES permit. Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit issued to the city by TCEQ under the
authority of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Transporter. A person who is registered with and authorized by the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ) to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit
trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code, section 312.142.
User. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes or
permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the wastewater collection system or stormwater
collection system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources.
Sec. 13.03.093 Grease interceptors required
All generators must install and properly operate and maintain a grease interceptor. Grease traps designed to serve
individual pieces of equipment are not permitted and will not qualify for compliance with the provisions hereof.
Sec. 13.03.094 Cleaning and maintenance requirements
(a) All generators are required to use best management practices for the operation and maintenance of the
required grease interceptor, grease interceptors must be operated and maintained in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with these standards. Grease interceptors shall be
maintained in efficient operating condition at all times.
(b) All grease interceptor waste shall be evacuated, transported and disposed of in compliance with TCEQ
regulations and the provisions hereof.
(c) Grease interceptors shall be inspected and cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and
floating materials do not impair the efficiency and efficacy of the grease interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in
compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease is observed in discharge.
(d) Except as otherwise provided below, grease interceptors shall be fully evacuated, cleaned and inspected at
least once every ninety (90) days, or more frequently when:
(1) The combined thickness of solids at the bottom and FOG on the surface exceeds 25% of the
total depth of the grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the
outlet pipe;
(2) The discharge exceeds biological oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD),
total suspended solids (TSS), fats, oil and grease (FOG); pH (measure of acidity or basicity), as
established by the city or TCEQ; or
(3) There is a history of noncompliance.
(e) After four consecutive quarterly evacuations, a generator may submit to the city a written request for an
exception to the minimum ninety (90) day evacuation frequency. The city may grant a change in the mandatory
minimum frequency on a case-by-case basis when:
(1) The generator demonstrates, with defensible test results, that the specific interceptor will
produce an effluent, in compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG,
pH, or other parameters as determined by the city; or
(2) A transporter, registered with the TCEQ, certifies in writing that, based on the transporter's
judgment, a stated, less frequent evacuation and cleaning of the grease interceptor is sufficient to
comply with the intent and standards of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/334
The decision to grant or not grant a change shall rest solely in the discretion of the city manager or the city
manager's duly authorized designee. No change shall be effective until confirmed in writing by the city. Any
change shall be subject to revocation or amendment by the city upon thirty (30) day written notice to the
generator.
(f) As required by TCEQ, each evacuation or pump-out of a grease interceptor must be accompanied by a
manifest and the owner or operator of the grease interceptor shall submit to the city a copy of the completed
manifest within ten (10) days of the date of such evacuation.
Sec. 13.03.095 Alternative treatment prohibited
(a) A generator commits an offense if the generator introduces, causes, or permits the introduction of any
surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease interceptor. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials
which allow the grease to pass from the grease interceptor into the collection system, and include but are not
limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other solvents.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection (a) above that the use of surfactants or soaps is
incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations.
Sec. 13.03.096 Schedule of penalties
Any generator violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00
for the first violation, up to $1,500.00 for a second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation within a twoyear
period. Additional violations will result in a $500.00 increase in the civil penalty and may result in
termination of wastewater collection and treatment services.
(Ordinance 2012-04 adopted 3/13/12)
ARTICLE 13.04 ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES (OSSF)
Sec. 13.04.001 Adoption of state law
The city clearly understands that there are technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures
and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities, and will fully ensure enforcement of chapter 366
of the Texas Health and Safety Code (H&SC) and chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code (TWC), and
associated rules referenced in section 13.04.009 of this article. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 5, adopted 9/10/02)
Sec. 13.04.002 Area of jurisdiction
The rules shall apply to all the area lying in the city, except for the area regulated under an existing rule and the
areas within incorporated cities. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 6, adopted 9/10/02)
Sec. 13.04.003 Compliance with rules
Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of the city must comply with the
rules adopted in section 13.04.009 of this article. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 7, adopted 9/10/02)
Sec. 13.04.004 Rules adopted
The rules, administrative rule 30, Texas Administrative Code (TAC) sections 285.1–285.91 and 30 TAC 30,
attached to Ordinance 2002-10, promulgated by the state commission on environmental quality for on-site
sewage facilities are hereby adopted, and all officials and employees of the city having duties under said rules
are authorized to perform such duties as are required of them under said rules. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 8,
adopted 9/10/02)
Sec. 13.04.005 Incorporation of rules by reference
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/334
The rules, 30 TAC chapters 30 and 285, and all future amendments and revisions thereto are incorporated by
reference and are thus made a part of these rules. A copy of the current rules is attached to Ordinance 2002-10 as
appendix I. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 9, adopted 9/10/02)
Sec. 13.04.006 Approval and certification of inspector
The on-site sewage facilities inspector of the city must be approved and certified by the state commission on
environmental quality before assuming the duties and responsibilities. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 10, adopted
9/10/02)
Sec. 13.04.007 Collection of fees
All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the city. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 11,
adopted 9/10/02)
Sec. 13.04.008 Appeals
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision
to the city commission. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 12, adopted 9/10/02)
Sec. 13.04.009 Penalties
This article adopts and incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to on-site facilities, which include,
but are not limited to, those found in chapters 341 and 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code; chapters 7, 26,
and 37 of the Texas Water Code; and 30 TAC chapters 30 and 285. (Ordinance 2002-10, sec. 13, adopted
9/10/02)
ARTICLE 13.05 SOLID WASTE
Sec. 13.05.001 Definitions
Automated cart. A wheeled or nonwheeled cart provided by the city for use with an automated collection
system.
Bags. Plastic sacks designed to store refuse with sufficient strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted
from the top. Total weight of the bag and its contents shall not exceed thirty-five (35) pounds.
Brush. Trees, shrubs, grass and trimmings of trees, shrubs and grass.
Bulky waste. Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, and any other heavy appliance, mattresses
and furniture. Bulky waste does not include construction debris, dead animals or stable matter with weight or
volume greater than allowed for residential or commercial trash receptacles.
Bundle. Brush, newspapers or magazines securely tied together, forming an easily handled package, not
exceeding four feet in length or fifty pounds in weight.
City. City of La Feria, Texas.
Commercial customer. A person or business entity, owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any
commercial property.
Commercial/industrial property. Any premises, location, or public or private entity, which is not a residential
property, requiring refuse collection within the corporate limits of the city. An apartment complex is considered
a commercial property for the purposes of this article.
Construction debris. Waste associated with construction, remodeling, repair or demolition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/334
Disposal site. A solid waste depository, including but not limited to sanitary landfills, transfer stations, and
waste processing/separation centers licensed and approved by all governmental entities having jurisdiction over
such facilities.
Dumpster. A receptacle provided by the city designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use at
commercial and industrial properties.
Garbage. Solid waste generated by normal day-to-day operation of a household, business, or other commercial
endeavor, excluding brush and hazardous waste of any kind.
Residential customer. A person or family occupying a residential property. Those residential customers served
by a dumpster will be considered commercial customers for the purpose of garbage and brush collection
services.
Residential property. A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied by not more than one family. A
residential unit shall be deemed occupied when water or domestic light and power services are being supplied
thereto.
Sec. 13.05.002 Services
(a) Garbage and brush collection shall be conducted from Monday through Friday, beginning at 7:00 a.m.
each day.
(b) The city shall collect residential garbage at least once per week and brush on a schedule and route
designated by the city manager.
(c) The city shall collect commercial garbage at such frequency to be determined by the city manager based
on the demand demonstrated by each commercial establishment, at a minimum of once per week.
(d) The city shall provide a number of dumpsters to each commercial establishment based on the demand
demonstrated by each commercial establishment.
(e) The city shall not collect tires, bulky waste or construction debris of any kind. All persons or entities
producing these forms of waste and all property owners allowing such waste to accumulate on their property
shall be responsible for the disposal of such waste at an approved disposal site.
(f) The city shall notify each customer of the day or days of the week designated for collection of the
customer's garbage and brush upon the customer's establishment of an account for water and wastewater services
with the city.
Sec. 13.05.003 Garbage collection
(a) All residential customers shall be provided with a refuse container by the city for the gathering, storage
and collection of garbage. Prior to being placed in the refuse container, garbage shall be placed in plastic bags to
prevent spillage inside and damage to the container. If the refuse container is not sufficient for the amount of
refuse generated, the customer may make arrangements with the city for an additional refuse container for an
additional fee. If it is determined by the city after observation for at least two weeks that the container received
by the customer is not sufficient, the city will deliver additional containers and will bill accordingly.
(b) All customers shall be responsible for the care of the refuse containers assigned to them. The refuse
container lids shall be kept closed at all times to prevent flies, insects and stormwater from accumulating.
Materials that may cause damage to the refuse container such as hot ashes or exceptionally heavy items shall not
be placed in the container. Customers shall contact the city to discuss the removal of those items from the
property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/334
(c) The contents of all garbage receptacles shall be protected so that wind or prowling animals cannot scatter
the garbage. It is the responsibility of the customer whether residential or commercial to collect any garbage that
has been scattered for any reason.
(d) Meddling with garbage receptacles or in any way pilfering from, scattering the contents of or dumping, in
any alley, street or property within the city limits is strictly prohibited.
(e) Landscaping services of any kind shall be responsible for the removal of any grass, tree or shrub clippings
from the premises in which they are responsible. Such service providers are also responsible for providing their
own equipment to perform such services.
(f) Garbage and brush collected by the city becomes the property of the city.
(g) The city shall enforce a general system for the collection and disposal of refuse and garbage within the city
and shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of such refuse and garbage within the city or shall have
the right to enter into a contract with one or more persons, firms or corporations for the collection and disposal
of refuse and garbage within the city.
(h) All garbage shall be placed inside the container provided by the city for refuse collection. Garbage placed
outside the container will be collected; however, additional fees in the amount set forth in section A13.05.003 of
the fee schedule in appendix A to this code shall be charged. In determining such charge, the city has taken into
consideration labor costs, including fringe benefits, cost of trucks and other equipment, cost of fuel, insurance,
depreciation, distance traveled, bookkeeping and time records and other similar related costs.
(i) Residential refuse containers shall be placed as close to the curb as practical without endangering the
movement of vehicles or pedestrians, but not in the street roadway or nearer than ten feet (10') to any utility
meter or utility pole, unless the city currently provides garbage collection in an adjacent alley. The city
designates street or alley collection locations. When construction is being performed on the roadways or alleys,
the refuse containers shall be placed as close as practical to an access point for the collection vehicle. The city
shall not collect garbage from refuse containers not placed correctly.
(j) Residential refuse containers shall be removed from the collection point the same day as collected.
(k) All commercial customers shall provide a fence of sufficient height to completely conceal all garbage
receptacles from view. The construction of the fence shall be done in such a way not to prohibit the mechanized
truck from picking up the containers. All commercial customers shall ensure that liquids escaping from any
garbage receptacle are diverted into the sanitary sewer system.
(l) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or permit another to place any refuse in any refuse container
unless the refuse is from the premises on which the refuse container is located.
(m) Each customer, residential, commercial or industrial, shall maintain supervision and surveillance over
their refuse container serving such premises and if such refuse containers are not emptied at least once every
seven (7) days, the customer shall notify the city.
(n) Each customer, residential, commercial or industrial shall be responsible to secure the refuse containers
and any loss due to theft or damage of containers shall be reimbursed to the city by the customer.
(o) The customer shall not remove or transport garbage containers from one residence to another. Violators
will be prosecuted as permissible under the law.
(p) The city manager may authorize the pickup of bulky materials if the customer deposits such amount
estimated by the city for the pickup. The customer shall also agree to reimburse the city for any additional
charge not anticipated initially. The fee for the pickup of bulky materials shall be determined on a case-by-case
basis so as to recover cost associated with the removal of the bulky material.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/334
(q) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove trash containers from one location to another location.
(r) The city is authorized to forfeit the customer's deposit in lieu of any amount owed to the city and for any
damages caused to the containers.
Sec. 13.05.004 Brush collection
(a) Brush shall be collected on a schedule established by the city manager.
(b) Tree limbs shall be cut into sections no longer than three feet (3') in length and shall weigh no more than
thirty-five (35) pounds. Grass clippings and any loose brush shall be placed in plastic bags for collection.
(c) Brush shall be placed near the curb of the property for collection. Brush shall not be placed near utility
poles or wires and shall not be placed in the street. Brush shall not be placed over or nearer than ten feet (10') to
any utility meter. Brush shall not be placed on the roadway or on drainage swell.
(d) Vacant property owners are not billed the minimum monthly charge, and brush generated from vacant
properties shall not be picked up by the city unless the property owner deposits funds with the city to offset the
cost of such brush pick up.
(e) The public works director or his designee is responsible to preview the quantity of brush to be picked up
and determine the fee to be assessed for the pickup. The charge due can be deposited with the city prior to the
pickup or it can be billed on the next water bill.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring brush from another property or other locations and place for
pick up in another area.
(g) No minimum fee is established for certain property owners due to the general nature of the property.
Additional charges must be collected from these property owners/occupants/residents for the brush picked up
from the property.
(h) No vehicle shall be parked in front nor 10 feet to each side of the brush placed for pick up.
(Ordinance 2006-13 adopted 9/7/06)
Sec. 13.05.005 Charges assessed
(a) The charges fixed for collection, removal and disposal of garbage and brush within the city limits shall be
levied and assessed by the city against all agents, owners, occupants, lessees or tenants, owning, using or
occupying any building, structure, premises or location where such service is received or available. The fee
schedule and the maximum amount of brush picked up for the monthly minimum charge is found in section
A13.05.005 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code. (Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 9/13/11)
(b) In order for the city to effect the collection of such charges from the persons who own the same [garbage
and brush], and in order to avoid duplication of expense and effort, said charges shall be billed each month as a
separate item on the water bill of all persons who receive water bills from the city. Such charges shall be due and
payable at the same time and place and in the same manner as such water bill, and contemporaneously therewith.
In such cases where a person who receives garbage and/or brush collection service has no water or wastewater
service, said charges shall be billed each month through the U.S. mail, addressed to such person's mailing
address and shall be due and payable by such person on the same schedule as the water bills.
(c) Where a water account has been established and a deposit has been paid, there shall be no additional
deposit for garbage and brush collection services. Where garbage and brush collection services are available but
there is no water service available, a deposit, as set forth in section A13.05.005 of the fee schedule in appendix
A to this code, for commercial customers shall be required prior to beginning the garbage and brush collection
services. Such deposit shall be refunded when the account has been closed, if the account is current. An account
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/334
activation fee as set forth in section A13.05.005 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code shall be charged
for those accounts receiving garbage and brush pick up services only at the time of setup.
(d) Any person required by this article to pay the charges herein provided for, and who fails to do so before
the same becomes delinquent, shall have his water service through the municipal water system discontinued and
his water meter disconnected or locked to prevent continued service, including garbage and brush collection
services. The city may thereafter refuse water service until such time as the delinquent garbage and brush service
is paid in full.
(e) The city will impose a late charge of 10% of any delinquency remaining after the close of the business day
on the 10th day of the month following the mailing of the garbage and brush collection bills.
(f) Any person intentionally damaging the refuse container provided by the city shall be charged an amount
deemed sufficient to repair or replace the container, as warranted.
(g) The city manager is authorized to grant an extension of time for payment of bills if a customer requests
such an extension in writing and demonstrates extreme hardship. Extensions shall be for a short period of time
and may be revoked by the city manager at any time. Notwithstanding the grant of such an extension, any
payment made after its due date shall not be considered timely and all applicable late charges will be imposed.
Sec. 13.05.006 Penalty for violation
Any person, group of persons, firm, agent, corporation or other entity that fails to comply with the requirements
of this article, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as
specified in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 2006-13 adopted 9/7/06)
ARTICLE 13.06 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLANS
Sec. 13.06.001 Adopted
The city commission adopts the water conservation and drought contingency plans attached to Ordinance 2013-
04 and which are made a part hereof by reference. A copy of these plans are on file in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance 2013-04 adopted 4/23/13)
ARTICLE 13.07 IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
Sec. 13.07.001 Program adoption
The city developed this identity theft prevention program (program) pursuant to the Federal Trade commission's
red flags rule (rule), which implements section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003. 16
C.F.R. section 681.2. This program was developed for the utility department of the city (utility) with oversight
and approval of the city commission. After consideration of the size and complexity of the utility's operations
and account systems, and the nature and scope of the utility's activities, the city commission determined that this
program was appropriate for the city's utility, and therefore approved this program on October 14, 2008.
Sec. 13.07.002 Purpose and definitions
(a) Establish an identity theft prevention program. To establish an identity theft prevention program designed
to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of a covered account or an existing
covered account and to provide for continued administration of the program in compliance with part 681 of title
16 of the Code of Federal Regulations implementing sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit
Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003.
(b) Establishing and fulfilling requirements of the red flags rule.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/334
(1) The red flags rule (rule) defines identity theft as “fraud committed using the identifying
information of another person” and a red flag as a “pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates
the possible existence of identity theft.”
(2) Under the rule, every financial institution and creditor is required to establish an identity theft
prevention program tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its operation. The program must
contain reasonable policies and procedures to:
(A) Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those
red flags into the program;
(B) Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program;
(C) Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity
theft; and
(D) Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to
the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft.
(c) Red flags rule definitions used in this program.
City. The City of La Feria, Texas.
Covered account. Under the rule, a covered account is:
(1) Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household
purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions; and
(2) Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk
to customers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft.
Creditors. The rule defines creditors “to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers,
utility companies, and telecommunications companies. Where nonprofit and government entities defer payment
for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered creditors.”
Identifying information. Defined under the rule as “any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,” including: name, address, telephone
number, Social Security number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification number, alien
registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique
electronic identification number, computer's internet protocol address, or routing code.
Program. The identity theft prevention program for the city.
Program administrator. The utility director is the program administrator for the program.
Utility. The utility department for the city.
Sec. 13.07.003 Identification of red flags
In order to identify relevant red flags, the utility considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the
methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous
experiences with identity theft. The utility identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed categories:
(1) Notifications and warnings from consumer credit reporting agencies.
(A) Report of fraud accompanying a consumer credit report;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/334
(B) Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or
applicant;
(C) Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant;
and
(D) Indication from a consumer credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's
usual pattern or activity, including but not limited to:
(i) Recent and significant increase in volume of inquiries;
(ii) Unusual number of recent credit applications;
(iii) A material change in use of credit; and
(iv) Accounts closed for cause or abuse.
(2) Suspicious documents.
(A) Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic;
(B) Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is
not consistent with the person presenting the document;
(C) Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer
information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears forged); and
(D) Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged.
(3) Suspicious personal identifying information.
(A) Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the
customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates, lack of correlation between Social
Security number range and date of birth);
(B) Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information
(for instance, Social Security number or an address not matching an address on a credit report);
(C) Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other
applications that were found to be fraudulent;
(D) Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an
invalid phone number or fictitious billing address);
(E) Social Security number presented that is the same as one given by another customer;
(F) An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person;
(G) A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application
when reminded to do so (however, by law Social Security numbers must not be required) or an
applicant cannot provide information requested beyond what could commonly be found in a
purse or wallet; and
(H) A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for
the customer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/334
(4) Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account.
(A) Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's
name;
(B) Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account;
(C) Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example: very high activity);
(D) Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable;
(E) Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the utility;
(F) Notice to the utility that an account has unauthorized activity;
(G) Breach in the utility's computer system security; and
(H) Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
(5) Alerts from others. Notice to the utility from a customer, identity theft victim, fraud detection
service, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for
a person engaged in identity theft.
Sec. 13.07.004 Detecting red flags
(a) New accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new
account, utility personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the
account:
(1) Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business
address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification;
(2) Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's license or other identification
card);
(3) Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity;
(4) Request additional documentation to establish identity; and
(5) Independently contact the customer or business.
(b) Existing accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an existing account, utility
personnel will take the following steps to monitor transactions with an account:
(1) Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via
facsimile, via email);
(2) Verify the validity of requests to close accounts or change billing addresses; and
(3) Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes.
Sec. 13.07.005 Preventing and mitigating identity theft
In the event utility personnel detect any identified red flags, such personnel shall take one or more of the
following steps, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag:
(1) Prevent and mitigate.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/334
(A) Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
(B) Contact the customer, sometimes through multiple methods;
(C) Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to accounts;
(D) Not open a new account;
(E) Close an existing account;
(F) Do not close the account, but monitor or contact authorities;
(G) Reopen an account with a new number;
(H) Notify the program administrator for determination of the appropriate step(s) to take;
(I) Notify law enforcement; or
(J) Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances.
(2) Protect customer identifying information. In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity
theft occurring with respect to utility accounts, the utility will take the following steps with respect to
its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information:
(A) Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure;
(B) Where and when allowed, ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents
and computer files containing customer information;
(C) Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after
a set period of time;
(D) Change passwords on office computers on a regular basis;
(E) Ensure all computers are backed up properly and any backup information is secured;
(F) Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
(G) Request only the last 4 digits of Social Security numbers (if any);
(H) Ensure computer virus protection is up-to-date; and
(I) Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility
purposes.
Sec. 13.07.006 Program updates
This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in risks to customers and the
soundness of the utility from identity theft. At least annually, the program administrator will consider the utility's
experiences with identity theft situation, changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection
and prevention methods, changes in types of accounts the utility maintains and changes in the utility's business
arrangements with other entities, consult with law enforcement authorities, and consult with other city personnel.
After considering these factors, the program administrator will determine whether changes to the program,
including the listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the program administrator will update the program
or present the city council with his or her recommended changes and the city council will make a determination
of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/334
Sec. 13.07.007 Program administration
(a) Oversight. Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with an identity
theft committee for the utility. The committee is headed by a program administrator who may be the head of the
utility or his or her appointee. Two or more other individuals appointed by the head of the utility or the program
administrator comprise the remainder of the committee membership. The program administrator will be
responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of utility staff on the program, for
reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating
identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances
and considering periodic changes to the program.
(b) Staff training and reports.
(1) Initially, all utility staff shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program
administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is
detected. Thereafter, all utility staff shall undergo update training not less than annually. Additionally,
all new utility employees shall undergo training.
(2) All utility staff shall submit reports monthly concerning the utility's compliance with the
program, the training that has been given and the effectiveness of the policies and procedures in
addressing the risk of identity theft, including recommendations for changes to the program. While
incidents of identity theft are to be reported immediately to the program administrator, the monthly
reports shall contain a recap of the incident and include the steps taken to assist with resolution of the
incident.
(c) Service provider arrangements. In the event the utility engages a service provider to perform an activity in
connection with one or more accounts, including but not limited to franchise utility providers, the utility will
take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable
policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft:
(1) Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers have such policies and
procedures in place; and
(2) Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers review the utility's program
and report any red flags to the program administrator.
(d) Specific program elements and confidentiality. For the effectiveness of identity theft prevention programs,
the red flag rule envisions a degree of confidentiality regarding the utility's specific practices relating to identity
theft detection, prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this program, knowledge of such specific practices
are to be limited to the identity theft committee and those employees who need to know them for purposes of
preventing identity theft. Because this program is to be adopted by a public body and thus publicly available, it
would be counterproductive to list these specific practices here. Therefore, only the program's general red flag
detection, implementation and prevention practices are listed in this article.
(Ordinance 2008-29 adopted 10/14/08)
ARTICLE 13.08 POLLUTION PREVENTION IN STORMWATER
Sec. 13.08.001 Purpose
It is the policy of the city and the intent of this article, to reduce pollution and contamination entering the city's
separate stormwater sewer system (MS4) to the greatest extent practicable. Discharges to the city's MS4 that
cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards or that fail to protect and maintain the aquatic life
use of the Arroyo Colorado are hereby prohibited. New sources or new discharges to the city's MS4 of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/334
oxygen-demanding substances, nutrients and sediments are not authorized by this article unless otherwise
allowable under NPDES, TPDES, and the Texas Administrative Code.
Sec. 13.08.002 Definitions
Best management practices. Activities, prohibitions, maintenance procedures, structural controls, local
ordinances, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants.
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as codified at 33 U.S.C. 1251–1376.
Common plan of development or sale. A construction activity that is completed in separate stages or phases or in
combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development or sale is identified by plats,
blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permit applications, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests,
or other similar documentation.
Construction activity (large). Construction activities that result in land disturbance of five or more acres of land.
Large construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than five acres of land area that is part of a
common plan of development or sale that will ultimately disturb five or more acres of land.
Construction activity (small). Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in
land disturbance of one or more but less than five acres of land. Small construction activity also includes the
disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if
the larger common plan will ultimately disturb one or more but less than five acres of land.
Construction site operator. The person or persons associated with a small or large construction project that is
either:
(1) The person or persons that have operational control over construction plans and specifications
including approval of revisions to the extent necessary to meet the requirements and conditions of
state and federal law, including TPDES or NPDES permits allowing stormwater discharge; or
(2) The person or persons that have day-to-day operational control of those activities at a
construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan
for the site.
Conveyance. Streets, curbs, gutters, manmade channels and ditches, drains, pipes, and other constructed features
designed or used for drainage or flood control or to otherwise transport stormwater runoff.
Discharge. The drainage, release, or disposal of pollutants in stormwater and certain nonstormwater from areas
where land disturbing activities, construction materials, equipment storage or maintenance, or other industrial
activities are located.
Final stabilization. Where the following conditions are met:
(1) All soil disturbing activities have been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover
with a density of 70% of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on
all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
(2) For individual lots in a residential construction site either:
(A) The homebuilder completes final stabilization as specified in subsection (1) above; or
(B) The homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization for an individual lot prior to the
time of transfer of the ownership of the home to the buyer and informs the homeowner of the
need for, and benefits of, final stabilization.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/334
(3) For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g. pipelines across crop or
range land), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its
preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural
activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to a surface water and areas which are not being
returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization conditions of
subsection (1) above.
Groundwater infiltration. Groundwater that enters the MS4 (including storm sewer service connections and
foundation drains) through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes.
Illicit connection. Any human-made conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to the MS4.
Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not entirely composed of stormwater, except discharges
allowed pursuant to state or federal law, including TPDES or NPDES permits allowing stormwater discharge or
a separate authorization.
Industrial activities. Manufacturing, processing, material storage and disposal areas, and similar areas where
stormwater can contact industrial pollutants related to the industrial activity at an industrial facility described by
the TPDES Multi-Sector General Permit, TXR050000, as it may be amended, or by another TPDES or NPDES
permit.
Land disturbance (or soil disturbance). Any activity which involves the physical movement or disturbance of
earth material by mechanized means. This includes excavating, filling, stockpiling, clearance of vegetation,
grading, compaction of soil, creation of borrow pits, or combination thereof. Land disturbance does not include
plowing, seeding, planting, cultivating, or harvesting on a farm, including lands that have been lying fallow as
part of a conventional rotational cycle. Land disturbance does not include routine maintenance performed to
maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity and purpose of a ditch, channel or other similar
stormwater conveyance. Land disturbance does not include routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt
overlays of existing roads, routine clearing of existing rights-of-way or other similar maintenance activities.
Maximum extent practicable. The technology-based discharge standard for MS4s to reduce pollutants in
stormwater discharges established by the Clean Water Act.
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The conveyance or system of conveyances including roads,
streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains that are owned or operated by the
city, the city irrigation district, Cameron County or the Texas Department of Transportation and that are
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; but which are not a combined sewer (sanitary sewer
and stormwater) and are not part of the city's sanitary sewer collection system.
MS4 operator. For the purpose of this article, the City of La Feria.
NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
Point source. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch,
channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
Pollutants of concern. Those pollutants identified as a cause of impairment of the Arroyo Colorado and
including biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and sediment or parameters that address sediment such as total
suspended solids, turbidity or siltation.
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching,
dumping, or disposing into groundwater, subsurface soils, surface soils, the MS4, the surface water of the state,
or the waters of the United States.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/334
Site development permit. A permit issued by the city for the alteration of the ground for the construction or
installation of utilities, streets, sidewalks, structures designed to control erosion and run-off and other grading
activities that are not a part of a project that requires a building permit.
Stormwater management program (SWMP). A comprehensive program to manage the quality of discharges into
and from the city's MS4.
Stormwater runoff. Rainfall runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Structural controls. A pollution prevention practice that requires the construction or use of a device to capture or
prevent pollution in stormwater runoff. Structural controls and practices may include but are not limited to: wet
ponds, bio-retention, infiltration basins, stormwater wetlands, silt fences, earthen dikes, drainage swales,
vegetative lined ditches, vegetative filter strips, sediment traps, check dams, subsurface drains, storm drain inlet
protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent
sediment basins.
Surface water in the state. Lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries,
wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico from the mean high water level out 10.36 miles into the
Gulf, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or
nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly
or partially inside or bordering the state or subject to the jurisdiction of the state; except that waters in treatment
systems which are authorized by state or federal law or permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste
treatment are not considered to be water in the state.
TPDES. Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
Waters of the United States.
(1) All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in
interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
(2) All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
(3) All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams),
mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds
that the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign
commerce including any such waters:
(A) Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other
purposes;
(B) From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign
commerce; or
(C) Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate
commerce;
(4) All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the U.S.;
(5) Tributaries of waters identified in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition;
(6) The territorial sea;
(7) Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in
subsections (1) through (6) of this definition; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/334
(8) Waste treatment systems, including manmade treatment ponds, lagoons or wetlands designed to
meet the requirements of CWA are not waters of the United States.
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Sec. 13.08.003 Pollution prevention and erosion control at construction sites
(a) General provisions. The intent of this section is to implement and enforce a program to reduce pollutants
in stormwater runoff from construction activities. To that end, all construction site operators, at a minimum,
must:
(1) As a precondition to receiving a building permit for a small construction site, prepare and
submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3).
(2) For projects that do not require a building permit, but will require excavation, fill or grading or
more than one acre of land, such as the construction or installation of utilities, new drainageways,
streets, or sidewalks, apply for a site development permit and prepare and submit a SWP3.
(3) Except, no SWP3 is required to perform emergency work needed to protect life or property.
(4) For construction sites that will disturb less than one acre of land, the following provisions
apply:
(A) No SWP3 need be prepared or submitted.
(B) Construction site operators are responsible for retaining all soil and sediment on site and
off of adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. This includes dust control and control of
vehicle tracking of dirt off site.
(C) Soil and sediment that leaves the construction site must be cleaned-up daily.
(D) Proper provision for solid waste, construction debris and sanitary waste must be made
and maintained.
(5) The operator of a construction site, required to have a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater
shall submit a copy of the notice of intent to the city at the same time the operator submits the
original notice of intent (NOI) to the TCEQ. The copy of the NOI may be delivered to the city either
in person or by mailing it to: Public Works Director, City of La Feria, 115 East Commercial Avenue,
La Feria, TX 78559-5002.
(b) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3).
(1) Prior to commencing any construction activity and prior to receiving a building or site
development permit from the city, construction site operators that are required by the NPDES or the
TPDES to obtain a permit to discharge stormwater must:
(A) Develop and submit for review and approval a SWP3 that covers the entire site;
(B) Post a signed copy of the notice (attached to Ordinance 2011-11) at the construction site
where it can be readily viewed;
(C) Ensure the project specifications allow or provide that adequate BMPs will be developed
and modified as necessary to meet the requirements of the SWP3; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/334
(D) Ensure all contractors and sub-contractors are aware of the requirements of the SWP3,
that on-site personnel are responsible for the day-to-day implementation of and adherence to the
SWP3, and who to contact concerning SWP3 compliance; and
(2) The SWP3 must:
(A) Be completed and initially implemented prior to commencing activities that result in land
disturbance;
(B) Provide for compliance with the terms and conditions of this article and the NPDES and
TPDES for stormwater;
(C) Be available at the construction site or readily available at the time of an on-site
inspection to TCEQ; the EPA, or city personnel;
(D) Be amended whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or
maintenance that may have a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants or that was not
previously addressed in the SWP3; or because inspections by the site operator, TCEQ, EPA or
city indicate the SWP3 is ineffective in eliminating or minimizing pollutants in discharges;
(E) Identify the person or persons responsible for implementation of the plan.
(c) Issuance of a building permit or site development permit. Before authorizing the issuance of a building
permit or a site development permit, the city will review the proposed site plan and SWP3, as well as
construction documents, for compliance with this article and the NPDES and TPDES for stormwater.
(d) City inspection of construction sites. City building inspection, code enforcement and public works staff
and the city engineer are hereby authorized to inspect construction sites for the purpose of ensuring compliance
and enforcement of control measures contained in the SWP3s and this article.
(e) Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plan. The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3)
required pursuant to this article, the Clean Water Act, NPDES, and TPDES must include the following
information.
(1) The SWPS must include a project description which includes the following:
(A) The nature of the construction activity, potential pollutants and sources;
(B) The intended schedule or sequence of major activities that will disturb soils;
(C) The number of acres of the entire construction site property and the total number of acres
of the site where construction activities will occur, including off-site material storage areas,
overburden and stockpiles of dirt, and borrow areas;
(D) The soil type and the quality of any existing discharge from the site;
(E) A map showing the general location of the site (e.g. a portion of a city or county map);
(F) A detailed site map indicating the following:
(i) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities;
(ii) Areas where soil disturbance will occur;
(iii) Areas which will not be disturbed;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/334
(iv) Locations of all major structural controls either planned or in place;
(v) Locations where stabilization practices are expected to be used;
(vi) Locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas;
(vii) Surface waters (including wetlands) either adjacent or in close proximity; and
(viii) Locations where stormwater discharges from the site directly to a surface water
body.
(G) The location and description of asphalt plants and concrete plants (if any) providing
support to the construction site and that are also authorized under the general permit TXR
150000, as it may be amended; and
(H) The name of receiving waters at or near the site that will be disturbed or that will receive
discharges from disturbed areas of the project.
(2) The following records must be either attached to or referenced in the SWP3 and made readily
available upon request to the city, TCEQ or the EPA:
(A) The dates when major grading activities occur;
(B) The dates when construction activities temporarily or permanently cease on a portion of
the site; and
(C) The dates when stabilization measures are initiated.
(3) The SWP3s must identify and describe the best management practices (BMPs) that will be
used, the general timing or sequence for implementation of such BMPs, and the party responsible for
implementation. At a minimum, the description must include erosion and sediment controls designed
to retain sediment on site to the maximum extent practicable with due consideration for local
topography and rainfall.
(A) Control measures must be selected, installed, and maintained according to the
manufacturer's or designer's specifications.
(B) Sediment must be removed from sediment traps and sedimentation ponds no later than
the time that design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(C) If sediment escapes the site, accumulations must be removed at a frequency to minimize
further negative effects and, whenever feasible, prior to the next rain event.
(D) Controls must be specified that limit off-site transport of litter, construction debris and
construction materials.
(4) The SWP3 must describe interim and permanent stabilization practices and a schedule of when
the stabilization practices will be implemented. Site plans should ensure that existing vegetation is
preserved where it is possible.
(A) Stabilization practices may include but are not limited to: establishment of temporary
vegetation, establishment of permanent vegetation, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization,
vegetative buffer strips, and protection of existing trees and vegetation.
(B) Stabilization measures must be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site
where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, and except as provided
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/334
in subsections (i) and (ii) below, must be initiated no more than fourteen (14) days after the
construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased.
(i) Where the initiation of stabilization measures is precluded by seasonably arid
conditions, drought, excessive rainfall, or other weather or climatic conditions,
stabilization measures must be initiated as soon as practicable.
(ii) Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased but earthdisturbing
activities will be resumed within twenty-one (21) days, temporary stabilization
measures do not have to be initiated on that portion of site.
(5) The SWP3 must include a description of any structural controls that will be used to divert flows
away from exposed soils, to limit the contact of runoff with disturbed areas, or to lessen the off-site
transport of eroded soils.
(A) Sediment basins are required, where feasible, for common drainage locations that serve
an area with ten or more acres that are disturbed at any one time. Sediment basins may be either
temporary or permanent, but must be designed to store either the calculated volume of runoff
from a 2-year, 24-hour storm, or designed to provide 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre
drained. When calculating the volume of runoff from a 2-year, 24-hour storm event, it is not
required to include the flows from off-site areas and flow from on-site areas that are either
undisturbed or have already undergone final stabilization, if these flows are diverted around
both the disturbed areas of the site and the sediment basin. In determining whether installing a
sediment basin is feasible, the permittee may consider factors such as site soils, slope, available
area on site, and public safety. Where sediment basins are not feasible, equivalent control
measures, which may include a series of smaller sediment basins, must be used. At a minimum,
silt fences, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent sediment controls are required for all down
slope boundaries and for those side slope boundaries as dictated by individual site conditions of
the construction area.
(B) Sediment traps and sediment basins may be used to control solids in stormwater runoff
for drainage locations serving less than ten (10) acres. At a minimum, silt fences, hay bales,
vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent sediment controls are required for all down slope
boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed appropriate as dictated by individual
site conditions) of the construction. Alternatively, a sediment basin providing storage for a
calculated volume of runoff from these areas for a 2-year, 24- hour storm or 3,600 cubic feet of
storage per acre drained may be provided.
(6) Other controls:
(A) The SWP3 must describe how off-site vehicle tracking of sediment and the generation of
dust will be minimized.
(B) The SWP3 must include a description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site and a description of controls to reduce pollutants from these materials.
(C) The SWP3 must include a description of pollutant sources from areas other than
construction (including stormwater discharges from dedicated asphalt plants and dedicated
concrete plants), and a description of controls and measures that will be implemented at those
sites to minimize pollutant discharges.
(7) The SWP3 must commit to ongoing maintenance to keep all erosion and sediment control and
other protective measures identified in the SWP3 in effective operating condition.
(8) Site inspections:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/334
(A) The construction site operator shall provide for regular inspections by persons familiar
with the SWP3 of the disturbed areas that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for
storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, all structural control measures, and
locations where vehicles enter or exit the site for evidence of effectiveness and necessary
maintenance. Inspections must occur at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within
twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater.
(B) As an alternative, the SWP3 may require that inspections will occur at least once every
seven calendar days; in which case additional inspections are not required following each
qualifying storm event. If this alternative schedule is developed, the inspection must occur on a
specifically defined day, regardless of whether or not there has been a rainfall event since the
previous inspection.
(C) The construction site operator must inspect all accessible discharge locations to
determine if erosion control measures are effective in preventing visually noticeable changes to
receiving waters, including persistent cloudy appearance in water color and noticeable
accumulation of sediments. Where discharge locations are inaccessible, nearby downstream
locations must be inspected to the extent that such inspections are practicable. The frequency
for these inspections must be established in the SWP3 with consideration for local rainfall and
soil, but must occur at least once during the construction activity if a discharge occurs.
(D) The SWP3 must be modified based on the results of inspections, as necessary, to better
control pollutants in runoff. Revisions to the SWP3 must be completed within seven calendar
days following the inspection. If existing BMPs are modified or if additional BMPs are
necessary, an implementation schedule must be described in an amendment to the SWP3 and
wherever possible those changes implemented before the next storm event. If implementation
before the next anticipated storm event is impracticable, these changes must be implemented as
soon as practicable.
(E) A report summarizing the scope of the inspection, names and qualifications of personnel
making the inspection, the dates of the inspection, and major observations relating to the
implementation of the SWP3 must be made and retained as part of the SWP3. Major
observations should include:
(i) The locations of discharges of sediment or other pollutants from the site;
(ii) Locations of BMPs that need to be maintained;
(iii) Locations of BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved inadequate for a
particular location;
(iv) Locations where additional BMPs are needed; and
(v) Identification and location of the BMPs that are working effectively.
(F) Actions taken as a result of inspections must be described within, and retained as an
amendment to the SWP3. Reports must identify any incidents of noncompliance. Where a
report does not identify any incidents of noncompliance, the report must contain a certification
that the facility or site is in compliance with the SWP3 and this permit.
(9) The SWP3 must identify and ensure the implementation of pollution prevention measures for
all eligible nonstormwater components of the discharge. This article prohibits, and all SWP3s will be
presumed to prohibit:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/334
(A) The discharge from a construction site of any water or other liquid having a pH value
lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.5;
(B) The discharge of any type of industrial waste from construction sites;
(C) The deposit of any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste other than at a facility licensed to
receive such debris;
(D) The discharge of paint or paintbrush cleaning water or solvents, thinners or turpentine or
any combination thereof;
(E) Unused construction materials or used construction materials or debris remaining on the
site after construction is completed. All on-site debris shall be properly disposed of in the
landfill within thirty (30) days from the occupancy of the structures; and
(F) The washing of any type of trucks, including, but not limited to, ready-mix trucks or
material supply trucks on or around the construction site.
(f) Effective date of coverage. Operators of construction activities eligible for coverage under TXR150000, as
it may be amended, are authorized to discharge stormwater associated with construction activity upon issuance
by the city of the building permit or site development permit.
(g) Retention of records. The construction site operator must retain a copy of the SWP3 and all reports and
actions required by this article and state and federal law, including NPDES, TPDES and general permit
No.150000, for a minimum period of three years from the date that final stabilization has been achieved on all
portions of the site.
Sec. 13.08.004 Illicit discharges
(a) Intent. The intent of this section is to prohibit, detect, and eliminate illicit discharges to the city's MS4.
(b) Allowable nonstormwater discharges. The following nonstormwater sources are not considered illicit
discharges to the MS4:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities (but excluding washing of trucks, run-off water from
training activities, test water from fire suppression systems, and similar activities);
(2) Uncontaminated fire hydrant flushings from systems that utilize potable water, surface water,
or groundwater that does not contain additional pollutants (but excluding discharges of
hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to
adversely affect aquatic life and excluding flushing where recycled wastewater is used);
(3) Water from the routine external washing of vehicles, the external portion of buildings or
structures, and pavement, where detergents and soaps are not used and where spills or leaks of toxic
or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless spilled materials have been removed; and if local
state, or federal regulations are applicable, the materials are removed according to those regulations),
and where the purpose is to remove mud, dirt, or dust;
(4) Uncontaminated water used to control dust;
(5) Potable water including waterline flushings (but excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated
water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect
aquatic life);
(6) Uncontaminated air-conditioning condensate;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/334
(7) Uncontaminated groundwater or spring water, including foundation or footing drains and water
from crawl space pumps where flows are not contaminated with industrial materials such as solvents;
(8) Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing
potable water, groundwater, or surface water sources;
(9) Diverted stream flows;
(10) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
(11) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(12) Individual residential vehicle washing;
(13) Flows from wetlands and riparian habitats;
(14) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and
(15) Street washwater.
(c) Prohibited discharges.
(1) No person shall deposit, release, throw, drain, cause or allow to be deposited, released, thrown,
drained or discharged, or otherwise cause to enter the MS4, or any other drainage device which
connects with the MS4, any of the following described materials or substances:
(A) Any acidic waste materials (having a pH value lower than 6);
(B) Any alkaline waste materials (having a pH value higher than 10.5);
(C) Any water or waste containing free-floating, or insoluble oil;
(D) Gasoline, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas;
(E) Any noxious, malodorous, poisonous, or reactive substance which, either singularly or by
interaction with other substances, or by its accumulation in the MS4 becomes injurious or
potentially injurious to human, plant or animal life, or property; or
(F) Any domestic wastewater or industrial wastewater.
(2) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that such person was authorized to
commit any act, under a valid permit from the TCEQ or the US EPA, which would otherwise
constitute a violation at the time of commission.
(3) No person shall place or drop or cause or allow to be placed or dropped, brush cuttings,
clippings, or rubbish within the MS4 or on any street in the city in such a manner that the same may
be washed by the flow of water into the MS4.
(4) No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic waste, or industrial
effluent to the MS4 or allow such a connection to continue.
(5) No person shall discharge or release, or allow or permit the discharge or release of any of the
following substances in a manner or location by which such substance may enter the city's MS4:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/334
(A) Any washwater or wastewater from the washing or cleaning of pavement, including but
not limited to parking lots, driveways or carports, that contains soap, detergent, solvent,
degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other cleaning substance other than water;
(B) Any washwater or wastewater from cleaning of any pavement where a spill, leak, or
other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless
all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed or pretreated;
(C) Any washwater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other
harmful cleaning substance;
(D) Gasoline, motor oil, used oil filters, wax, grease, antifreeze or any other motor vehicle
fluids;
(E) Any contaminated water or waste from a commercial carwash facility, from any vehicle
washing, cleaning, or maintenance area at any new or used automobile or other vehicle
dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, maintenance facility, or from any washing,
cleaning, or maintenance area of any commercial or public service vehicle, including any truck,
bus, or piece of heavy equipment, by any business or public entity;
(F) Any contaminated water or waste from commercial establishments including but not
limited to gas stations, service stations, and auto repair shops with areas exposed to weather
conditions;
(G) Material from an oil/water separator or an oil/water interceptor, grit trap or grease trap.
Any oil/water separator or interceptor users who are discharging to the MS4 shall notify the city
of the existence of such connections to the MS4 within sixty (60) days of the effective date of
this article. If such notification is not made during the allocated sixty (60) days, then the
detected connections to MS4 of a oil/water separator or interceptor shall be considered an illicit
connection and the city reserves the right to terminate such connection immediately, without
prior notice;
(H) Any release from a petroleum underground storage tank (PUST), or any leachate or
runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PUST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or
partially treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PUST unless release satisfies all
of the following criteria:
(i) Is in compliance with all municipal, state, and federal laws;
(ii) No discharge contains any harmful quantity of any pollutant; and
(iii) The discharge shall not have a pH value lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.5;
(I) Any public or private underground utility manhole, including but not limited to electric
power, gas pipeline, cable companies, telephone companies, the collected water, due to rain,
surface runoff, cross connection, or illegal discharge;
(J) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions
filter, or the blowdown from a boiler;
(K) Any type of wastewater from residential, commercial or industrial sources, any domestic
sewage or septic tank waste;
(L) Any runoff or wash down water from any animal pen, kennel, or fowl or livestock
containment area;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/334
(M) Any swimming pool water or filter backwash from a swimming pool or fountain,
discharge from a water line if it has been disinfected by super-chlorination or other means and
the total residual chlorine exists in any harmful quantity or any other chemical has been used in
line disinfection.
(6) No person shall apply used oil or other vehicle fluid to a road or land for dust suppression,
weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil contamination into the environment;
(7) No person shall introduce any type of hazardous waste generated in and around a household
including, but not limited to batteries, used paints, solvents, used pesticide, and used toiletries into
the MS4;
(8) No person shall use, dispose of, discard, store, or transport an insecticide, herbicide, or
fertilizer, in a manner inconsistent with the proper usage, storage, transport and disposal set out in the
labeling in accordance with the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), such
that a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer may enter the MS4.
(9) No person shall wash a commercial dumpster, or residual ready-mix concrete from concrete
mixing trucks, in an area where it discharges into MS4.
(d) Mandatory reporting and clean-up of any discharge or release.
(1) The person in charge of any facility, vehicle, or other source of any spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping, leaching, disposing, or any other release of any
of the following quantities of any of the following substances that may enter the MS4, surface water
of the state or waters of the U.S., shall immediately notify by telephone the police department
concerning the incident:
(A) An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any hazardous or extremely
hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR parts 302 and 355, respectively;
(B) An amount of oil that either: (i) violates applicable water quality standards; or (ii) causes
a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface of the water or an adjoining shoreline or
causes a sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an
adjoining shoreline; or
(C) Any harmful quantity of any pollutant.
(2) The immediate notification required shall include the following information:
(A) The identity or chemical name of the substance released, and whether the substance is an
extremely hazardous substance;
(B) The exact location of the release, including any known name of the waters involved or
threatened and any other environmental media affected;
(C) The time and duration (thus far) of the release;
(D) An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known) of the substance released;
(E) The source of the release;
(F) Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release and, where appropriate,
advice regarding medical attention that may be necessary for exposed individuals;
(G) Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/334
(H) Any steps that have been taken to contain and/or clean up the released material and
minimize its impacts; and
(I) The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be contacted for further
information.
(3) Within fifteen (15) days following such reportable release, the responsible person in charge of
the facility, vehicle, or other source of the release shall submit, unless waived by the city, a written
report containing the information specified above in subsection (2)(A) through (I) as well as the
following additional information:
(A) The ultimate duration, concentrations, and quantity of the release;
(B) All actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up the released substances, and all
precautions taken to minimize the impacts;
(C) Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated with the release;
(D) The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives responding to the release;
and
(E) The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible persons to prevent similar future
occurrences.
(4) The notifications required by subsections (2) and (3) shall not relieve the responsible person of
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the release,
including any liability for damage to the city, to natural resources, or to any other person or property;
nor shall such notification relieve the responsible person of any fine, penalty, or other liability which
may be imposed pursuant to city ordinance, or state or federal law.
(5) Any person responsible for any release as described in this subsection shall comply with all
state, federal, and local law requiring reporting, cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate
remedial action in response to the release.
(6) Any person responsible for a release described in this subsection shall reimburse the city for
any cost incurred by the city in responding to the release.
(e) Abatement of illicit conditions and assessment and collection of expenses. The city may abate illicit
discharges in the same manner and according to the same procedures provided for by section 6.02.003 of this
code and assess and collect any expenses incurred in the manner and procedure provided by section 6.02.004.
Sec. 13.08.005 Right of entry; inspection; and sampling
(a) City code enforcement, public works, building inspection staff and the city engineer are authorized to enter
and inspect sites and facilities subject to regulation under this article or discharging stormwater to the city's MS4
to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article and any state or federal discharge
permit, limitation, or requirement.
(b) Facility operators shall allow such city staff access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination, photo recording, and copying of records that must be kept under this
article, NPDES, TPDES or TXR 150000, as it may be amended, permit to discharge stormwater, including
pollution control measures or modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance
evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, or documents related to compliance with this article
and with any state or federal stormwater discharge permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/334
(c) City staff shall have the right to set-up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the staff to monitor and/or sample the facility's or the site's stormwater discharge.
(d) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility or site to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city staff and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(e) The city may require, at its reasonable discretion, any discharger to conduct specified sampling, testing,
analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of
any such required monitoring.
(f) The city may require, at its reasonable discretion, the discharger to install monitoring equipment at the
discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater
flow, wastewater and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(g) Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the city staff will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of implementing and
enforcing this article.
Sec. 13.08.006 Enforcement and penalties
(a) Penalty for violation.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation or business entity that violates any provision of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. A culpable mental state is
not required to prove an offense under this article.
(2) The penal provisions imposed by this article shall not preclude the city from filing a suit to
enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local,
state and federal law. The city may, at its discretion, report alleged noncompliance to the EPA, the
TCEQ, US Fish and Wildlife Service, Texas Parks and Wildlife, the US Army Corps of Engineers, or
any other state or federal agency.
(b) Violations.
(1) It is a violation of this article to engage in construction activity without complying with this
article.
(2) It is a violation of this article to discharge any substance, other than stormwater or those
discharges listed in section 13.08.004(b), to the city's MS4 in violation of any provision in this
article.
(3) The operator of a facility or site with a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial or construction activity commits an offense if the person denies city staff reasonable access
to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article. Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility or site is a violation of
this article.
(4) A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility or site that is discharging
stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity without having submitted a copy of the
notice of intent to do so to the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/334
(5) A facility shall be operated in strict compliance with the requirements of its TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity. A person commits an offense
if the person operates a facility or construction activity in violation of a requirement of the facility's
TPDES permit to discharge stormwater.
(6) The city may require any operator of a facility to modify the facility's or the site's SWP3 if in
the best professional judgment of the city staff, the SWP3 does not comply with the requirements of
the facility's or the site's TPDES permit to discharge stormwater.
(c) Notices of violations and stop-work orders.
(1) Notice of the deficiencies in a facility's or a site's SWP3 will be made in writing, and the city
will give the facility or construction site operator a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed thirty
(30) days, to make the necessary changes in the SWP3.
(2) Noncompliance flag and stop-work orders. If the city staff determines that activities are being
carried out in violation of this article, a notification of noncompliance shall be issued. In addition to
the notification, if the violation continues beyond five days, a “noncompliance flag” will be posted at
the site. Finally, if the violation continues after three days after the “noncompliance flag” is posted,
the city may stop all work until corrective measures have been completed. The site shall be posted
with a “stop-work order.” No other permits may be issued or inspections conducted by the city until
corrections have been made to the satisfaction of the city. To move or interfere with a
“noncompliance flag” or a stop-work order shall constitute a violation of this article.
(3) Any person alleged to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be required to correct
the problem upon written notification from the city. Such written notification may require that certain
conditions be adhered to in the correction of the problem. These may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(A) Use of specific pollution prevention measures and techniques;
(B) Use of pretreatment procedures;
(C) Modification of existing SWP3;
(D) Completion of work within a specified time period; and
(E) Submission of SWP3.
(d) Appeals. Any person denied permission to discharge to MS4 shall have the right to appeal such to the
board of adjustment or other board established by the city within forty-five (45) days of the date of such denial.
(Ordinance 2011-11 adopted 7/26/11)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/334
Sec. 14.01.001 Zoning fees and charges
(a) The schedule of fees adopted is as set forth in section A14.01.001 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this
code.
(b) The city manager, or his designated representative, shall provide the interested party with the appropriate
application for either the planning and zoning commission and city commission hearings or the zoning board of
adjustment hearing.
(c) The interested party shall then submit the appropriate application and any other requested materials,
together with the application fee, to the city.
(d) The fees submitted are nonrefundable, even if the request is denied.
(Ordinance 2001-15 adopted 8/23/01)
ARTICLE 14.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION†
Sec. 14.02.001 Creation and purpose
A planning and zoning commission is hereby created in order to accomplish the following purposes:
(1) To identify community need and to advise the city commission of their short-range and longrange
implications for the total development of the city;
(2) To recommend achievable community goals as a basis for a long-range planning and
development programs;
(3) To recommend plans, programs, and policies that will aid the entire community in achieving its
defined goals; and
(4) To interpret adopted plans and programs to concerned citizens so that private activities and
desires may be accomplished in harmony with public needs and policies.
(Ordinance 97-07, sec. 12.201, adopted 10/9/97)
Sec. 14.02.002 Membership and appointment
The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of seven (7) qualified electors of the city. The city
commission will consider for appointment to the commission only those persons who have demonstrated their
civic interest, general knowledge of the city, independent judgment, interest in planning and zoning, and
availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the city commission that members shall, by
reason of diversity of their individual occupations, constitute a commission which is broadly representative of
the community.
Sec. 14.02.003 Terms of office
The members of the commission shall be identified by place numbers one (1) through seven (7). The members
shall serve staggered terms, with all terms being three (3) years in length. No member shall serve more than
three (3) consecutive terms. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first commission meeting after
their appointment.
(Ordinance 2010-17 adopted 11/16/10)
Sec. 14.02.004 Organization
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/334
The commission members shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman during the first meeting held during a
calendar year. The commission shall also elect a secretary and other such officials as it deems necessary either
from its membership or from staff representatives assigned by the city manager to work with the commission.
The commission shall meet as needed, and records of the proceedings shall be kept by the secretary. (Ordinance
97-07, sec. 12.204, adopted 10/9/97)
Sec. 14.02.005 Duties and powers
The planning and zoning commission is hereby charged with the duty and invested with the authority to:
(1) Inspect property and premises at reasonable hours where required in the discharge of its
responsibilities under the laws of the state and of the city.
(2) Formulate and recommend to the city commission for its adoption a city plan for the orderly
growth and development of the city and its environs and from time to time recommend such changes
in the plan as it finds will facilitate the movement of people and goods, and the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(3) Formulate a zoning plan as may be deemed best to carry out the goals of the city plan; hold
public hearings and make recommendations to the city commission relating to the creation,
amendment, and implementation of zoning regulations and districts as provided in the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, authorizing cities and incorporated villages to pass regulations; all
powers granted under said act are specifically adopted and made a part hereof.
(4) Exercise all the powers of a commission as to approval or disapproval of plans, plats, or replats
and vacations of plans, plats or replats set out in the Texas Local Government Code.
(5) Study and recommend on the location, extension and planning of public rights-of-way, parks or
other public places, and on the vacating or closing of same.
(6) Study and recommend on the general design and location of public buildings, bridges, viaducts,
street fixtures and other appurtenances. Study and recommend on the design or alternation and on the
location of works of art which are, or may become, the property of the city.
(7) Initiate, in the name of the city, for consideration at public hearings all proposals: (A) for the
opening, vacating or closing of public rights-of-way, parks or other public places; (B) for the original
zoning of annexed areas; and (C) for the change of zoning district boundaries on an areawide basis.
No fee shall be required for the filing of any such proposal in the name of the city.
(8) Formulate and recommend to the city commission for its adoption policies and regulations
consistent with the adopted city plan governing the location and/or operation of utilities, public
facilities and services owned or under the control of the city.
(9) Keep itself informed with reference to the progress of city planning in the United States and
other countries and recommend improvements in the adopted plans of the city.
(10) Submit periodic progress reports to the city commission summarizing its activities, major
accomplishments for the past year, and proposed work program for the coming year. The report shall
contain the attendance record for all members and identity of the commission members.
(Ordinance 97-07, sec. 12.205, adopted 10/9/97)
Sec. 14.02.006 Meetings; quorum; compensation
A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four members of the commission. The members of the
commission shall attend meetings and public hearings of the commission and shall serve without compensation,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/334
except for the reimbursement of authorized expenses in the performance of their duties. (Ordinance 97-07, sec.
12.206, adopted 10/9/97)
Sec. 14.02.007 Procedure for actions
(a) A motion may be made by any member other than the presiding officer. The presiding officer shall not
vote except in the event of a tie.
(b) A motion to approve any matter before the commission or to recommend approval of any request requiring
commission action shall require a majority vote of the members present. When fewer than all the members are
present for the voting and when all motions to recommend on a given application fail to carry by a majority vote,
consideration of the application shall be continued to the next meeting upon motion carried by a majority of
those present. Provided further that no request or application shall be continued under this rule beyond the next
meeting; failure of the commission to secure majority vote to approve or recommend approval at said next
meeting shall be recorded in the minutes as a denial of the proposal under this rule.
(Ordinance 97-07, sec. 12.207, adopted 10/9/97)
Sec. 14.02.008 Disqualification from voting
(a) A member shall disqualify himself/herself from voting whenever he/she finds that he/she has a personal or
monetary interest in the property under appeal, or that he/she will be directly affected by the decision of the
commission.
(b) A member shall disqualify himself/herself from voting whenever any applicant, or his/her agent, has
sought to influence the vote of the member of his/her application, other than in the public hearing.
(Ordinance 97-07, sec. 12.208, adopted 10/9/97)
ARTICLE 14.03 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN*
Sec. 14.03.001 Adopted
The city comprehensive plan and all of its components including the following are hereby adopted:
(1) Mapping;
(2) Economic activities;
(3) Population;
(4) Housing;
(5) Land use;
(6) Streets;
(7) Thoroughfares;
(8) Recreation and open space;
(9) Water system;
(10) Wastewater system;
(11) Storm drainage;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/334
(12) Central business district;
(13) Revisions to the subdivision regulations; and
(14) Revisions to the zoning ordinance.
(Ordinance 2008-04 adopted 1/10/08)
ARTICLE 14.04 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED
The zoning ordinance governing the use of land within the city, Ordinance 2008-03, adopted by the city on
January 10, 2008, is included at the end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the zoning ordinance
and the technicalities involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only
nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and
subsections have been retained as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and
denoted by a history note following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the material
is unchanged from the original. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other
material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets. (Ordinance adopting Code)
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
This ordinance is prepared under the authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 211, to promote
health, safety, morals, and for the protection and preservation of places and areas of historical and cultural
importance and significance, and the general welfare of the community. These zoning regulations are made in
accordance with the spirit of the city comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote the general welfare of the community; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements. These regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of
the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
SECTION 2: ZONING ADMINISTRATION
A. ADMINISTRATION
The city manager is hereby designated by the city commission as the administrative official to supervise the
administration and enforcement of these regulations. The city manager may appoint an assistant to help him or
her with the general administration and enforcement duties required for this implementation of this zoning
ordinance.
If the city manager or his or her designated administrative official finds that any of the provisions of this
ordinance are being violated, the city manager or his or her designated administrative official shall notify, in
writing, the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it. The city manager or his or her designated administrative official shall order the
discontinuance of any illegal use of land, buildings or structures, the removal of any illegal buildings or
structures or of any illegal additions, alterations or structural changes, the discontinuance of any illegal work
being performed; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or to
prevent violation of these provisions.
B. INTERPRETATION AND APPEALS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/334
It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the
city manager or his or her designated representative, and that such questions shall be presented to the zoning
board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the city manager or other administrative official, and
that recourse from the decisions of the zoning board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law.
C. CITY COMMISSION DUTIES
It is further the intent of this ordinance that the duties of the city commission, in connection with this ordinance,
shall have the duty [sic] of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments to this ordinance or of
its repeal, and of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in subsection D here below.
D. FEES
The city commission shall, by ordinance or resolution, establish a schedule of fees and charges for the permits,
certificates of occupancy, zoning change requests, zoning board of adjustment appeals and other matters
pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees and charges may be altered or amended only by action of the
city commission. Until all applicable fees and charges have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
zoning application or appeal.
E. BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
(1) Building Permits Required
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, enclosed or structurally altered
without a permit therefor, where applicable, and issued by the City of La Feria. No building permit
shall be issued by the city except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, unless a written
order from the zoning board of adjustment for a variance, as provided by this ordinance, has been
granted.
(2) Certificate of Occupancy Required for New, Altered or Changes in Use or Nonconforming
Uses
(a) It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the uses or occupancy of any building or
premise [premises], or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or
wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued therefor by the City of La Feria stating that the proposed use of the principal
building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. Application for a certificate of
occupancy shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such
building.
(b) No nonconforming building or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or altered until
a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector. The certificate of
occupancy shall state specifically how the nonconforming use differs from the provisions of this
zoning ordinance. After the enactment of this ordinance, the owner or occupant of a
nonconforming use or building shall apply to the city for a certificate of occupancy. Upon
receipt of the application for a certificate of occupancy, each owner or occupant shall be
required to file an affidavit stating that such building or land occupied by the nonconforming
use was in lawful use or lawfully existed as of the date of adoption of this zoning ordinance.
Upon receipt of such application for a certificate of occupancy and the affidavit, the city shall
issue a certificate of occupancy for any lawful nonconforming use if the city is satisfied that
such nonconforming use or building was in existence at the time of adoption of this zoning
ordinance. Any person denied a certificate of occupancy shall have the right to appeal the
decision to the zoning board of adjustments.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/334
(c) No building permit for erection, alteration, moving or structural repair of any structure or
building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of occupancy, and
the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance upon
completion of the work.
(d) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the city for a period not exceeding
three (3) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion,
provided that said temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will
protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
(e) The City of La Feria shall maintain a public record of all certificates of occupancy.
(f) Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this ordinance and
punishable by fine.
(3) Construction and Use to be As Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits and Certificates of
Occupancy
Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the City of La Feria authorize only the use, arrangement, or construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications, and any other use, arrangement, or construction shall be
deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable by fine.
SECTION 3: ZONING DISTRICT MAP
A. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map, which together with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this zoning ordinance. This map shall
be kept on file in the office of the city manager and shall be available for public inspection during regular office
hours. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city manager,
and bearing the seal of the city under the following words:
“This is the official zoning map as adopted by part of Ordinance No. 92-7 on July 23, 1992 by the City
Commission of the City of La Feria, Texas.”
When changes are made in any zoning district boundaries, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning
map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city commission. No zoning change shall become
effective until after its approval by the city commission.
B. ZONING MAP REPLACEMENT
The city commission may, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning map should the original official zoning map
be damaged, destroyed, lost or become ambiguous because of the nature or number of changes and additions.
The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map or
any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall also be identified by the signature of the
mayor attested by the city manager, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words:
“This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted (date of
adoption of map being replaced) as a part of the zoning ordinance of the City of La Feria, Texas.”
C. RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the
following shall apply:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/334
(1) When the district boundaries are roads or streets, unless otherwise shown, and where the
designation of the district map indicates that the various districts are bounded by a road or street line,
the centerline of such road or street shall be construed to be the district boundary line;[.]
(2) Where the district boundaries indicated follow platted lot or tract lines, the district boundaries
shall be construed to follow such lot or tract lines.
(3) Where the district boundaries indicated appear to follow city limit boundaries, the district
boundaries shall be construed to follow the city limit boundaries.
(4) Where district boundaries [are] indicated as dividing a lot or tract, the district boundaries shall
be construed as being located as shown on the Zoning District Map. Distances not specifically
indicated on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(5) Where district boundaries are disputed or not otherwise clearly designated, or where the
physical or structural features are at variance with the official zoning map or in other circumstances
not covered in this section, the zoning board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.
SECTION 4: ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY
A. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of La Feria, Texas, is hereby divided into thirteen (13) zoning
districts as follows:
“AG” – Agricultural District
“R-1” – Single Family Residential District
“R-2” – Single Family Residential District
“R-3” – Single Family Residential District
“D” – Two Family (Duplex) Residential District
“MF” – Multi-Family District
“MH” – Mobile Home District
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/334
“LC” – Light Commercial
“C-1” – Restricted Commercial District
“C-2” – General Commercial District
“I” – Industrial District
“PD” – Planned Development District
“FP” – Floodplain District (overlay district)
B. NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY
(1) Annexed Territory to be Zoned R-1
All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be temporarily zoned as “R-1” District, until
permanent zoning is established by the city commission, except as provided in paragraph (3) below.
The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on newly annexed territory shall conform to the
procedure established by law for the adoption of the original zoning regulations.
(2) Regulations for Temporary R-1 Districts
In an area temporarily classified as R-1:
(a) No person shall erect, construct or add to any building or structure or cause same to be
done in any newly annexed territory without first applying for and obtaining a building permit
or certificate of occupancy from the city as required herein.
(b) No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued other than a
permit which will allow construction of a building permitted in R-1 District(s) unless and until
such territory has been permanently zoned.
(c) An application for a permit for any use other than that specified above shall be made to
the city commission for their consideration and recommendation. The city commission in
making its recommendation shall take into consideration the appropriate land use for the area
and the overall plans for the city. The city commission may, by majority vote, authorize the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/334
issuance of such building permit or certificate of occupancy or may disapprove the application
as their findings may indicate it is inappropriate in the public interest.
(3) Concurrent Rezoning and Annexation
Application(s) for permanent zoning of a newly annexed area may be considered by the city at the
same time as the area is being considered for annexation, although annexation procedures must be
completed prior to any final zoning actions by the city commission.
C. GENERAL COMPLIANCE WITH DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The regulations established by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class and kind of structure or land, and in accordance with the following:
(1) Conformity with District Required
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or
part thereof shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
(2) Height and Lot Coverage to Conform with District Regulations
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally
altered to exceed the height or to occupy a greater percentage of lot area in which it is located.
(3) Height and Area Exceptions
The regulations contained herein relating to the height of buildings or structures and the size of
yards and other open spaces shall be subject to the following exceptions:
(a) Chimneys, noncommercial television receiving antennas, and satellite dishes as part of a
residential development or use are hereby excepted from the height regulations as established
herein.
(b) Church steeples or spires, cooling towers, tanks, water towers, microwave radio and
television relay or broadcasting towers, mast or aerials and necessary mechanical appurtenances
are hereby excepted from the height regulations as established herein; provided, a specific use
permit or variance is granted.
(c) When a lot has an area less than the minimum number of square feet as required for the
district in which it is located, and was of record as such at the time of the passage of this zoning
ordinance, such lot may be continued to be occupied or used. However;[,] no building or
structure shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered unless a variance has
been granted.
(d) An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front or back yard
for a distance of not more than ten (10) feet, but shall not be interpreted to include or permit
fixed canopies.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
(4) Yards to Conform with District Regulations
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) below, no building or other structure shall have
narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than herein required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/334
or in any other manner be contrary to the provisions of these regulations unless existing at the
time of passage of this ordinance, in which case, they shall not be further reduced in size.
(b) When forty percent (40%) or more of the lots on one side of a block between intersecting
streets, were developed with a shallower front setback than is currently required in the zoning
district, new development, including alteration of existing structures, may adhere to the setback
established by the existing development.
(c) When forty percent (40%) or more of the lots on one side of a block between intersecting
streets, were developed with a deeper front setback than is now generally required for the
zoning district, new development, including alteration of existing structures, shall adhere to the
setbacks established by the existing development.
(Ordinance 2011-03, sec. 4, adopted 2/8/11)
(5) No Yard or Other Integral Component Required for Any Building Shall be Counted Twice
No part of a yard or other open space, off-street parking or loading space required about or in
connection with any building for the purpose of complying with these regulations shall be
included as a part of a yard, open space, off-street parking or loading space similarly required
for any other building.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
(6) Visibility at Intersections Required
On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to materially interfere with visibility across the corner. Clear visibility must be maintained
within the triangle created by measuring twenty feet (20') along the two intersecting property
lines, from the point where they intersect, and between two and one-half feet (2.5') and ten feet
(10') in height from the ground.
(Ordinance 2012-15, sec. I, adopted 11/6/12)
(7) Special Scenic Corridor Regulations
All property within one thousand (1,000) feet of Expressway 83, within three hundred feet (300')
of Business Highway 83 (East and West), and within one hundred and fifty (150') feet of Main Street
(North and South) shall adhere to special design guidelines and development standards in addition to
its standard or base zoning. These guidelines and standards regulate building design and placement,
landscaping, screening and buffering, signage, and lighting and are regulated through such standards
as adopted by an ordinance of the La Feria City Commission and which is on file in the office of the
city manager. See Scenic Corridor Ordinance # 92-10.
(8) Television Satellite Dishes
(a) One (1) television satellite dish per single family residential dwelling and one (1) per
apartment (multifamily) complex or mobile home park shall be permitted as an accessory use
incidental to the main use, under the following conditions:
(i) the dish shall not exceed ten and one-half feet (10-1/2') in diameter;
(ii) the dish shall not be erected in front of the main building or the front building line;
(iii) the overall height of the dish, at any position, shall not exceed twelve and one-half
feet (12-1/2');
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/334
(iv) the dish shall not be erected closer than five feet (5') from the rear property line or
side property line;
(v) a screening fence, wall or hedge shall be erected, grown and maintained around the
dish, wherever installed, unless a six foot (6) backyard fence or wall around the perimeter
of the backyard is already in place;
(vi) roof-top installations of dishes are prohibited; and
(vii) no lettering, logo or any form of advertising or other writing shall appear on the
face or back of such satellite dishes, except the name of the manufacturer, distributor or
seller of such dish, and provided the lettering does not exceed two inches (2") in height.
(b) One (1) television satellite dish per building in all nonresidential districts shall be
permitted as an accessory use incidental to the main use, under the following conditions:
(i) the dish shall not be erected in front of the main building or the front building line;
(ii) when the occupancy is adjacent to a residential district, the overall height of the
dish, at any position, shall not exceed more than ten feet (10') in height when located
closer than twenty-five feet (25') to a residential district; twenty feet (20') in height when
located closer than fifty feet (50'); thirty feet (30') in height when located closer than one
hundred feet (100'); forty feet (40') in height when located closer than one hundred fifty
feet [sic] hundred feet (100'); forty feet (40') in height when located closer than one
hundred fifty feet (150'); sixty feet (60') in height when located closer than two hundred
feet (200'); or seventy feet (70') in height when located closer than two hundred fifty feet
(250');
(iii) the dish shall not be erected closer than five feet (5') from the rear property line or
side property line; and
(iv) no lettering, logo or any form of advertising or other writing shall appear on the
face or back of such satellite dishes, except the name of the manufacturer, distributor or
seller of such dish, and provided the lettering does not exceed two inches (2") in height.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
(9) Fences and Walls
(a) General Standards.
(i) For purposes of this section, “residential districts” include R-1, R-2, D, R-3, MF and
MH.
(ii) Generally, fence posts and horizontal rails shall face into the lot or parcel being
fenced rather than towards the right-of-way or neighboring property. One exception to this
general rule is when a new fence is to be erected immediately adjacent to an existing
fence or wall in which case the support members of the proposed fence may face the
existing wall or fence. “Good neighbor fences,” that is, fences where the vertical elements
are alternated on either side of the horizontal elements, are encouraged.
(b) Materials.
(i) Fences and walls shall be constructed of durable materials such as weather-resistant,
painted, or stained and sealed wood; ornamental wrought iron or powder-coated
aluminum; cement fiberboard or vinyl; masonry (brick, stucco-finished concrete, split
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/334
face concrete masonry units, or stone, but not unfinished concrete block); or combinations
of these materials;[.]
(ii) Fences may not be constructed of scrap lumber, plywood, tree branches, tree trunks,
sheet metal, plastic or fiberglass sheets, or spikes, nails, or other comparable sharp points.
No barbed, razor or concertina wire shall be used on any fence in any residential zoning
district.
(iii) Front yard fences must be at least fifty percent (50%) transparent. However,
chainlink fences (also known as hurricane fences or cyclone fences) are not allowed in
front yards of the R-1 District.
(c) Height. Subject to the compliance with the height limit applicable within the vision
clearance triangle on corner lots, the maximum height of fences or walls [in] residential districts
shall be as follows.
(i) On lots that are less than one acre in size:
a. in front of the minimum front building setback line - five feet (5');
b. along the rear lot line in a residential district - six feet (6');
c. along the side lot line, behind the front set-back line - six feet (6'); and
d. along the side lot line, in front of the front set-back line - five feet (5').
(ii) On lots that are one acre or larger in size, fences and walls on side and rear lot lines
shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height. A fence or wall along the front property line
must maintain at least fifty percent 50% transparency.
(d) Subdivision plats.
(i) When creating more than nine lots in a subdivision, a plat note shall specify whether
or not fences are permitted in front yards and side yards that face streets.
(ii) In the event of a conflict between the standards and rules contained in this section
and one stated on a recorded plat, the stricter provision shall prevail.
(iii) When a residential subdivision plat creates lots with “reverse frontage,” a plan to
establish common fencing or a wall on the rear property line must be established as part of
the subdivision approval process. Fences on the reverse frontage must be set-back a
minimum of three feet (3') from the ROW and landscaping installed between the property
line and ROW. Access to maintain landscaping must be provided. If the rear yards face
front [of] an arterial or higher capacity roadway, the fence shall be finished with brick,
stone, or painted stucco.
(Ordinance 2012-15, sec. II, adopted 11/6/12)
D. SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED
The following table of district regulations is hereby adopted and shall be considered as part of each applicable
zoning district regulations as hereafter described in this ordinance:
AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/334
Lot area (sq. ft.) 1 Acre 9,000 6,000 5,000 6,000 (a) 3,000*
5,000**
3,000 3,000 3,000 N/A
Minimum lot
width (ft.) N/A 80 50 50 50 75
40*
50**
25 25 25 N/A
Minimum lot
depth (ft.)
N/A 100 90 90 100 120
75*
100**
120 120 120 N/A
Front yard
setback (ft.)
25 25 20 20 20 20 20 (c) (c) (c) (c)
Rear yard
setback (ft.)
25 25 25 20 20 15
15*
20**
(b) (b) (d) (d)
Side yard
setback (ft.),
Interior lot
25 7.5 5 5 7.5 7.5 5 (e) (e) (e) (e)
Side yard set
back (ft.),
Corner lot
15 15 15 15 15 15 7.5 15 15 15 15
Aggregates of
side yard
12 12 12 12 12 12 12 None None None None
Maximum
height in
(stories)
(ft.)
2.5
35
25
35
2.5
35
2.5
35
2.5
35
3
45
1.5
22.5
3
45
3
45
10
125
8
100
Maximum lot
coverage
40% 40% 40% 40% 40% 50% 50% N/A N/A N/A 50%
Minimum living
area, excludes
garage (sq. ft.)
1,000 1,500 1,200 1,000 1,000/unit (f) 450 N/A N/A N/A N/A
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/334
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08; Ordinance 2011-03, sec. 1, adopted 2/8/11)
* pertains to mobile home park.
** pertains to individually owned mobile home lots.
(a) The minimum lot area for multifamily dwellings shall be 2,000 square feet per apartment.
(b) For mobile home lots which are individually owned, the minimum lot area shall be three thousand seven
hundred and fifty (3,750) square feet when a public sewer system is available or twenty-one thousand seven
hundred eighty (21,780) square feet or one-half acre where no public sewer system is available and septic tanks
are used for sewage disposal.
For mobile home parks, the minimum lot area shall be at least three (3) times larger than the mobile home to be
placed thereon and in no event less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area when a public sewer system
serves the park. Where no public sewer system is available and septic tanks are used for sewage disposal, the
minimum lot area shall be twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet or one-half acre per
mobile home lot or space.
(c) No front yard or setback is required except where a lot adjoins a residential district or lot, in which
instance the front yard in the residential district shall be provided for a distance of not less than twenty-five (25)
feet from the boundary of said residential district.
(d) No rear yard setback required except that a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth shall be
provided upon that portion of a lot adjoining or abutting upon a residential district or lot.
(e) No side yard shall be required except that a side yard of not less than six (6) feet in width shall be provided
on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district.
(f) The minimum living area per unit shall be five hundred (500) square feet for an efficiency, six hundred
fifty (650) square feet for one (1) bedroom, eight hundred (800) square feet for two (2) bedrooms, and nine
hundred (900) square feet for three (3) bedrooms. However, the average living area for all apartments in an
apartment building must be a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet.
SECTION 5: “AG” AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “AG” District is established to be used primarily in areas where agricultural uses or open space should be
retained. These lands should be continued to be used for agricultural purposes until needed for urban purposes in
conformity with the orderly growth of the city.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “AG” District include those in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 17 [18] hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/334
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any single family residential district when adjacent to any
mobile home district, multifamily or nonresidential use or district. Such fence, wall or hedge shall not
be less than six feet (6) in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height. However, no fence, wall or
hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility at
intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations.
(2) Additionally, any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court or swimming pool, when
adjacent to any nonresidential use or district, shall be suitably screened from view with a fence, wall
or hedge of at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height.
(3) No fence or wall shall be erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way because
it would interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utility line, service, thoroughfare
or drainageway.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 22 hereof.
Such off-street parking shall be enclosed by a garage or covered by a carport.
SECTION 6: “R-1” SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “R-1” District is established to allow for larger lots with larger single family dwelling structures per lot.
This district is intended to provide a more rural and estate setting.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “R-1” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18
hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any single family residential district when adjacent to any
mobile home district, multifamily or nonresidential use or district. Such fence, wall or hedge shall not
be less than six feet (6') in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height. However, no fence, wall or
hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility at
intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations.
(2) Additionally, any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court or swimming pool, when
adjacent to any nonresidential use or district, shall be suitably screened from view with a fence, wall
or hedge of at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height.
(3) No fence or wall shall be erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way because
it would interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utility line, service, thoroughfare
or drainageway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/334
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with Section 22 hereof (two off-street, paved parking
spaces per single-family residence).
Such off-street parking shall be enclosed by a garage or covered by a carport.
The twenty-five foot (25') minimum building setback from the rear lot line rear generally applicable in the R-1
district shall not apply to carports or garages accessed from a rear alley. The minimum rear building setback for
a side-loading garage or carport accessed from a rear alley shall be seven-and-a-half feet (7.5'). The minimum
rear setback for a rear-loading garage or carport accessed from a rear alley shall be twenty feet (20'), unless two,
additional off-street, paved parking spaces are provided elsewhere on the property, in which case the rear setback
may be 7.5'.
(Ordinance 2012-13, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/12)
SECTION 7: “R-2” SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
This district is one of the preferred single family housing districts for the city. Unless otherwise specified or
requested, all residentially suited areas presently undeveloped should be zoned in this classification.
Development in the “R-2” District is limited primarily to single family dwellings and certain community and
recreational facilities to serve residents of the district.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “R-2” District include those listed in “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18 hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any single family residential district when adjacent to any
mobile home district, multifamily or nonresidential use or district. Such fence, wall or hedge shall not
be less than six feet (6') in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height. However, no fence, wall or
hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility at
intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations.
(2) Additionally, any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court or swimming pool, when
adjacent to any nonresidential use or district, shall be suitably screened from view with a fence, wall
or hedge of at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height.
(3) No fence or wall shall be erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way because
it would interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utility line, service, thoroughfare
or drainageway.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/334
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with Section 22 hereof (two off-street, paved parking
spaces per single-family residence). At least one of the two off-street parking spaces shall be covered by a
carport or enclosed by a garage.
The twenty-five foot (25') minimum building setback from the rear lot line generally applicable in the R-2
district shall not apply to carports or garages accessed from a rear alley. The minimum rear setback for such
garage or carport shall be six feet (6.0'), if side-loaded and twenty feet (20') if rear-loaded.
(Ordinance 2012-13, sec. 2, adopted 10/9/12)
SECTION 8: “R-3” SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
This district is one of the predominate [predominant] single family housing districts that now exists in the city.
This district allows for smaller and more affordable housing for residents. Development in the “R-3” District is
limited primarily to single family dwellings and certain community and recreational facilities to serve residents
of the district.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “R-3” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18
hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any single family residential district when adjacent to any
mobile home district, multifamily or nonresidential use or district. Such fence, wall or hedge shall not
be less than six feet (6') in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height. However, no fence, wall or
hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility at
intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations.
(2) Additionally, any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court or swimming pool, when
adjacent to any nonresidential use or district, shall be suitably screened from view with a fence, wall
or hedge of at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height.
(3) No fence or wall shall be erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way because
it would interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utility line, service, thoroughfare
or drainageway.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 22 hereof
(two off-street, paved parking spaces per single-family residence). At least one of the two off-street parking
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/334
spaces shall be covered by a carport or enclosed by a garage.
The minimum building setback of twenty feet (20') from the rear lot line generally applicable in the R-3 District
shall not apply to side-loaded carports or garages accessed from a rear alley. The rear setback for such garage or
carport shall be six feet (6.0').
(Ordinance 2012-13, sec. 3, adopted 10/9/12)
SECTION 9: “D” TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “D” District is established in order to allow more affordable housing for both rental and ownership. The “D”
District is established to meet the needs for medium density residential development where such areas are
suitable for higher development than traditional areas of single family dwellings.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “D” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18 hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any two-family residential district when adjacent to any singlefamily
residential, mobile home, multifamily or nonresidential use or district. Such fence, wall or
hedge shall not be less than six feet (6') in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height. However,
no fence, wall or hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing
visibility at intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations[.]
(2) Additionally, any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court or swimming pool, when
adjacent to any nonresidential use or district, shall be suitably screened from view with a screening
fence, wall or hedge of at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height.
(3) No fence or wall shall be erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way because
it would interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utility line, service, thoroughfare
or drainageway.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with Section 22 hereof (two off-street, paved parking
spaces per dwelling unit). At least one of the two off-street parking spaces shall be covered by a carport or
enclosed by a garage.
The minimum building setback of twenty feet (20') from the rear lot line shall not apply to side-loaded carports
or garages that are accessed from a rear alley. The rear setback for such garage or carport shall be six feet (6.0').
(Ordinance 2012-13, sec. 4, adopted 10/9/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/334
SECTION 10: “MF” MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “MF” District is established to meet the needs for medium to high density residential development where
such areas are suitable for higher impact development and higher volume traffic while encouraging the provision
of conveniently located rental accommodations.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses shall [sic] permitted in the “MF” District [include those listed] in the “Schedule of Uses” found in
Section 18 hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any multifamily residential district when adjacent to any single
family, two-family or nonresidential use or district. Such fence, wall or hedge shall not be less than
six feet (6') in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height. However, no fence, wall or hedge on a
corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility at intersections as
prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations.
(2) Additionally, any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court or swimming pool, when
adjacent to any nonresidential use or district, shall be suitably screened from view with a fence, wall
or hedge of at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height.
(3) No fence or wall shall be erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way because
it would interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utility line, service, thoroughfare
or drainageway.
(4) Garbage, refuse, and trash collection/storage areas in any multifamily residential district and
any condominium or townhouse project shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a dense
screening element to adequately screen such area from view of the surrounding area.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 22 hereof. No
covered parking is specifically required, however, carports are encouraged.
F. MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR CARPORTS AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
Carports or other detached accessory buildings shall be located within the rear portion of the lot and shall not
exceed one (1) story in height nor shall any such structure be located closer than fifteen feet (15') to the main
building nor closer than seven and one-half feet (7-1/2') to a side lot line, nor closer than ten feet (10') to any rear
lot line nor closer than fifteen feet (15') to any side street in the case of a corner lot.
SECTION 11: “MH” MOBILE HOME DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/334
The “MH” District is intended to provide for quality mobile home park subdivision development and trailer park
development containing many of the characteristics and atmosphere of a conventional type single family
residential subdivision.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “MH” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18
hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE AND PARKING REQUIREMENTS
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings and parking
requirements, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District
Regulations” found in Section 4-D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any mobile home residential district when adjacent to any single
family, two-family, multifamily or nonresidential use or district. Such fence, wall or hedge shall not
be less than six feet (6') in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height. However, no fence, wall or
hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility at
intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations.
(2) Additionally, any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court or swimming pool, when
adjacent to any nonresidential use or district, shall be suitably screened from view with a fence, wall
or hedge of at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height.
(3) No fence or wall shall be erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way because
it would interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utility line, service, thoroughfare
or drainageway.
(4) Garbage, refuse, and trash collection/storage areas in any mobile home park district shall be
enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a dense screening element to adequately screen such area from
view of the surrounding area.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 22 hereof. No
covered parking is specifically required, however, carports and garages are encouraged.
SECTION 12: “LC” LIGHT COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “LC” District is created to accommodate office uses, office sales uses and certain personal services of a
nature that will not have a blighting effect on adjacent residential areas, be suited for shallow depth lots along
major streets and not create excessive amounts of traffic. This district is designed for a limited area of the city to
protect and encourage a transitional character by permitting a limited group of uses[.]
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “LC” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18
hereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/334
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any commercial use or district when adjacent to any residentially
zoned property to a height of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') above ground
level. However, no fence, wall or hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the
regulations governing visibility at intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations.
Also, no fence or wall shall be erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way.
(2) All storage within one hundred feet (100') of a residential use or district, except for motor
vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened
with a fence, wall or hedge not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height, provided
no storage located within fifty feet (50') of such screening shall exceed the height of such screening.
(3) When the rear or side property line of a commercial use or district abuts a residential district or
use, or when the refuse and trash collection/storage areas are visible from a public thoroughfare, then
the garbage, refuse and trash collection/storage areas shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides, by a
dense screening element to adequately screen such area from view of the surrounding area.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found Section 22 hereof. No
covered parking is specifically required.
F. ALL COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS TO BE ENCLOSED; EXCEPTIONS
All commercial uses, except for off-street parking and off-street loading facilities[,] shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise indicated in this section. The city commission may grant a
permit to businesses for sidewalk sales for a period up to thirty (30) days.
SECTION 13: “C-1” RESTRICTED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “C-1” District has been established because it is recognized that the downtown business area was generally
developed without setback and without off-street parking. Therefore, this district is provided to accommodate
this existing development and to encourage compatible future development. This district is designed for a
limited area of the city, being the central business district area. This district will accommodate the basic
shopping needs of residents and to provide retail and office space for merchants and financial, administrative,
government and business services. Businesses in this district should be oriented to satisfying the daily and
frequent shopping needs or personal services of the citizens.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “C-1” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18
hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/334
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any commercial use or district when adjacent to any residentially
zoned property to a height of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') above ground
level. When a parking lot or facility is adjacent to any residential use or boundary, then a fence, wall
or hedge will be required along the common boundary in order to provide suitable screening. Such
fence, wall or hedge must be at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height. However, no fence,
wall or hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility
at intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations. Also, no fence or wall shall be
erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way.
(2) All storage within one hundred feet (100') of a residential use or district, except for motor
vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened
with a fence, wall or hedge not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height, provided
no storage located within fifty feet (50') of such screening shall exceed the height of such screening.
(3) When the rear or side property line of a commercial use or district abuts a residential district or
use, or when the refuse and trash collection/storage areas are visible from a public thoroughfare, then
the garbage, refuse and trash collection/storage areas shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides, by a
dense screening element to adequately screen such area from view of the surrounding area.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 22 hereof. No
covered parking is specifically required.
F. ALL COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS TO BE ENCLOSED; EXCEPTIONS
All commercial uses, except for off-street parking and off-street loading facilities[,] shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise indicated in this section. The city commission may grant a
permit to businesses for sidewalk sales for a period up to thirty (30) days.
SECTION 14: “C-2” GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “C-2” District is established to accommodate those uses that are of city-wide and regional significance.
Within this district are permitted retail, service and office uses characteristic of retailing and wholesaling
markets. This district is intended to accommodate commercial activities that cannot generally be accommodated
in the “C-1” District.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “C-2” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18
hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/334
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of any commercial use or district when adjacent to any residentially
zoned property to a height of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') above ground
level. When a parking lot or facility is adjacent to any residential use or boundary, then a fence, wall
or hedge will be required along the common boundary in order to provide suitable screening. Such
fence, wall or hedge must be at least three and one-half feet (3-1/2') in height. However, no fence,
wall or hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility
at intersections as prescribed in Section 4-C(6) of these regulations. Also, no fence or wall shall be
erected or placed in any dedicated easement or right-of-way.
(2) All storage within one hundred feet (100') of a residential use or district, except for motor
vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened
with a fence, wall or hedge not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height, provided
no storage located within fifty feet (50') of such screening shall exceed the height of such screening.
(3) When the rear or side property line of a commercial use or district abuts a residential district or
use, or when the refuse and trash collection/storage areas are visible from a public thoroughfare, then
the garbage, refuse and trash collection/storage areas shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides, by a
dense screening element to adequately screen such area from view of the surrounding area.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 22 hereof. No
covered parking is specifically required.
SECTION 15: “I” INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “I” District is established to accommodate most industrial and manufacturing uses, provided such use is not
noxious or offensive by reason of emission of odors, soot, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “I” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 18 hereof.
C. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 4-D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
D. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a solid fence, wall or hedge must be erected, placed, grown and
maintained along a boundary line of an industrial district when adjacent to any residentially zoned
property to a height of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') above ground level.
(2) All storage within one hundred feet (100') of a residential use or district, except for motor
vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/334
with a fence, wall or hedge not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height, provided
no storage located within fifty feet (50') of such screening shall exceed the height of such screening.
(3) When the rear or side property line of a [an] industrial manufacturing use or district abuts a
residential district or use or when the refuse and trash collection/storage areas are visible from a
public thoroughfare, then the garbage, refuse and trash collection/storage areas shall be enclosed on
at least three (3) sides by a dense screening element to adequately screen such area from view of the
surrounding area.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
The minimum off-street parking requirements for manufacturing and industrial uses shall be one (1) space for
each two (2) employees or one (1) space for each one thousand square feet of gross floor area of all buildings
used for the such manufacturing or industrial purposes, whichever is greater. Such off-street parking shall also be
in accordance with Section 22 hereof.
SECTION 16: “PD” PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE AND SCOPE
The “PD” District is established to provide a greater flexibility in development planning and the opportunity of
the application of modern planning concepts than is permitted under conventional regulations. “PD” Districts
may combine a variety of land uses and/or housing types. Mixed uses may include any combination of
residential, commercial or industrial uses as long as the uses are compatible with each other and with potential
and existing uses surrounding the district. “PD” Districts may be established on parcels of land which are
suitable for and of sufficient size to be planned and developed in a manner consistent with the purposes and
objectives of this zoning ordinance.
In addition, property may be classified under the “PD” District in combination with any other zoning district (or
base district) and so designated by the letters “PD” affixed to the code letters of that base district.
B. PERMITTED USES
The following uses may be permitted in a designated “PD” District:
(1) Residential Uses, including Detached, Attached or Semi-attached Single Family Units, Row
Houses, Townhouses, Condominiums, and Patio Homes, in addition to Duplexes and Multifamily
Dwellings–No mobile homes or mobile home parks, recreational vehicles or recreational vehicle
parks shall be allowed;
(2) Business Park;
(3) Office and Shopping Center;
(4) Hotel and Motel;
(5) Medical Clinic and Hospital;
(6) Industrial Park;
(7) Library, Museum and Gallery;
(8) Community, Recreation, and Civic Center;
(9) Park, Playground and Golf Course;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/334
(10) Church and School;
(11) College and University;
(12) Police and Fire Station;
(13) Municipal and Governmental Building;
(14) Water Pumping Station, Water Reservoir, Water Tower[,] Artesian Well, Sewage Lift Station
and Septic Tank;
(15) Telephone Exchange; and
(16) Radio and Television Transmitter and Satellite Dish.
Whenever a property is classified as a “PD” District in combination with any other zoning district, the permitted
uses shall primarily be those allowed under the base district. In no event shall more than thirty percent (30%) of
the land area of this district be utilized as any other use than that permitted in such base district unless otherwise
agreed to by a concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the city commission, and only after public
hearings and proper notices to all parties affected.
C. APPLICATION FOR “PD” DISTRICT
Application for a “PD” District shall be made in the same manner as an application for any amendment to this
zoning ordinance and shall include the following additional information:
(1) Proposed Uses
An application for a “PD” District shall specify and describe the category or type of use or the
combination of uses proposed. Permitted uses under “PD” zoning shall be specified in each “PD”
District ordinance. If such ordinance specifies permitted uses by references to a conventional zoning
district, the permitted uses shall mean those uses permitted in the referenced district.
(2) Development Requirements
An application for a “PD” District shall include a list of proposed development standards, which
may be incorporated into the “PD” District ordinance. Development standards shall include, but not
be limited to: density; lot size; setbacks; building sizes; height and exterior requirements; lot
coverage; parking ratios; screening; landscaping; and any other requirements the city commission
may deem appropriate.
Whenever a property is classified as a “PD” District in combination with any other zoning district,
the standards set forth in the specific zoning district will be used as a guideline for planned
development. Modifications of standards may be considered if the modification substantially meets
the intent of this ordinance and improves the overall development design or if a unique project design
is proposed which cannot readily be accommodated through other zoning districts, provided, that
pecuniary reasons shall not be the sole reason for modifying standards.
(3) Concept Plan
An application for a “PD” District shall include a concept plan showing a preliminary layout of
proposed uses, access, buildings, parking, open space and the relationship to existing natural features
and adjacent properties and uses.
Upon submission of the application for a “PD” District and after proper notice has been given to
all affected parties and public hearings are had, the planning and zoning commission and the city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/334
commission shall review the application and may either give approval, with or without modifications,
or reject it. In approving the “PD” District, the city commission may impose conditions relative to the
standard of development and such conditions shall be complied with before a Certificate of
Occupancy is issued for the use of land or any structure which is part of the “PD” District, and such
conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning amendment,
but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a Certificate of Occupancy.
D. DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN
(1) Approval Required
In establishing a “PD” District in accordance with this section, a comprehensive site plan of the
development is required. Such site plan shall be approved and filed as part of the “PD” ordinance
prior to the issuance of any building permit in the “PD” District. The approval of the development
site plan may also serve as preliminary plat approval, provided that all requirements of the
subdivision ordinance and its subsequent amendments are satisfied. Five (5) copies of the site plan
will be required to be submitted to the city prior to the issuance of any building permit.
Upon approval of a development site plan and approval of the preliminary plat, application may
be made for the permits and certificates necessary for construction. Subsequent to such approval,
minor changes may be authorized when such changes will not cause any of the following
circumstances to occur:
(a) a change in the character of the development;
(b) an increase in the ratio of the gross floor area in structures to the area of any lot;
(c) an increase in the intensity of use;
(d) a reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings;
(e) an increase in the problems of circulation, safety and utilities;
(f) an increase in the external effects on adjacent property;
(g) an increase in ground coverage by structures;
(h) reduction in the ratio of off-street parking and loading space; or
(i) a change in the locations, lightings or orientation of approved signs.
(2) Compliance with Approvals of Site Plan
The development site plan must comply with all provisions of the “PD” ordinance specifying
development standards and substantially reflect the precepts and layout set forth in the concept plan.
If, in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission or the city commission, a development
site plan does not comply with the provisions of the “PD” ordinance and the concept plan
incorporated therein, the planning and zoning commission or the city commission may reject such
plan, in which case a new site plan may be submitted or application must be made to amend the “PD”
ordinance, including all requirements for notices and public hearings. If a “PD” ordinance does not
specify development standards or has not incorporated a concept plan, the development site plan
approval must specify such standards. Development requirements on such site plan may be revised
under the same review, notice and approval procedures as applied to the original approval of the site
plan and application to amend the “PD” ordinance shall not be required.
(3) Site Plan Information
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/334
Every application for approval of a site plan under the terms of this district shall contain sufficient
information delineating the characteristics of the site, changes in those characteristics as may be
proposed by the development, how the development will relate to public services and facilities, and
what protection features are included to insure that the development will be compatible with existing
and allowable development on adjacent property. The site plan shall show at least the following items
of information:
(a) Site/Adjacent Property Information: The land area included within the site; the land area
of all abutting sites and zoning classification; all public and private rights-of-way and
easements bounding and intersecting the site and the abutting sites which are proposed to be
continued, created, relocated and/or abandoned; and the north arrow, date and scale;
(b) Building Layout: The location of each existing and each proposed structures on the site;
the general category of use or uses to be contained therein; the number of stories, gross floor
area and the location of entrances and exits to buildings; front, side and rear building setback
lines; and elevation views or renderings indicating architectural design and building materials
proposed;
A table showing the type of units by size, number of bedrooms and number and type for all
residential dwellings, including floor plans, will also be required;
(c) Circulation and Parking: The location, dimensions and proposed construction of all
streets, private drives, alleys, parking areas and drive approaches, as well as their alignment
with existing thoroughfares; location and dimensions of sidewalks, off-street parking areas, fire
lanes and loading zones;
(d) Drainage and Utilities: Existing and proposed finished grade of the site, shown to contour
intervals not exceeding two (2) feet, proposed handling of on-site surface drainage, location of
any floodway or floodprone area as shown on current FIA mapping; existing and proposed
water and sanitary sewer layout; and existing and proposed fire hydrants; and
(e) Screening, Landscaping and Recreational Facilities: The location, height and building
materials for any proposed or required walls or fences; height, location and type of any
proposed berms or living screens; proposed landscaping plan; location and size of any proposed
recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts and playgrounds.
SECTION 17: “FP” FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
To provide for the appropriate use of land which has a history of inundation or is determined to be subject to
flood hazard and to promote the general welfare and to provide protection from flooding, the “FP” District is
hereby established. This district may also be coextensive with or overlay any or all of the other zoning districts
or portions thereof as provided for herein.
Where a tract of land or portion thereof is zoned for the uses of one of the other zoning districts and is also
zoned “FP” District, the restrictions contained in the “FP” District shall take precedence over the other zoning
districts and shall be the controlling regulations for that district or portion of that district.
B. PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall only be permitted in the “FP” District:
(1) Agricultural Activities, including the ordinary cultivation or grazing of land and legal and
permitted types of animal husbandry;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/334
(2) Park, Playground or Golf Course;
(3) Parking Facilities; and
(4) Railroad Right-of-Way and Tracks, but not including railroad yards or shops, freight or service
buildings.
C. SPECIFIC USES WHICH MAY BE PERMITTED
The following uses may be allowed in an “FP” District only if expressly authorized by the city commission and
subject to the provisions of Section 18:
(1) Sanitary Landfill;
(2) Excavation and Mining Operation;
(3) Salvage and Wrecking Yard;
(4) Stadium and Sports Arena;
(5) Theater, drive in;
(6) Shooting Range;
(7) Storage Facility and Warehouse;
(8) Rodeo Arena;
(9) Stable for Horses and Livestock;
(10) Car Wash;
(11) Granary or Gin; and
(12) Public Utilities, including Water Treatment Plant, Water Pump Station, Water Reservoir,
Water Tower, Artesian Well, Sewage Treatment Plant, Sewage Lift Station, Electrical Substation, Gas
Odorizing Station and Gate Station;
(13) Radio and Television Transmitter and Satellite Dish.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” and any other applicable
regulations as herein provided.
E. GENERAL REGULATIONS
(1) No building or structure shall be erected in that portion of any district designated “FP” District
until such building or structure has been approved by the city commission after recommendation by
the city engineer, who will ascertain that such building or structure is probably not subject to damage
by flooding and would not constitute an encroachment hazard or obstacle to the movement of
floodwaters and that such construction probably would not endanger the value and safety of other
property or the public health and welfare, in his opinion. The level of the first floor of buildings or
structures in floodplain areas shall be a minimum of at least eighteen inches (18") above the highest
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/334
flood elevation shown in the most recent Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) flood insurance
study for the area on which such building or structure is erected.
Owners of buildings in floodprone areas are encouraged to participate in the flood insurance
program made available by insurance companies with the support of the FIA of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
(2) An area may be removed from the “FP” District designation when[,] by the provision of
drainage works, grading, flood protection or specific drainage study, it is determined by the city
engineer that the flood hazard has, in most probability, been alleviated. Removal of the “FP” District
designation shall be accomplished by resolution of the city commission after written notification
from the city engineer advising of the removal of the flood hazard and after proper public hearing and
notice has been complied with. It shall be the responsibility of any person or organization applying
for the alteration of “FP” District to provide the necessary studies and data on which a decision may
be made concerning such change request.
(3) No septic tank system or electric or telephone utilities, with the exception of sanitary sewers,
may be located underground in a floodplain designated area unless installed by the guidelines set
forth by the Federal Insurance Administration.
F. CITY NOT LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
(1) The fact that land is, or is not, within a district having a floodplain designation, shall not be
interpreted as assurance that such land or area is, or is not, subject to periodic flooding. The city shall
not be held responsible for failure to designate any lands as floodprone areas and shall not be
responsible for any such damages caused by any such failure or action.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure in a
floodplain designated area unless and until deed restrictions are executed in favor of the city reciting
that the owner and his successors will indemnify and hold harmless the city from any damages
caused by flooding.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
SECTION 18: SCHEDULE OF USES
A. SCHEDULE OF USES ESTABLISHED
Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used for any of the following listed uses
but no land shall hereinafter [hereafter] be used and no building or structure shall hereinafter [hereafter] be
occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished, or converted which is arranged or designed to be
used for other than those uses specified for the district in which it is located as set forth by the following
schedule of uses:
X Designated use permitted in district
Designates use prohibited in district
S Use permitted with specific approval by City
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/334
NOTE: Gross floor area is abbreviated as g.f.a.
Residential Use: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Single Family
Dwelling-detached
X X X X X X X X
Duplex Dwelling
X X X
S
Triplex Dwelling
X
Quadraplex
Dwelling
X
Apartment
X
Mobile/Mfg. House
X
Industrialized
Housing
X S S X X X X
S
Mobile/Mfg. Home
Park
X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/334
Townhouse X
Condominium
X
Residential Use: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Recreational vehicle
X
S S
Adult Day Care
Center
S
S X X X
Accessory Building X X X X X X X X X X X
Child Day Care
Home
X X X X X X X S S S
Community Center
(Private)
S S S S X X X
Group Day Care
Home
S S S S S S S S S S
Group Home S S S S S S S S S S
Guest House or
Quarters
X X X X X X X S S S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/334
Halfway House S S S S S S S S S S
Home Occupation S S S S S S S S
Rooming (Boarding)
House
S
Swimming Pool
(Private)
X X X X X X X X X X X
Tennis Court
(Private)
X X X X X X X X X X X
Trailer Camp or Park
X
Agriculture/Ranch
Uses:
AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Animal Feed Lot S
S
Dairy S
S
Farm S S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/334
Greenhouse X S S S S S S S S S
Agriculture/Ranch
Uses:
AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Livestock Auction
Barn
S
S S
Orchard X S
Ranch X S
Rodeo Ground,
Arena
S
S S
Stable, Private S S
Stable, Public S
Utility/Solid Waste
Uses:
AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Electric Substations X S S S S S S S S S X
Gas Line (6" or
larger)
S S S S S S S S S X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/334
Gas Regulating/Gate
Station
S S S S S S S S S X X
Microwave Tower X S S S S S S S S X X
Radio and Television
Tower
X S S S S S S S S X X
Railroad Freight
Terminal
X
Railroad Yard
X
Recycling Facility
S X
Refuse Transfer
Station
S S
Sewer Lift Station X S S S S S S S S S X
Telephone Exchange X S S S S X X S X X X
Utility/Solid
Waste Uses:
AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/334
Wastewater
Treatment Plant
S S S S
Water Pump
Station
X S S S S S S S X X X
Water Storage Tank X S S S S S S S X X X
Water Treatment
Plant
X S S S S S S
X X X
Gov't and
Institutional Uses:
AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Athletic Field or
Stadium
S S S S S S S
X X X
Church or Rectory X X X X X X X X X X X
College or
University
S S S S S S S S X X
Community/
Recreation Center
X X X X X X X X X X
Convalescent
Center
X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/334
Fire Station
S S S S S S S X X X
Hospital
X
Library X X X X X X X X X X X
Museum or Art
Gallery
X X X X
Park or Playground X X X X X X X X X X X
Police Station S S S S S S S S X X
Post Office
S X X
Prison or
Penitentiary
S
S
Sanitarium
X
Gov't and
Institutional Uses:
AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
School
(trade or business)
S X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/334
School
(elementary or
middle)
X X X X X X X X X X
School (high
school)
X X X X X X X X X X
Government Office
S X X
Swimming Pool
(public)
S S S S S S S S X X
Tennis Court
(public)
S S S S S S S S X X
Commercial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Amusement Park X
X X
Animal Hospital X
X X X
Animal Shelter
X X
Antique Shop
S X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/334
Apparel Store
X X
Appliance Retail
Store
X X
Appliance Repair
Shop
X
Appliance Store
(retail)
X X
Art Supply Store
S X X
Athletic or Fitness
Club
X X X
Commercial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Audio and Video
Store (retail)
X X
Auto Paint and
Body Shop
X X
Auto Rental
S X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/334
Auto Repair
Garage
X X
Auto Sales Lot
X X
Bakery (retail)
X X
Bank or Financial
Institution
X X
Barber or Beauty
Shop
S S S S S S S S X X
Bicycle Sales and
Repair
X X
Boat Sales
X X
Bowling Alley
S X X
Building Materials
Yard
X X
Bus Terminal
X X X
Business Office
S X X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/334
Cabinet Shop
S X X
Camera Store
(retail)
X X
Car Wash
S X X
Carnival or Circus
S S S
Carpet Store
(retail)
X X
Commercial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Child Care Center S S S S S S S S X X
Computer Store
(retail/service)
X X
Contractor Yard
(outside storage)
X X
Dental Clinic or
Office
X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/334
Department Store X X
Electrical Supply
Store
X X
Electronics Store
(retail)
X X
Farm Implement
Sales
X X
Feed Store
X X
Florist Shop
X X X
Flea Market
(outside)
X X
Fraternity/Sorority
Lodge
S
X X
Furniture Store
(retail)
X X
Game Hall
S S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/334
Gift or Novelty Shop S X X
Go-Cart Track
X X
Golf Course X S S S S S S
X X
Golf Course
(miniature)
X X
Golf Driving Range S
X X
Commercial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Granary or Gin X
X
Grocery Store
X X
Gun Shooting
Range (indoor)
S
S X
Gunsmith Shop
X X
Hardware Shop
X X
Heavy Equipment
X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/334
Sales
Hobby Shop
X X
Hotel or Motel
S X X
Jewelry Store
X X
Kennel S
S X X
Laboratory,
Medical or Dental
S X X
Laundry or Dry
Cleaners
X X X
Lawnmower Sales
and Service
S S S S S S S
S X X
Lithographic Shop
X X X
Locksmith Shop
X X X
Meat Market
X X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/334
Medical Clinic or
Office
X X
Mini-warehouse
S X X
Commercial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Manufactured
Home Sales Lot
X X
Massage
Establishment
S X X
Mortuary or
Funeral Home
S X X
Motorcycle Sales
X X
Movie Theater
(drive-in)
X X
Movie Theater
(indoor)
X X X
Musical Instrument
Store
X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/334
Newspaper Office X X
Newsstand
X X
Nightclub
X X
Office Supply Store
X X
Optical Clinic or
Office
X X
Optical Dispensary
Store
X X
Paint Sales Store
(retail)
X X
Pawnshop
S X
Pet Grooming Shop
X X
Pet Shop
X X
Commercial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/334
Pharmacy or Drug
Store
X X
Picture Framing
Shop
S X X
Plant Nursery S
X
Plumbing Shop
(retail)
X X
Pool or Billiard
Hall
S X
Printing Shop
X X
Private Club
(serving alcohol)
X X X
Professional
Offices
S X X
Recording Studio
X X X
Recreation Center
X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/334
Recreational
Vehicle Sales
X X
Restaurant or Cafe
(inside)
X X
Restaurant (drivein)
X X
Second Hand Store
X X
Service Station
S X X
Sexually Oriented
Business
S S
Shoe or Boot Store
X X
Shopping Center or
Mall
X X
Sign Shop
X X
Commercial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Skating Rink
S X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/334
Sporting Goods
Store
X X
Tanning Salon
S X X
Taxidermist
X X
Tire Sales and
Repair
X X
Tool Rental
X X
Travel Agency
X X
Truck Rental
X X
Truck Repair
X X
Truck Sales
X X
Truck Wash
X X
Upholstery Shop
X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/334
Washateria
(self-service)
X X
Industrial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Airport
S S
Ammonia
Manufacturing
X
Apparel
Manufacturing
X
Appliance
Manufacturing
X
Artificial Limb
Manufacturing
X
Industrial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Asphalt Batching
Plant
S
Auto Salvage Yard
X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/334
Bakery,
Commercial
X
Bleach
Manufacturing
X
Bookbinding and
Publishing
S X
Bottling Plant
S X
Box Manufacturing
X
Brewery
X
Brick or Tile
Manufacturing
X
Canning Operation
X
Carpet
Manufacturing
X
Cartage Operation
S X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/334
Chemical Storage
and Mfg.
S
Chlorine
Manufacturing
X
Cold Storage Plant
X
Concrete Batching
Plant
S X
Concrete Product
Casting Plant
X
Contractor Yard
(outside storage)
X X
Industrial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Cotton Gin
X
Creamery
X
Creosote
Manufacturing
X
Distribution Center
S X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/334
Distillation Plant
X
Dying [Dyeing]
Plant
X
Electroplating
X
Envelope
Manufacturing
X
Explosives
Manufacturing
S
Fertilizer
Manufacturing
S
Fiberglass
Manufacturing
X
Fireworks
Manufacturing
S
Food Processing
X
Foundry
X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/334
Freight Terminal,
Motor
X
Freight Terminal,
Railroad
X
Furniture
Manufacturing
X
Industrial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Glass
Manufacturing
X
Glue
Manufacturing
X
Gypsum
Manufacturing
X
Heliport or Helistop
S S
Ice Cream Plant
X
Ice Plant
X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/334
Incinerator S S
Insecticide
Processing
S
Junkyard
X
Laundry Plant
X
Light Fabrication
Plant
X
Machine Shop
X
Marble
Manufacturing
X
Mattress
Manufacturing
X
Meat Processing
Plant
X
Metal Fabrication
X
Metal Stamping and
X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/334
Extrusion
Mining, Extraction
Operation
X
Monument Works
X
Packaging
Operation
S X
Industrial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Paint
Manufacturing
X
Pallet
Manufacturing
X
Paper Mill
X
Pesticide
Processing
X
Petroleum Products
(wholesale)
X
Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing
X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/334
Plastic Product
Manufacturing
X
Pottery
Manufacturing
X
Poultry Processing
Plant
X
Radio Transmitting
Station
S X
Rendering Plant
S
Smelter Plant
S
Tanning Plant
S
Television
Transmitting
Station
S X
Temporary
Construction Office
S S S S S S S S S S X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/334
Textile
Manufacturing
X
Tire Manufacturing
X
Tire Recapping
Plant
X
Industrial Uses: AG R-1 R-2 R-3 D MF MH LC C-1 C-2 I
Vehicle
Conversion
Facility
X X
Warehouse
S X
Welding Shop
S X
Wrecking Yard
X
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08; Ordinance 2011-03, sec. 3, adopted 2/8/11)
B. UNLISTED LAND USES
In instances where a proposed land use is not included in the “Schedule of Uses” and interpretation is required
regarding the appropriate classification of an unlisted form of land use, the procedures as set forth in Section 24
of this ordinance shall be followed.
SECTION 19: SPECIFIC USE PERMITS GENERALLY
A. STANDARDS
No application for a specific use shall be granted by the City Commission unless all of the following conditions
are present:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/334
(1) That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the specific use will not be materially
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals or general welfare;
(2) That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already
permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the
establishment, maintenance or operation of the specific use;
(3) That the establishment of the specific use will not significantly impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
(4) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been
or are being provided;
(5) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed as
to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and
(6) That the specific use shall conform to all applicable area, yard, height, lot coverage, building
size and exterior requirements and parking space regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES
Prior to the granting of any specific use permit, the city commission may stipulate such conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the specific use as
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and to secure
compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Subsection A above. In all cases in which specific
use permits are granted, the city commission shall require such evidence and written guarantees as it may deem
necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
C. EFFECT OF DENIAL OF APPLICATION
No application for a specific use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the city commission shall be
resubmitted for a period of sixty (60) days from the date of said denial.
D. APPLICATION, FILING PROCEDURES AND FEES
The Property owner or certified agent shall make application on a form prescribed by the City of La Feria, and
such application shall provide a site plan. Obtaining a special use permit shall not exempt an applicant from
complying with requirements of the City of La Feria's building codes or other ordinances.
E. SITE PLANS
(1) Purpose: The purpose of the site plan is to ensure compliance with the zoning ordinance and to
assist in the orderly and harmonious development of the city, to protect and enhance the general
welfare, and to help prevent the impairment or depreciation of land values and development by the
erection of structures, additions, or alteration thereto without proper attention to site planning.
(2) Recording: An applicant for a special use permit shall file a site plan with the City Manager or
his or her designated administrative official.
(3) Contents: A site plan shall contain drawings to scale to indicate, as needed:
(a) The location of all structures on the subject property and on adjoining property;
(b) Landscaping and/or fencing yards and setback areas and proposed changes;
(c) Design of ingress and egress;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/334
(d) Off-street parking and loading facilities;
(e) Height of all structures;
(f) Proposed uses; and
(g) The location and types of all signs, including lighting and heights.
F. PROCEDURE
The city manager or his or her designated administrative official shall have the responsibility for processing all
applications for special use permits and presenting them to the city commission for consideration. The city
manager or his or her designated administrative official shall complete all of the following procedures prior to
the city commission's consideration of an application for a specific use permit:
(1) The city manager or his or her designated administrative official performs all investigation he
or she deems necessary under the circumstances.
(2) The city manager or his or her designated administrative official shall obtain recommendations
from the chief of police and from the fire marshal relative to the application.
(3) The city manager or his or her designated administrative official shall send, by first-class mail,
a written notice of a public hearing conducted by the city commission, in a form prescribed by the
city manager or his or her designated administrative official, to each and every owner of real
property, as determined from the most recent property tax rolls within two hundred (200) feet of the
property of which an application has been made. In no event shall such notice be sent less than ten
(10) days prior to the date of the meeting at which the city commission will conduct a public hearing
regarding such application.
(4) The city manager or his or her designated administrative officials shall publish said notice of
public hearings one (1) time in the official newspaper of the City of La Feria. In no event shall such
notice be published less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting at which the city
commission will conduct said public hearing.
(5) The city manager or his or her designated administrative official shall formulate a
recommendation to the city commission regarding the application.
G. ACTION BY THE CITY COMMISSION
(1) The city commission shall conduct a public hearing on each application for a special use
permit.
(2) The city commission shall consider the recommendation of the city manager or his or her
designated administrative official regarding each such application.
(3) After the close of the public hearing, the city commission shall take action to grant or to deny
the specific use permit. The city commission may grant a specific use permit subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards when the city commission finds:
(a) That the proposed specific use meets all the minimum standards established in this
ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
(b) that the proposed specific use meets the intent of the zoning district in which it is located,
and is in accordance with the comprehensive plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/334
(c) that the proposed specific use will not be detrimental to the health, welfare, and safety of
the surrounding neighborhood or its occupants, nor be substantially or permanently injurious to
the neighboring property.
H. TERM OF PERMIT; RENEWAL
A specific use permit shall have a term of not more than one (1) year from the date it is granted by the city
commission unless otherwise provided by the city commission. If the specific use permit is given a term other
than one (1) year, the expiration date shall be set forth in the permit. Any permittee wishing a renewal of such
permit for successive terms shall make application for such renewal to the city manager or his or her designated
administrative official, not less than thirty (30) days before the date the permit expires. If, after proper
inspection, the city manager or his or her designated administrative official finds that the conditions of the
original permit are being met, and there have been no signed complaints of noncompliance, the permit may be
renewed by the city manager or his or her designated administrative official for an additional term equal to the
term originally which the city commission originally granted. If there is evidence of or complaints of
noncompliance with the terms of the permit, then a request to renew the permit shall constitute a request for a
new special use permit which shall be subject to all the provisions of this Section 19.
I. COMPLIANCE; REVOCATION AND CANCELLATION
(1) The city manager or his or her designated administrative official shall ensure compliance with
this ordinance and all special use permits granted by the city commission. He/she shall:
(a) Make inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and the
permit, and initiate appropriate action if necessary.
(b) Investigate thoroughly any complaints of noncompliance concerning a permitted special
use, and keep a record of all complaints, indicating any action taken. These records shall be
made available at the time of renewal of the permit.
(2) Upon determination of noncompliance with the provisions of a special use permit, the city
manager or his or her designated administrative official shall give to the permit holder written notice
of:
(a) The nature of the violation;
(b) The necessary action to remedy the violation; and,
(c) The time period, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the date
of notification, within which to comply.
(3) The city commission, after due hearing, may revoke any special use permit that has been
reported in violation by the city manager or his or her designated administrative official. Continued
use without a permit shall be a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be subject to the penalties
provided therein.
(4) If within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date the city commission grants a special use
permit, such permit has not been used, or a building permit has not been obtained, where construction
is necessary, such special use permit shall be automatically canceled at midnight on the one hundred
eightieth (180th) day following the date the city commission issued such permit.
(5) In the event, the owner of the property subject to a special use permit transfers such property
during the term of such permit, such special use permit shall be automatically canceled at midnight
on the fifth (5th) business day after such transfer unless the transferee has executed a written
agreement that such special use may continue on the subject property after the date of transfer and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/334
such executed, written agreement is delivered to the city manager or his or her designated
administrative official before 5:00 PM on the fifth (5th) business day after such transfer.
SECTION 20: HOME OCCUPATIONS
The purpose of this section is to permit the conduct of home occupations which are compatible with the
neighborhoods in which they are located. Some home occupations are a permitted accessory use in a residential
district and are subject to the requirements of that district in which the use is located, in addition to the
following:
(1) Only the members of the immediate family occupying the dwelling shall be engaged in the
home occupation;
(2) The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit,
garage, or accessory buildings. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment
related to the operation of home occupation shall be visible outside any structure located on the
premises;
(3) No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of one (1) story of the principal building
shall be devoted to the home occupation;
(4) There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character thereof as a dwelling and/or
exterior evidence of the home occupation other than those signs permitted in the district;
(5) No use shall create smoke, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, small electrical interference
or any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use in the district;
(6) The home occupation shall not create any significant increase in vehicular flow or parking and
shall not create greater pedestrian traffic than normal for the district;
(7) No home occupation shall cause a significant increase in the use of any utilities, or generate
trash or refuse beyond the average of the residences in the neighborhood; and
(8) No more than one (1) advertising sign with a maximum of four (4) square feet of a
nonilluminating nature may be attached to the main building.
The following are examples of uses which can often be conducted within the limits of this section. Uses listed in
this paragraph do not automatically qualify as a home occupation nor does this listing limit the uses which may
qualify as home occupations: piano and guitar instruction, handicraft, dressmaking, preserving, accountant,
artist, author, consultant, individual tutoring, millinery, child care of no more than five (5) children, and barber
or beauty shops. The following uses are incompatible with residential neighborhoods and thereby impair the
character of residential areas. Therefore, these uses shall not be permitted as accessory uses in residential
districts: vehicle repair, painting of vehicles or boats, television and appliance repair, fix-it shops, cabinet shops,
and machine shops.
The city commission shall interpret the provisions of this section to determine the validity of a home occupation.
A use considered not within the scope of the home occupation provisions shall be subject to the provisions of the
commercial or industrial zones of this ordinance.
SECTION 21: GARAGE SALES
A. No garage sale shall be held within the City of La Feria except as specifically provided herein. Any person
holding a garage sale in violation of the requirements set forth herein shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance and the Code of Ordinances of the City of La Feria, Texas, and such person shall be subject to the
penalty provisions found in Chapter 1.106 [section 1.01.009] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of La Feria.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/334
B. Prior to conducting a garage sale, the person conducting the sale shall obtain a garage sale permit at City
Hall at a cost of $5.00; provided, however, the fee may be waived in the sole discretion of the City Manager for
good cause shown. The person obtaining the permit must show evidence of the right to occupy the premises for
which the permit is sought. The fee is nonrefundable; however, if inclement weather or other good cause, as
solely determined by the City Manager, forces cancellation of all or any portion of the sale, an extended permit
may be issued at no additional charge.
C. No more than four (4) garage sales may be held at the same location within any twelve (12) month period.
No garage sale may be held at the same location more than once every sixty (60) days.
D. No garage sale shall be held for more than three (3) consecutive days. All garage sales shall be held only
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
E. The permit issued by the City shall be and remain posted on the property identified therein in a manner
readily visible to and accessible to the persons attending the garage sale for the duration of the sale.
F. The person named in the permit shall be responsible to insure that no signs relating to the garage sale shall
be posted on any public property in violation of any applicable ordinance, rule, regulation or law of the City of
La Feria or the State of Texas. The person named in the permit shall be responsible to insure that all signs
relating to the garage sale shall be removed within 72 hours of the expiration of the permit.
SECTION 22: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY
A. PURPOSE
To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets; to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of
land, minimum off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and
provisions.
B. RESIDENTIAL PARKING REQUIRED
(1) Two (2) paved parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided for the following, with the
parking area located on the same lot as the main building or buildings, except as otherwise provided
above:
(a) Single-family dwelling, including townhouses and mobile homes.
(b) Two-family (duplex) dwellings.
(c) Three-family (triplex) dwellings.
(d) Four-family (fourplex) dwellings.
(2) Minimum number of paved, striped off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit required for
multifamily dwelling units or condominiums:
(a) O[0]-bedroom or efficiency dwelling unit, one (1.0) space per unit.
(b) 1-bedroom dwelling units, one and one-half (1.5) spaces per unit.
(c) 2-bedroom dwelling units, one and three-fourths (1.75) spaces per unit.
(d) 3-or more bedroom dwelling units, two (2.0) spaces per unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/334
(3) One and one-half (1-1/2) parking spaces for each person shall be provided for the following
establishments:
(a) Dormitory.
(b) Lodging house.
(c) Rooming house.
(d) Other similar group quarters.
C. NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
(1) Commercial uses, office and professional buildings outside of the Central Business District,
unless otherwise mentioned in this section, shall be required to have three (3) spaces for up to three
hundred (300) square feet of floor area, plus one (1) space for each additional three hundred (300)
square feet of floor area.
(2) Restaurants, nightclub, café or similar recreation or amusement establishment: One (1) parking
space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area, or one (1) space for each four (4) seats,
whichever is greater.
(3) Theaters, auditoriums, churches, temples, assembly halls, sports arenas, stadiums: One (1)
space for each three (3) seats in the main auditorium or seating area.
(4) Dance, assembly and exhibition halls without fixed seats: One (1) space for each one hundred
(100) square feet used for assembly or dancing.
(5) Hotel or motel: One (1) parking space for each sleeping room or suite plus one (1) space for
each two hundred (200) square feet of commercial floor area contained therein.
(6) Hospital: One (1) parking space for each bed.
(7) Sanitorium, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar institution: One (1) parking space
for each two (2) beds.
(8) Medical or dental clinics: Five (5) for each doctor or dentist, or in accordance with a [1.] [sic],
whichever is greater.
(9) Bowling alley: Five (5) parking spaces for each alley.
(10) Mortuary or funeral home: One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor space
in slumber room parlors and individual funeral service rooms.
(11) Day nurseries, day care centers, and kindergartens with over six children: One (1) parking
space for each two (2) employees, plus an off-street drive and loading space for a minimum of four
(4) cars for the transferring of passengers.
(12) Schools (except high school or college): One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each classroom.
(13) College or high schools: One (1) parking space for each eight (8) seats in the main auditorium
or four (4) spaces for each classroom, whichever is greater.
(14) Manufacturing plants, research laboratories: One (1) for each one and one-half (1.5)
employees in the maximum work shilt [shift].
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/334
(15) Warehouses: One (1) for each employee in the maximum work shift.
(16) Terminal facilities, truck terminals, and other similar personal and/or material facilities: One
(1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area when non warehousing facilities are
provided; one (1) for each seven hundred (700) square feet when warehousing facilities are provided.
(17) Bus depots: One (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
(18) Lumberyards and wholesale establishments: One (1) for each one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of sales floor area, plus one (1) for each warehouse employee.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
(19) Unclassified use: Where the proposed land use cannot be classified within the uses herein
specified, the City Manager shall determine the specified use most closely related to the proposed use
and the minimum requirements for the specified use so determined shall apply to the proposed use.
(20) Exceptions: Groups of uses requiring vehicle parking space may join in establishing group
parking areas with capacity aggregating that required for each particular use. Where it can be
established to the satisfaction of the City Manager that parking for two (2) specific uses occurs at
alternating periods, the parking space requirements of the use requiring the greater number of spaces
may be applied to both uses in a combined parking area. Such parking shall be within three hundred
(300) feet of all uses to be served by such parking. Example: Church and professional office building.
(21) Game Halls: one (1) parking space for every two gaming devices or 200 square feet of gross
floor area of the Game Hall, whichever is more.
(22) Sexually Oriented Businesses: one (1) parking space for every 200 square feet of gross floor
area of the Sexually Oriented Business.
(Ordinance 2011-10, sec. 6, adopted 7/12/11)
D. OFF-PREMISES LOCATION OF PARKING
Off-Premises Location: For any new use, building or structure where the required off-street parking cannot be
provided on the premises because of the size or the locations of the lot, such parking may be provided on other
property under the same ownership not more than two hundred (200) feet distant from the building site and
provided the proposed parking area is located in a district where parking lots are permitted. Where individual
land parcels are not large enough to permit on-site parking, the owners of several such adjacent parcels may be
required to make a financial contribution sufficient to permit the joint development of required parking space
nearby to serve traffic generated by the several land uses.
E. CLARIFICATION, EXCEPTION AND MODIFICATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING
REQUIREMENTS
(1) No parking space located on a public street or alley may be included in the calculation of offstreet
parking requirements.
(2) Parking spaces used for the parking of trucks or buses shall not be counted towards meeting the
requirements of this section.
(3) In the event that the owner of a piece of property has insufficient street frontage to comply with
the above parking requirements, the board of adjustment may grant permission to lessen the parking
requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/334
(4) When the computation for the number of parking spaces required under this ordinance results
in the requirement of a fractional space, the fractional space requirement shall be satisfied by adding
one (1) additional space to the whole-space total.
(5) When a lot is used for a combination of uses, the off-street parking requirements are the sum of
the requirements for each use, and no off-street parking space for one use is included in the
calculation of off-street parking requirements for any other use.
(6) Except for single-family, duplex, townhouse and mobile home uses, head-in parking adjacent
to a public street where the maneuvering of the vehicle in parking or leaving the parking space is
done on a public street is prohibited, and on all existing uses is excluded in computing off-street
parking requirements.
(7) In all districts except a central area district, required off-street parking must be available as free
parking or contract parking on other than an hourly or daily fee basis. This requirement does not
apply to institutional uses.
(8) The parking space required for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as
required for a use of similar nature.
(9) After the effective date of this Section 22, whenever a property is changed or enlarged in floor
area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise, to create a need
for an increase to ten (10) percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such space shall
be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change as proportional percentage. Whenever a
building or use existing prior to the effective date of this Section 22 is enlarged to the extent of fifty
(50) percent or more in floor area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the
parking requirements set forth herein.
(10) Automotive vehicles or trailers bearing license plates or state motor vehicle inspection stickers
that are more than three (3) months out of date shall only be parked or stored on any residentially
zoned property in a completely enclosed building. Parking and storage of vehicles shall be in
accordance with the city's junk vehicle ordinance.
(11) For purposes of these regulations, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats
and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive
vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting
recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No major recreational
equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in an enclosed building
or behind the portion of a building nearest to a street, provided, however, that such equipment may be
parked anywhere on residential premises for not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during loading or
unloading.
F. OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Except in the “C-1” and “C-2” District, all retail, commercial and industrial uses shall be provided with offstreet
facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or
tract. Such off-street loading space may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a
truck berth within the structure. Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of
ten by forty-five feet (10' x 45') and such spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with the following
schedule:
Square Feet of Gross
Floor Area in Structure
Minimum Required
Spaces or Berths
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/334
0 to 5,000 None
5,000 to 25,000 1
25,000 to 45,000 2
45,000 to 65,000 3
65,000 to 100,000 4
The existence of a twenty foot (20') alley adjacent to the property shall be construed as equivalent to one (1)
berth. All off-street loading spaces shall have an all-weather surface of asphalt or concrete construction and shall
be accessible by a street, driveway or alley.
No loading docks shall be constructed facing on any public street or highway unless said loading dock is at least
seventy-five feet (75') inside the right-of-way line of the street or highway on which said loading dock fronts.
G. OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
All parking areas and spaces shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) All parking areas and spaces shall be designed and constructed so as to have free ingress and
egress at all times.
(2) No parking space or parking area shall be designed so as to require a vehicle to back into a
public street or across a public sidewalk, except in the case of one-family and two-family dwelling
units.
(3) Minimum dimensions for off-street parking:
(a) Ninety-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall not be less than nine (9) feet in
width and eighteen (18) feet in length. Maneuvering shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet.
(b) Sixty-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide
perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than twenty (20) feet in length when measured at
right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be not less than sixteen
(16) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line.
(c) Forty-five-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet
wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than eighteen and one-half (18-1/2) feet in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/334
length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall
be not less than twelve (12) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line.
(d) When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of said
alley may be utilized as a portion of the maneuvering space requirement, provided the alley is
paved.
(e) When off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of minimum amounts herein
specified, or when off-street parking facilities are provided, but not required by this Section,
said off-street parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and
maneuvering space herein specified.
(4) Pavement standards: All parking lots shall be paved according to city standards and
specifications. The parking lanes must be clearly marked by white paint, buttons or other approved
material.
(5) No parking area shall be designed or constructed which ends in a dead end, if more than three
(3) parking spaces in depth, unless adequate turnaround space is provided.
(6) All entrances or exits in a parking area shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
beginning point of any corner radius.
(7) All entrances or exits in a parking area shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet and a
maximum of thirty (30) feet in width, unless one-way, in which case they shall be a minimum of
twelve (12) feet for entrances and a minimum of nine (9) feet for exits.
(8) The driveway approach angle to any parking area shall be a maximum of sixteen (16) degrees,
the departure angle a maximum of ten (10) degrees, and the ramp angle a maximum of eleven (11)
degrees.
(9) No parking areas or parking spaces shall be allowed to pave over or utilize public right-of-way,
with the exception of approved entrances and exits, unless an exception is granted by the board of
adjustment to pave within four (4) feet of an existing or future curbline, due to a hardship.
(10) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so designated [designed]
and constructed as to reflect the light away from any adjoining property or street.
(11) No occupancy permit shall be issued by the chief building inspector of the city until the terms
and conditions of this ordinance have been met, as certified by the director of planning.
(12) All parking areas and parking spaces shall be designed and constructed to protect adjacent
residences from the direct glare of headlights of vehicles using the parking area. In accordance, all
off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on each side by a buffer as herein defined, from
any adjoining property zoned single-family, townhouse, or duplex.
SECTION 23: STANDARDS FOR CONDOMINIUM AND TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT
Development of condominium and/or townhouse projects shall be considered within the scope of the “PD”
Planned Development zoning classification, thereby providing flexibility in planning and design, and allowing
the application of innovative and creative development concepts.
The following standards are set forth as guidelines for the preparation of a development plan as required for
“PD” Districts which incorporate condominium and/or townhouse development. Consistent with the intent of the
“PD” District, these standards may be modified as may serve the best interests of the community upon approval
of the development plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/334
(1) Condominium and Townhouse Lots
The following minimum requirements should apply to each lot used for condominium or
townhouse development:
(a) Area of Lot - Three thousand (3,000) square feet;
(b) Depth of Lot - One hundred feet (100'), except where the lot backs up to a freeway,
expressway, or thoroughfare, in which case the minimum depth of lot shall be one hundred ten
feet (110');
(c) Width of Lot - Twenty-five feet (25');
(d) Front Yard Setback - Twenty-five feet (25'); and
(e) Exterior Side Yard - Where a side lot line abuts a street, a side yard of fifteen feet (15')
shall be required.
Street access to a condominium or townhouse lot shall be required in order to provide fire
protection and sanitation service.
(2) Spacing Between Buildings
Dwelling units should be in groups of not less than three (3) condominium or townhouse units nor
more than seven (7) units; but in no event should more than one quarter of the total building groups
contain eight (8) condominiums or townhouses. The total length of any one group of units should not
exceed an overall length of two hundred twenty-five feet (225'). There shall be a minimum space of
thirty-six feet (36') between building groups and fifteen feet (15') between the end of a building and a
street, private drive or alley.
(3) Open Space
Not less than forty percent (40%) of the total gross land area shall be open space or permanent
landscaped areas. Such open space shall be used exclusively for the purpose of installation of
recreational facilities and green or landscaped areas. Floodplains, or any standing surface water, other
than swimming pools, may be considered open space if specifically approved by council.
(4) Density
The average density of condominium or townhouse units should not exceed eight (8) units per
acre. The density is to be computed by taking the gross land area of each tract and dividing the total
number of dwelling units within the tract.
(5) Living Area in Each Condominium or Townhouse Unit
The minimum living area for a one bedroom condominium or townhouse unit shall be nine
hundred (900) square feet; two (2) or more bedroom units shall have a minimum of one thousand
(1,000) square feet living area, exclusive of garages, breezeways, patios and porches.
(6) Exterior Fire Resistant Construction
All main buildings shall be of exterior fire resistant construction having at least eighty percent
(80%) exterior walls constructed of brick, brick veneer, stone, stone veneer or other masonry, or
materials of equal characteristics, or as approved in the review of the development plan.
(7) Fire Walls
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/334
Within each condominium or townhouse complex, a four (4) hour fire-rated fire wall shall be
placed every four thousand five-hundred (4,500) square feet. All such fire walls shall be continuous
and unbroken from the foundation slab to the underside of the roof deck and conform to the other
requirements for fire walls as outlined in the building code for the city. All other condominium or
townhouse unit separation walls shall be of a two hour rating.
(8) Utilities.
All utilities shall be placed underground, except installations aboveground shall be permitted when
approved by the city commission under the following circumstances:
(a) Aboveground installations of transformers;
(b) Where utility lines cross a major drainage channel or depression of such depth as to make
underground installation impractical; and
(c) At the point where the utility enters the development.
(13) [sic]Screening
In the event that a condominium or townhouse development backs up or sides upon single family
residential districts, except a mobile home district, a solid fence, wall or hedge of not less than six
feet (6) shall be erected or placed, grown and maintained along the property line separating the two
districts. However, no such screening fence shall be erected so as to obstruct the vision of motorists
at alley, street or drive intersections.
(14) [sic]Construction Requirements
All streets, parking areas, access drives, sidewalks and drainage structures constructed on private
or public property shall be approved by the city and constructed in accordance with the city's
subdivision regulations.
(15) [sic]Homeowners' Associations
Where any condominium or townhouse development plan proposes the reservation of land or
structure in common ownership for recreational, parking, landscape or open space use or for any
other use, or private streets are proposed, a homeowners' association shall be required for the purpose
of control over the development and maintenance of such private land, streets and facilities which are
intended to be owned in common.
A homeowners' association shall be established by the developer for the purpose of control over
the private facilities of the project. Preliminary bylaws, restrictions and other covenants shall be
submitted with the application for zoning or site plan approval. Prior to issuance of building permits,
a final homeowners' association must be approved by the city commission. The responsibility and
control of the homeowners' association shall be with the developer until such time that eighty percent
(80%) of the dwelling units are occupied. The homeowners' association must include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following requirements:
(a) Mandatory membership from all residents and owners in the association;
(b) A system for payment of association dues to be collected with mortgage payment;
(c) Provisions for enforcement of the rules and regulations within the development and
association;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/334
(d) Deed restrictions pertaining to size, architectural style and type of building materials used
in the construction of dwelling units and other buildings erected on the site;
(e) Provisions for the construction, maintenance and repair of all open land, buildings,
facilities and improvements determined to be private or common as established by the site plan;
(f) Provisions for storage and control of boats, campers, old automobiles and other items
considered to be unsightly;
(g) In the event the approved association does not perform its specified responsibilities or
fulfill its obligations as specified in the homeowners' association, or is [sic]
(9) Parking Regulations
Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section
22 hereof. Such off-street parking shall be enclosed by a garage or covered by a carport. Additional
guest parking spaces shall also be placed in groups scattered through the development to
accommodate the guests of the homeowners.
(10) Recreational Facilities
Recreational and community facilities, including community buildings, swimming pools and
playground areas, shall be considered in the review of the development plan. The maintenance
liability of such recreational facilities shall be assumed by a Homeowner's Association.
(11) Recreational Vehicles and Equipment
Adequate storage areas for the storage of recreational vehicles and equipment shall be considered
in the review of the development plan.
(12) Sanitation Services
Sanitation service within each condominium or townhouse development should be provided by
any of the following:
(a) Stationary compaction system provided the homeowners' association is responsible to
own, collect, and place the trash into the compactor;
(b) Plastic bag or can system; and/or
(c) Trash container system.
(13) Screening
In the event that a condominium or townhouse development backs up or sides upon single family
residential districts, except a mobile home district, a solid fence, wall or hedge of not less than six
feet (6) shall be erected or placed, grown and maintained along the property line separating the two
districts. However, no such screening fence shall be erected so as to obstruct the vision of motorists
at alley, street or drive intersections.
(14) Construction Requirements
All streets, parking areas, access drives, sidewalks and drainage structures constructed on private
or public property shall be approved by the city and constructed in accordance with the city's
subdivision regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/334
(15) Homeowners' Associations
Where any condominium or townhouse development plan proposes the reservation of land or
structure in common ownership for recreational, parking, landscape or open space use or for any
other use, or private streets are proposed, a homeowners' association shall be required for the purpose
of control over the development and maintenance of such private land, streets and facilities which are
intended to be owned in common.
A homeowners' association shall be established by the developer for the purpose of control over
the private facilities of the project. Preliminary bylaws, restrictions and other covenants shall be
submitted with the application for zoning or site plan approval. Prior to issuance of building permits,
a final homeowners' association must be approved by the city commission. The responsibility and
control of the homeowners' association shall be with the developer until such time that eighty percent
(80%) of the dwelling units are occupied. The homeowners' association must include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following requirements:
(a) Mandatory membership from all residents and owners in the association;
(b) A system for payment of association dues to be collected with mortgage payment;
(c) Provisions for enforcement of the rules and regulations within the development and
association;
(d) Deed restrictions pertaining to size, architectural style and type of building materials used
in the construction of dwelling units and other buildings erected on the site;
(e) Provisions for the construction, maintenance and repair of all open land, buildings,
facilities and improvements determined to be private or common as established by the site plan;
(f) Provisions for storage and control of boats, campers, old automobiles and other items
considered to be unsightly;
(g) In the event the approved association does not perform its specified responsibilities or
fulfill its obligations as specified in the homeowners' association, or is declared nonexistent for
any reason, the city shall have the right to levy special assessments against the property on a
pro-rata basis for the cost of maintenance or the cost of correcting any such condition for which
the association was responsible and the lien holder shall be responsible for collecting such
levies and assessments and transmitting such funds to the city; and
(h) Such other provisions as deemed appropriate to secure a sound and stable association.
SECTION 24: CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES
It is recognized that new types of land uses will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate
in the city. In order to provide for such uses and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate
classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows:
The applicant shall refer the question of any new or unlisted use to the planning and zoning commission
requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use may be placed. Such request shall
be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity,
sales, processing, type of product, storage and amount or nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated
employment, transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, toxic material and vibration likely
to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities and sanitation collection.
The planning and zoning commission shall then consider the nature and described performance of the proposed
use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts, and after public hearing, determine the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/334
zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted. Following its decision, the planning and
zoning commission shall submit its recommendation to the city commission for final approval. The same
procedures should be followed as outlined in Section 26 [28] pertaining to amendments, including the public
notice and hearing requirements, when considering any zoning classification request for a new or unlisted land
use.
SECTION 25: NONCONFORMING USES
A. NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE DEFINED
When a use or structure does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or
structure is located and was in existence and lawfully operating prior to the adoption of any previous zoning
ordinance and has been operating since without discontinuance, or when on the effective date of this ordinance,
the use or structure was in existence and lawfully constructed, located and operating in accordance with the
provisions of any previous zoning ordinance or which was a nonconforming use thereunder, and which use or
structure does not now conform to the regulations herein prescribed for the district in which the use or structure
is located, such use or structure shall be considered as a nonconforming use or structure.
B. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
In any district in which residential, commercial or industrial buildings are permitted, buildings may be erected
on any single lot of record or multiple lots, provided there is access to such buildings or houses from a street and
it is in the same ownership which uses recorded prior to the effective date of this ordinance in the same
ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot or lots fail to meet the minimum requirements for
area, width, or both, for such districts in which located; however, all other requirements shall still apply. Any
required variances shall be obtained only through the zoning board of adjustment.
C. EXPANSIONS OR ENLARGEMENTS PROHIBITED
No nonconforming use or structure may be expanded or increased beyond the lot or tract of land upon which
such nonconforming use or structure is located after the passage of this ordinance except to provide off-street
loading or off-street parking space.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction
or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which a building permit has been properly secured from the
city. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has
been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to
be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
D. WHEN DISCONTINUED, CONFORMANCE REQUIRED
The lawful use of a building or land existing at the date of enactment of this ordinance, although such use does
not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued. However, if the nonconforming use is discontinued for
a period of six (6) consecutive calendar months, it shall not thereafter be resumed and any future use of such
building or land shall be in conformity with the provisions hereof.
E. CLASSIFICATION CHANGES
Whenever the nonconforming use of a structure is changed to a use of a more restrictive classification, such use
shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted classification.
For the purpose of this regulation, uses permitted in “R-1” Districts shall be deemed to be those in the most
restrictive zoning classification while industrial districts shall be the least restrictive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/334
F. WHEN RESTORATION ALLOWED
A nonconforming structure destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake, explosion or other casualty,
or by the public enemy, to the extent where the cost of restoration would amount to less than fifty percent (50%)
of its assessed value may be restored. If the damage is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of its value, application
for restoration shall first be made to the zoning board of adjustment to permit such restoration. The board may
grant or deny such restoration only after public hearing and taking into consideration the property owners
circumstances and the effect on the surrounding property. Homeowners, as shown by the city tax records on the
effective date of this ordinance, shall be able to restore their property regardless of the extent of destruction,
without making application to the zoning board of adjustment. However, said restoration shall comply with all
construction codes then in effect within the city and must be started within one (1) year. The failure to start
restoration or reconstruction within one (1) year shall forfeit the owner's right to restore or reconstruct the same
unless as a conforming use or building.
G. BOARD-APPROVED USES CONSIDERED CONFORMING
Any use which is permitted in a district only upon action of the zoning board of adjustment shall, upon its
establishment, be considered a conforming use in that district, provided that this regulation shall not be so
interpreted as to waive any conditions of a specific use permit for such use.
SECTION 26: DEFINITIONS
A. GENERAL INTERPRETATION
For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, certain terms and words are defined and shall have the meanings
ascribed in this ordinance unless it is apparent from the context that different meanings are intended.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the singular number include the plural number,
and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word “building” includes the word “structure,”
except as otherwise specified. The term “use” means “used or intended to be used for, or arranged or designed
for use.” The word “shall” is mandatory not directory; the word “may” is permissive. The word “person”
includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company or corporation as well as an
individual. The word “including” means “including, but not limited to.”
Accessory Building - A subordinate building which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot and
which does not exceed 120 square feet in size.
Accessory Use - A subordinate use which is incidental to the main or primary use.
Adult Day Care Center - A facility that regularly provides daytime care for the elderly that do not reside on the
premises.
Alley - A public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Amusement Park - Any building, lot, tract, or parcel of land used in whole or part for the operation and
maintenance of a circus, carnival, miniature golf course, golf driving range, batting cages, skating rinks, go-cart
racing tracks and minstrel shows.
Animal Shelter - A facility that keeps or legally impounds stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals.
Apartment - A room or suite of rooms in an apartment building intended, designed, or occupied as a home or
residence by a single family, individual, or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Apartment (Multifamily) Building - Any building which is intended, designed, or occupied as the home or
residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking
facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/334
Automobile Repair Shop - A building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, but not including
factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junkyards.
Automobile Sales Lot - An open area or lot used for the display or sale of automobiles, where no repair work is
done except minor reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises, and no dismantling of
cars for sale or keeping of used car parts or junk on the premises.
Bar - An establishment, not a restaurant, the principal activity of which is the sale and consumption on the
premises of liquor, wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverages, whether served with or without food and other
refreshments.
Basement - A building story which is partly underground, but may have at least one-half (1-1/2) [sic] of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
Block - That property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the nearest intersecting or intercepting
streets or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other barrier to or gap
in the continuity of development along such street.
Boarding (Rooming) House - A dwelling wherein lodging or meals for three (3) or more persons, not members
of the principal family therein, is provided for compensation, but not including a building in which ten (10) or
more guest rooms are provided.
Build - The word build means to erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, or alter a building or structure.
Building - Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable
property of any kind.
Building Line - A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specific distance therefrom
marking the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected.
Business - Includes retail, commercial, personal services, excavation, manufacturing and industrial operations
and uses.
Carport - A roofed structure open on three sides when attached to a dwelling and open on four sides when
detached from a dwelling, covered with a roof supported by structural steel or wood columns or masonry piers
of minimum size for structural safety.
Carwash - A building, or portion thereof, where automobiles or other motor vehicles are automatically or
manually washed regularly as a business.
Cellar - A building story with more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
A cellar shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.
Cemetery - Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead humans, including crematories[,]
mausoleums, and mortuaries.
Certificate of Occupancy - An official certificate issued by the City of La Feria which indicates conformance
with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for
which it is issued.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
Child Care Center - Any facility, not the residence of the primary caregiver, that provides care, supervision, or
education for more than six children under the age of fourteen who are not related by blood, marriage, or
adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day whether known or incorporated
under such name as “Pre-School,” “Kindergarten,” “Child Development Center,” whether or not the facility is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/334
operated for profit or not-for-profit or charges for the services it offers. (Ordinance 2011-03, sec. 2, adopted
2/8/11)
Child Day Care Home - A facility, sometimes referred to as a “Registered Family Home,” that regularly
provides care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six (6) children under the age of fourteen (14)
years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children. When more than six (6) children are kept in the home, it
shall be considered as either a “Group Day Care Home” or “Child Care Center.”
Clinic - A group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons or dentists to treat sick or injured patients who
do not remain overnight.
Church or Rectory - A place of worship and religious training of recognized religions including the on-site
housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, and nuns.
City Commission - The governing body of the City of La Feria, Texas.
Comprehensive Plan - A periodically updated series of documents that unify all elements and aspects of city
planning. Based on careful analysis and projection, these volumes reflect the best judgment of the City
Commission, Planning and Zoning Commission and Staff to ensure the growth and prosperity of the City of La
Feria. The plan shall serve as a policy guide to zoning and subdivision development decision.
Condominium - See “Townhouse and Condominium.”
Convalescent Home - Any building or structure used for or customarily occupied by persons recovering from
illness or suffering from infirmities of age.
Country Club (Private) - An area of land containing either a golf course or tennis courts, or both, and a
clubhouse and which is available to members only. Country clubs may contain adjunct facilities such as private
club, dining room, swimming pool, and other similar recreational or service facilities.
Courtyard - An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building and bounded on two (2) sides by such
building, or the open space provided for access to a dwelling group.
Dwelling or Dwelling Unit - A building of [or] portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to
be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping.
Dwelling, Multifamily - A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units which is designed for or occupied
as a home or residence for three (3) or more families.
Dwelling, Single-Family - A detached building which is designed for or occupied as a home or residence by not
more than one (1) family.
Dwelling, Two-Family - A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units, commonly referred to as a
duplex, and which is designed for or occupied as a home or residence by not more than two (2) families.
Family - One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than two (2)
individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, but not including a group occupying a hotel, motel,
boarding house, club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
Farm or Orchard - An area of two (2) acres or more which is used for the growing of farm products such as
vegetables, fruit trees, and grain as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as
horses, dairy cattle, sheep, and swine.
Flea Market - A collection or group of outdoor stalls, booths, tables or other similar arrangements, used by
individual vendors, for the display and sale of various items of new or used personal property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/334
Floor Area - The living area of a building, including the walls thereof, but excluding all porches, open
breezeways and garages.
Fraternity/Sorority Lodge: A gathering location for a group of people associated and/or formally organized in a
nonprofit capacity for the purposes of providing scientific, cultural, educational, patriotic and/or charitable
services to the community.
Game Hall - An establishment consisting of games of chance for amusement purposes, also known as “arcades”,
“game rooms”, and “amusement centers.” An establishment that has six amusement machines or more on the
premises is considered a “game hall.”
Garage, Auto Repair - A building or portion of a building used for the general repair and/or painting of motor
vehicles.
Garage, Parking - A building or portion of a building used for the storage of motor vehicles, other than a private
garage or a [an] auto repair garage, in which any sale of gasoline, oil, and accessories is only incidental to the
storage of the vehicles.
Garage, Private - An accessory building or portion of a main building on the same lot and used for the storage
of private passenger motor vehicles or boats.
Garage Sale - An occasional sale of personal and/or household property at a nonbusiness location for a
temporary period of time not exceeding three (3) consecutive days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
The term shall also include yard sales, patio sales, moving sales, estate sales and other terms that refer to an
occasional sale of personal or household property in a residential area.
Grade - When used as a reference point in measuring height of building the “grade” shall be the average
elevation of the finished ground at the exterior walls of the main building.
Gross Floor Area - The total area of all floors as measured to the outside walls, excluding open porches,
breezeways, balconies, and terraces. In computing the gross floor area residential uses, garages and carports
shall be excluded.
Group Day Care Home - A facility that regularly provides care in the caretaker's own residence for seven (7) to
twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen (14) years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children.
Group Home - A residential facility licensed by the Texas Department of Human Resources to house up to six
(6) handicapped and/or mentally retarded persons and two (2) supervisors.
Halfway House - A residential facility providing shelter, supervision and residential rehabilitative services for
persons who have been inmates of any county, state or federal correctional institution and released and require a
group setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society.
Height (of Building) - The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to
the deck line of a mansard roof, or the highest ridge board, for gable, hip and gambrel roof.
Home Occupation - Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of
the premises and which is carried on wholly within a main building or accessory building by a member of a
family residing on the premises and which does not change the character thereof. However, such use will not be
obnoxious or offensive due to vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, noise or which increases traffic.
Hospital - An institution or place where sick or injured patients are kept overnight and given medical or surgical
care.
Hotel or Motel - A building or arrangement of buildings designed for and occupied as a temporary abiding place
by transient guest[s] who are lodged with or without meals for compensation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/334
Industrialized Building - A commercial structure that is constructed on one or more modules or constructed
using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent commercial site, and that is
designed to be used as a commercial building when the modules or modular components are transported to the
permanent commercial site and are erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include any commercial structure
that is in excess of two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height as measured from the finished grade elevation
at the building entrance.
Industrialized Housing - A residential structure that is designed for the use and occupancy of one or more
families, that is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built
at a location other than the permanent residential site, and that is designed to be used as a permanent residential
structure when the modules or modular components are transported to the permanent residential site and are
erected or installed on a permanent foundation system The term includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
and electrical systems. The term does not include any residential structure that is in excess of two (2) stories or
thirty-five feet (35') in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak
of the roof. The term shall not mean nor apply to (a) housing constructed of sectional or panelized systems not
utilizing modular components, or (b) any ready-built home which is constructed so that the entire living area is
contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling it and moving it to another
location.
Junk - Means old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous metals, batteries, appliances, equipment, automobile and truck
parts, wrecked vehicles, debris, paper, rubber, tires, steel, and other used or secondhand materials or goods.
Junkyard or Salvage Yard - Any area used for the storage, keeping, processing, buying, or selling of junk,
including scrap metals or other scrap materials or goods, or used for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment
of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, or parts thereof.
Kennel - Any place or premise [premises] where four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other pets are raised, trained,
boarded, or kept with or without charge, except for veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, and animal shelters.
Laundry - A building or place where clothes and linens are washed and thoroughly dried and pressed by the use
of washing, drying, and ironing machines for fee basis and shall include the term “cleaners,” and “dry cleaners.”
Living Area - Shall include that portion of the dwelling unit which is used or designed for occupancy but does
not include carports, garages, and open porches, breezeways, balconies, and terraces.
Loading Space - A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing,
loading or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by thirty-five (35) feet and
a vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet.
Lot - A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a main building and its accessory buildings, or by
a group of buildings and their accessory buildings, and having frontage on a dedicated street.
Lot, Corner - A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting streets.
Lot Coverage - The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the first story or ground floor of buildings
located on the lot.
Lot Depth - The average depth from the front line of the lot to the rear line of the lot.
Lot, Interior - A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot of Record - A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
county clerk, or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to
passage of this ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/334
Lot Width - The width measured at a distance back from the front line equal to the minimum depth required for a
front yard.
Main Building - A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
Mobile Home (Manufactured Home or House) - A structure transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight body feet (8') or more in width or forty body feet (40') or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems.
Mobile Home Lot - That part of a parcel of land (mobile home site) in a mobile home district or park which has
been reserved for the placement of one (1) mobile home unit.
Mobile Home Park - A parcel of land which is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or
private association or corporation, and has been developed for rental of lots to tenants with mobile homes.
Motel - See “Hotel.”
Neighborhood Convenience Center - Centers which carry convenience goods, such as groceries, drugs, hardware
and some variety items, and also includes some service stores. The neighborhood convenience center may
contain one (1) or two (2) small apparel or shoe stores, but it is clearly dominated by convenience goods, which
are items of daily consumption and very frequent purchase, sometimes called “spot necessity” items. This
neighborhood serving store group is within convenient walking distance of families served (within convenient
driving range in low-density areas), with due consideration for pedestrian access and amenity of surrounding
areas.
Nonconforming Use - The use of a building or land that does not conform to these zoning regulations and which
lawfully existed at the time these zoning regulations became effective.
Nursing Home - See “Convalescent Home.”
Orchard - See “Farm.”
Park or Playground (Public) - An open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such
as the city or the school and available to the general public for neighborhood use.
Parking Lot - An unenclosed, all-weather surface area used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor
vehicles.
Parking Space - An area measuring at least nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet in length (except as
otherwise provided in Section 22-B(2) of this ordinance), surfaced with an all-weather surface, enclosed or
unenclosed, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley
permitting satisfactory ingress and egress. For computing off-street parking space requirements, parking spaces
on public streets, alleys or rights-of-way shall not be used.
Personal Services - Businesses which provide services customized for an individual such as: tailor, barber or
beauty shop, health studio, travel consultant, shoe repair, portrait photographic studio; however, uses such as
customizing of motor vehicles are not included.
Planning and Zoning Commission - The agency appointed by the City Commission as an advisory body to it and
which is authorized to recommend changes in zoning and review and approve or deny subdivision plats.
Plat - A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and
other information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City of La Feria and subject to
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Commission. Reference to a Plat in this Ordinance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/334
means an official Plat of Records which has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Commission and filed in the plat records of Cameron County.
Private Club - Facilities where food, beverages (including alcoholic beverages), entertainment, or meeting space
are provided to members only.
Ranch - An area of two (2) acres or more which is used for the keeping or raising [of] farm animals and
livestock including but limited to horses, mules, cows, cattle, and swine.
Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer - means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be
used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer
or recreational vehicle by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory-equipped for the road, it shall have a
body width not exceeding eight feet and a body lengthy [length] not exceeding state maximums.
Recreational Vehicle Park - means any development site, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended
to be used for the purpose of providing short-term occupancy of camper vehicle[s], recreational vehicles, tents or
trailers.
Recycling Collection Facility - A facility designed to collect, sort, and package, by either manual or mechanical
processes, recyclable items for transport to a processing plant.
Restaurant - Any eating or drinking establishment where the preparation and serving of food is the primary
business of such establishment including cafes, bistros, cafeterias, and other fast food and drive-in food
establishments.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
Reverse Frontage - lots that are bordered on both the front and back by the right-of-way of a public street.
(Ordinance 2012-15, sec. III, adopted 11/6/12)
School - A place having a curriculum for the purpose of giving instruction, training or education in a service, art,
trade, or for general knowledge.
Screening Element (Device) - Or suitably screened as herein referred, shall mean any of the following:
(1) Any solid material constructed of brick, masonry or of a concrete or metal frame, or wood or
base which supports a permanent type material, the vertical surface of which is not more than thirty
percent (30%) open;
(2) Any dense evergreen hedge or plant material suitable for providing a visual barrier, for which
such material shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition; or
(3) Landscaped earth berms may, when appropriate in scale, be considered and used as a screening
element in lieu of a fence, wall, hedge, or other dense planting material.
Seat - As used in determining parking requirements for this ordinance, a seat shall mean such sitting spaces as
needed or which is designed to be used for one person to sit down and occupy.
Servant or Caretaker's Quarters - A secondary dwelling unit located on a lot with a main residential structure
and used as living quarters for persons employed on the premises only and not for rent or use as a separate
domicile by persons other than those employed on the premises or their immediate family.
Service Station - A building or premise [premises] where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and accessories
may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and the servicing of vehicles occurs, but not including the overhaul of
major automobile components, body work or repair of heavy trucks. A service station is sometimes referred to as
a “gas station,” “filling station,” or “fuel service station.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/334
Setback - The required minimum distance between any structure and any property line of the lot on which it is
located. Setbacks shall be measured perpendicular to lot lines. The terms “setback” and “required yard” shall
mean the same and can be interchanged.
Shopping Center - An area consisting of three (3) acres or more arranged according to a site plan to be submitted
to and to be approved by the city commission, on which is indicated the amount of land to be devoted to the
shopping village, the detailed arrangement of the various buildings, parking area, streets and type of zoning
desired. It shall be required that the installation of all utilities, drainage structures, the paving of streets, parking
area, alley and sidewalks be in accordance with the city's specifications for each type of improvement.
Sign - An outdoor device or structure which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, announcement,
direction or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered to the public.
Specific Use - A use that may be allowed if it meets certain specified requirements or conditions and meets the
approval of the city commission. Specific uses are sometimes referred to as “conditional” uses or “special uses.”
Stable (Private) - An accessory building used by the residents of the premises for sheltering and quartering of
horses owned by the occupants and for which no fee is charged for stabling the horses.
Story - That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of a floor and the surface
of a floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the portion of the building between the surface of a
floor and the ceiling or roof above it.
Story, Half - The topmost story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2)
opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet (4') above the floor of such story, except that any partial story
used for residence purposes shall be deemed a full story.
Street - A public or private thoroughfare or road which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property.
Structural Alteration - Any change, addition or modification in construction in the supporting members of a
building, such as exterior walls, bearing walls, beams, columns, foundations, girders, floor joists, roof joists,
rafters or trusses.
Structure - Anything constructed or erected having location on or under the ground or attached to something
having location on or under the ground.
Television Satellite Dish - An earth-based station shaped like a dish which is used for the reception of satellite
signals for television programs.
Terminal, Motor Freight - The use of property or buildings for the temporary parking of motor vehicles or trucks
of common carriers, during loading and unloading and between trips, including necessary warehouse space for
storage of transitory freight.
Tourist Camp or Court - A group of attached or unattached buildings containing individual sleeping or living
facilities for overnight tourists, with parking facilities conveniently located to each unit.
Townhouse or Condominium - A single family dwelling constructed as part of a series of dwellings, all of which
are either attached to the adjacent dwelling or dwellings by party or common walls or are located immediately
adjacent thereto with no visible separation between walls or roofs.
Trailer Camp or Park - An area designed, arranged or used for the parking or storing of one or more recreational
vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, motor coaches, pick-up campers, and camping trailers which are occupied
or intended for occupancy as temporary living quarters by individuals or families.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/334
Underground Shelter - A concrete structure designed for the protection of humans from tornadoes or from
nuclear blast, heat, or fall-out, the main portion of which is underground.
Use - The purpose for which land or a building or structure thereon is designed, arranged, intended or
maintained or for which it is or may be used or occupied.
Use, Accessory - A subordinate use on the same lot with the principal use and incidental and accessory thereto.
Variance - An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the zoning ordinance to a particular
parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is
necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the
same vicinity and zoning district.
Washateria - A building or place where clothes and linens are washed and thoroughly dried on a self-service
basis by the use of washing, drying, and ironing machines and shall include the term “self-cleaning laundry.”
Yard - An open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building and which is not obstructed from
ground level to the sky except for roof overhangs, fences, trees, and shrubs.
Yard, Front - A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a depth equal to the shortest distance
between the front line of the lot and the nearest portion of the main building, including an enclosed or covered
porch, provided that the front yard depth shall be measured from the future street line for a street on which a lot
fronts, when such line is shown on the official map or is otherwise established.
Yard, Rear - A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a depth equal to the shortest distance
between the rear line of the lot and the main building.
Yard, Side - A yard between the side line of the lot and the main building extending from the front yard to the
rear yard and having a width equal to the shortest distance between said side line and the main building.
SECTION 27: ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. ORGANIZATION OF ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
There is hereby created a zoning board of adjustment which shall consist of five (5) members who are residents
of the city, each to be appointed by the city commission for a term of two (2) years and removable for cause by
the city commission upon written charges and after public hearing. The city commission shall designate one (1)
member as chairperson. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose place becomes
vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made. Provided, however, that the city
commission may appoint two (2) alternate members of the board who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or
more of the regular members when requested to do so by the chairperson of the board or mayor, as the case may
be. All cases to be heard by the board will always be heard by a minimum of four (4) members. These alternate
members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the regular members, which is for a term of two (2)
years, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner and they shall be subject to removal the same as the
regular members.
B. OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE
(1) The board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided, however, that such rules are not
inconsistent with this ordinance or state law. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine, and in accordance with the Open
Meetings Law. The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the vice-chairperson or acting chairperson,
may administer oath[s] and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(2) The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep record of its examinations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/334
and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk
[secretary] and shall be a public record.
(3) Appeals to the board can be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the city manager
or his or her designated zoning administrator or by any officer or department of the city. Such appeal
shall be taken within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been rendered by the city manager or
designated administrative officer, by filing with the city clerk [secretary] and with the board, a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer or department from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the records upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
(4) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the city
manager or designated administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reasons of facts stated in the
certification, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the board or a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
(5) No appeal to the board for the same or related variance on the same piece of property shall be
allowed prior to the expiration of sixty (60) days from a previous ruling of the board on any appeal to
such body unless other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the said sixty (60) day period,
been changed or acted on by the board or city commission so as to alter the facts and conditions on
which the previous board action was based. Such change of circumstances shall permit the rehearing
of an appeal by the board, prior to the expiration of sixty (60) days period, but such conditions shall
in no way have any force in law to compel the board, after a hearing, to grant a subsequent appeal.
Such subsequent appeal shall be considered entirely on its merits and the peculiar and specific
conditions related to the property on which the appeal is brought.
(6) At a public hearing relative to any appeal, any interested party may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to
warrant favorable action of the board on any appeal or variance request. Any special exception or
variance granted or authorized by the board under the provisions of this ordinance shall authorize the
issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, for a period of six (6)
months from the date of the favorable action of the board unless said board shall have in its action
approved a longer period of time and has so shown such specific longer period in the minutes of its
action. If the building permit and/or certificate of occupancy shall not have been applied for within
said six (6) month period or such extended period as the board may have specifically granted, then
the special exception or variance shall be deemed to have been waived and all rights thereunder
terminated. Such termination and waiver shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal and such
subsequent appeal shall be subject to the same regulation and requirement for hearing as herein
specified for the original appeal.
C. ACTIONS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
(1) In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of the Statutes of the
State of Texas as existing or hereafter amended, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of
the city manager or other administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The board shall have
the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant.
(2) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the city manager or other administrative official, or to
decide in favor of the application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance
or to effect any variance in said ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/334
(3) Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board or any
taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the municipality may present to a court of record
(district court) a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days
after the filing of the decision in the office of the board and not thereafter.
D. NOTICE OF HEARING BEFORE BOARD REQUIRED
The board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals and variance requests made to it and written notice of such
public hearings shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who are owners of real property lying within
two hundred feet (200') of the property on which the appeal is made. Such notice shall be given no less than ten
(10) days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their said property for city taxes
as the ownership appears on the last city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same properly
addressed and postage paid in the United States Post Office. Notice shall also be given by publishing the same in
the official publication of the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, which notice shall state
the time and place of such hearing.
Additionally, the city manager should erect at least one (1) sign on the property in which a variance has been
requested. Such sign shall be erected adjacent to a street if possible and should have an area of at least four (4)
square feet. The sign should state that a zoning variance has been requested on that particular property and the
telephone number of the city offices from where dates of public hearings and more information about the zoning
variance request may be obtained. The sign should be erected prior to the hearing as early as possible and
convenient. The erection and continued maintenance of this sign, however, shall not be deemed a condition
precedent to the granting of any zoning variance or the holding of any public hearing.
E. JURISDICTION OF BOARD
When, in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of
the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the board may, in specific cases, after
public notice and public hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the following
variances and special exceptions to the regulations herein established and take action relative to the continuance
and discontinuance of a nonconforming use:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the city manager or other zoning administrator in the enforcement of this
ordinance;
(2) Interpret the intent of the zoning district map where uncertainty exists because the physical
features on the ground vary from those on the zoning district map and none of the rules set forth in
Section 3-C apply;
(3) Initiate on its motion or cause presented by interested property owners action to bring about the
discontinuance of a nonconforming use;
(4) Require the discontinuance of a nonconforming use under any plan whereby full value of the
structure can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general
character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this
ordinance;
(5) Permit the change of occupancy of a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use in
accordance with the provisions of Section 23 [25];
(6) Permit the enlargement of a nonconforming use in accordance with the provisions of Section
23 [25];
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/334
(7) Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure or building on the lot or tract occupied
by such building, provided such reconstruction does not, in the judgment of the board, prevent the
return of such property to a conforming use or increase the nonconformity of a nonconforming
structure and provided that such actions conform to the provisions of Section 23 [25];
(8) Require the vacation and demolition of a nonconforming structure which is deemed to be
obsolete, dilapidated or substandard; and
(9) Permit such variance such as the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot width, lot depth, coverage,
minimum setback standards, off-street parking, off-street loading regulations, lot area, maximum
height, or building, where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in
an unnecessary hardship, or where such variance is necessary to permit a specific parcel of land
which differs from other parcels of land in the same district by being of such area, shape or slope that
it cannot be developed in a manner commensurate with the development permitted upon other parcels
of land in the same district.
SECTION 28: AMENDMENTS
A. GENERAL
The zoning regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed. Such amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repeal shall be deemed to
amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the comprehensive plan of the city and shall become a part of such
comprehensive plan.
An amendment to this ordinance may be initiated by the request by owner or agent of owner of property to be
changed, the city manager, or the planning and zoning commission or city commission on its own motion when
it finds that the public may benefit from the consideration of such matter.
B. PROCEDURE
All requests for amendments to zoning district boundaries shall be submitted, together with required fees to the
city manager or his or her designated administrative official, whom shall cause notices to be sent and the petition
placed on the planning and zoning commission agenda. Requests for changes in zoning districts shall include the
proposed designation or designations for the area concerned. Alternative proposals may be made at the time of
filing the original request for amendment, however[,] all hearings and deliberations shall be limited to the
request as submitted by the applicant at the time of original filing.
C. SIGN POSTING
The city manager, or his or her designated administrative official, shall have at least one (1) sign erected on the
property to be rezoned which sign shall have a total area of at least four (4) square feet. Such sign or signs shall,
if possible, be located adjacent to streets. Such sign shall be erected on or before the first date of the first notice
to property owners and shall be removed immediately after final action by the city commission or when the
applicant withdraws the request, whichever comes first. The sign shall state that a zoning change has been
requested on that particular property and the telephone number of the city offices from where dates of public
hearings and more information about the zoning request may be obtained. The erection or continued
maintenance of signs shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the granting of any zoning change or holding
of any public hearing.
D. HEARINGS AND NOTICES
The city commission may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the
districts or the regulations herein established after receiving a report thereon from the planning and zoning
commission. A public hearing on such amendment, supplement, or change shall be held by both the planning
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/334
and zoning commission and the city commission. Notice of hearings shall be given by publication one (1) time
in the official newspaper of the city, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier
than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication. Publication of such change shall be accomplished by
publishing a descriptive caption of the proposed change.
Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in district boundaries shall be sent to all owners of
property, or to the person rendering the same for city taxes, located within the area of application and within two
hundred feet (200') of any property affected thereby, within not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is
held. Such notices may be served by using the last known address as listed on the latest approved city tax roll
and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail.
E. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION AND REPORT
The planning and zoning commission, after conducting a hearing on a zoning request, shall report its
recommendations on the zoning request to the city commission for their consideration. The planning and zoning
commission may recommend favorable approval of the request or that the request be denied, with or without
prejudice. Every proposal which is recommended favorably by the planning and zoning commission shall
automatically be forwarded to the city commission for public hearing and consideration. When the planning and
zoning commission determines that the proposal should be denied, it shall report the same to the city
commission and the applicant. A hearing before the city commission shall be set on a [an] application
recommended for denial only when an appeal is filed by the applicant with the city manager or his or her
designated administrative official provided such appeal is requested within fifteen (15) days of the planning and
zoning commission's decision.
F. APPLICATION NOT TO BE CONSIDERED FOR SIXTY (60) DAYS AFTER DENIAL OF REQUEST
FOR REZONING
No application for rezoning shall be considered within sixty (60) days of denial of a request by city commission
for the same classification on the same property.
G. PROTEST AGAINST CHANGE
In case of a protest against such change signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the land
included in such proposed change, or of the land within two hundred (200) feet thereof, such amendment shall
not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-quarter (3/4ths) of all the members of the city
commission present and qualified to vote.
H. COMMISSION ACTION ON APPLICATION
The proponent of any zoning change shall satisfy the city commission that either the general welfare of all the
city affected by the area to be changed will be enhanced, or that the property is unusable for the purposes
allowed under existing zoning. If such is proved to the commission's satisfaction, it may grant the requested
zoning change; or it may change the zone's designation of a portion of such property; or it may initiate a request
to consider changing all or a portion of such property to a district other than that requested and of a different
character.
I. SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED; PETITION FOR ZONING DISTRICT
CHANGE OR SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
When, in the opinion of the city manager or his or her designated administrative official, the planning and
zoning commission, the city commission, or the zoning board of adjustment, greater information is required
from the applicant concerning the nature, extent and impact of his or her request, than supplied with his or her
application for a change in zoning, variance, or specific use permit, in order for such commission or board to
properly review and evaluate all relevant factors thereof, said commission or board may require the applicant to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/334
submit a site plan and supporting documents conforming with all or a portion of the requirements set forth in this
subsection, prior to rendering a decision thereon.
The applicant is encouraged to meet with the city manager or his or her designated official in an informal work
session to ascertain the exact extent of plans and documents required, if any, prior to the city initiating the
advertisement for public hearing on the petition.
The general type and extent of plans and supporting documents which may be required of the petitioner include,
but are not necessarily limited to:
(1) Site Plan
Meeting all of the requirements of a “preliminary plat,” as described in the city's subdivision
regulations, except that topographic and drainage map information provisions may be waived by the
reviewing body when the inclusion of such data would not materially contribute to the necessary
evaluation of the project's petition. Additional site plan drawing information which the reviewing
body may require include:
(a) Existing and proposed zoning district;
(b) A tabular summary schedule indicating:
(1) The gross acreage and percent of each type of zoning category proposed;
(2) The gross acreage and percent of each type of land use proposed, with streets and
open space categories listed separately, and residential uses further stratified as to type,
i.e., single family, two-family, multifamily, townhouse, etc., including the total gross
project acreage;
(3) The gross residential density of each type of residential land use proposed,
expressed in dwelling units per acre; and based on net residential land use plus one-half
(1/2) of any abutting street only;
(4) The quantitative number of dwelling units proposed for each residential dwelling
type, i.e., single family, two-family, etc.; and
(5) Proposed maximum lot coverage by building types, i.e., “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, “D”,
“MF”, commercial, industrial, etc., expressed in terms of percent or floor area ratio of the
lot or site;
(c) General outline of extensive tree cover areas;
(d) Drainageways and 100-year floodplain limits;
(e) Proposed treatment for screening the perimeter of the land embraced by the petition,
including screening of internal separations of land use, where required;
(f) Proposed internal nonvehicular circulation linkages, such as: pedestrian paths and hike
trails; bike trails; and equestrian bridle paths, where applicable, including their
interrelationships with vehicular circulation systems and proposed handling of points of
conflict; and
(2) Architectural Drawings
Elevations, concept sketches, or renderings depicting building types and other significant
proposed improvements, including the treatment and use of open spaces, etc., where the submission
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/334
of such drawings would more clearly portray the nature and character of the applicant's land use and
development proposals; and
(3) Written Documents
In narrative form on 8-1/2" x 11" sheets, including:
(a) Statement(s) on planning objectives to be achieved in use/development proposal,
including a narrative description of the character of the proposed development and rationale
behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant, including use and ownership of
open spaces, etc.;
(b) Legal description of the total site area proposed for rezoning, development, or conditional
use permit;
(c) A development schedule indicating the approximate date(s) when construction of the
proposed development, and subsequent stages or phases thereof, if any, can be expected to
begin and be completed, to the best of the applicant's knowledge and belief;
(d) A statement as to the present and proposed ownership of the site or parcels thereof
embraced by the application;
(e) Economic feasibility and/or market analysis studies, when deemed necessary by the
reviewing body to adequately assess the necessity for zoning certain parcels to the sizes
indicated by the applicant, or to evaluate the need for granting a conditional use permit;
(f) Environmental assessment statement, prepared pursuant to the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969, and any subsequent amendments thereto, when deemed necessary by the
reviewing body to properly assess the impact of the proposed development/land use on the
existing environment;
(g) Statement(s) as to how and when the applicant proposes to provide water and sewer to the
development; and
(h) Signature, title and date of the applicant, at the conclusion of the written documents
certifying the information presented in the plans and supporting documents reflecting a
reasonably accurate portrayal of the general nature and character of the proposals.
SECTION 29: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be fined,
upon conviction, not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each day any violation or noncompliance
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law and the power of
injunction as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Section 211.012 and as may be amended, may be
exercised in enforcing this ordinance whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed.
In addition to the penalty provided, the right is hereby conferred and extended to any property owner owning
property in any district where such property may be affected by a violation of the terms of this ordinance, to
bring suit in such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law
or in equity for the protection of the rights of such property owners.
SECTION 30: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/334
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. It is not
intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties, provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon height of building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by
other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of this ordinance
shall govern.
SECTION 31: PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS UNDER
EXISTING ORDINANCES
By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless
specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses
shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent
and declared purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either
civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the existing zoning ordinance was hereby amended, shall be
discharged or affected by such amendment; but the prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties
or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such prior
ordinance has not been amended.
SECTION 32: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 33: SEVERABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clause[s] or phrases of this ordinance are severable and, if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the City Commission without
the incorporation in this ordinance of any such unconstitutional section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.
SECTION 34: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after its passage and publication of the caption, as the law
in such cases provides.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/10/08)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
Note–The chapter, article and section numbers and subsection designations in this appendix correspond to the
chapter, article, section and subsection numbers in the Code of Ordinances. However, to avoid confusion, the
article and section numbers appearing in this appendix are preceded by the letter “A.”
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/334
ARTICLE A1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES
Sec. A1.01.010 Code compliance
The fees to be charged for code compliance activities completed by city employees on private property are as
follows: $100.00 per lot, plus $50.00 per employee hour, or portion thereof, devoted to completing the code
compliance task, plus if heavy equipment is required by the city employees to complete the task, an additional
fee will be charged to cover the cost of using that equipment. (Ordinance 2010-15 adopted 9/28/10)
ARTICLE A1.05 LIBRARY
Division 1. Generally
Sec. A1.05.001 Use of materials
(g) (3) Administrative charge to defray costs of preparation and mailing of certified mail
letter(s): $5.00. (1995 Code, app. A, art. 3.000; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE A1.06 PARKS AND RECREATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. A1.06.003 Private use of facilities
Administrative fee required to reserve an area or facility: $10.00. (1995 Code, app. A, art. 4.000; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Scott Sloane Memorial Park Pavilion and Tiny Town Park Pavilion: $60.00 per four-hour period in addition to a
refundable rental deposit of $40.00.
Swimming Pool at Scott Sloane Memorial Park: The fee for the exclusive use of this facility shall be determined
based on the number of lifeguards needed and time used and that fee is determined on a case-by-case basis prior
to the reservation.
Skateboard Park: $50.00 per four-hour period in addition to a refundable fee of $30.00.
Nature Park Pavilion: $250.00 per four-hour period with a refundable deposit of $75.00.
Rental fees ensure the exclusive use of the pavilions only, not the exclusive use of the restrooms or other park
facilities.
(Ordinance 2010-02 adopted 1/26/10)
CHAPTER 2 ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A2.02 CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/334
Sec. A2.02.009 Responsibility for expenses
Impoundment recovery costs: $10.00 for the first 24-hour period and $5.00 per day thereafter. These fees are in
addition to any fines imposed. (Ordinance 2008-19 adopted 6/24/08)
Division 2. Dogs and Cats
Sec. A2.02.042 Dog or cat license
(a) (3) Issuance of dog or cat license: $2.00. (1995 Code, app. A, sec. 5.100; Ordinance adopting
Code)
CHAPTER 4 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. A4.01.001 Occupational licenses
(a) Licensing fees; trades and professions; new business: $10.00 (one-time fee).
Business license (other than sexually oriented business or game hall with level 1 gaming device):
$10.00 (one-time fee).
Business license (sexually oriented business or game hall with level 1 gaming device): $6,000.00
(annually).
Gaming device occupational tax: $15.00 per device (annually).
(Ordinance 2011-10, sec. 7, adopted 7/12/11)
ARTICLE A4.02 CARNIVALS
Sec. A4.02.001 Deposit; permit fee
(a) Refundable deposit: $50.00.
(b) Permit fee: $100.00.
(1995 Code, app. A, sec. 6.100(a); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. A4.02.002 Electrical connections
Inspection fee: $5.00. (1995 Code, app. A, sec. 6.100(b); Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE A4.03 TAXICABS
Sec. A4.03.002 License issuance
(d) Fee: $10.00. (1995 Code, app. A, sec. 6.200; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE A4.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sec. A4.04.006 Licenses and permits
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/334
ACTIVITY APPROPRIATE
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
CODE SECTION
ANNUAL FEE
Brewer's permit 12.01 et seq. $750.00
Nonresident brewer's permit 13.01 et seq. $750.00
Distiller's/rectifier's permit 14.01 et seq. $750.00
Class A winery permit 16.01 et seq. $37.50
Wine bottler's permit 18.01 et seq. $112.50
Wholesaler's permit 19.01 et seq. $937.50*
General class B wholesaler's
permit
20.01 et seq. $150.00
Local class B wholesaler's
permit
21.01 et seq. $37.50
Package store permit 22.01 et seq. $150.00
Local distributor's permit 23.01 et seq. $50.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/334
Wine only package store permit 24.01 et seq. $37.50
Wine and beer retailer's permit 25.01 et seq. $87.50
Wine and beer retailer's offpremises
permit
26.01 et seq. $30.00
Temporary wine and beer
retailer's permit
27.01 et seq. Exempt
Mixed beverage permit 28.01 et seq. $375.00****
Mixed beverage late hours
permit
29.01 et seq. Exempt
Daily temporary mixed
beverage permit
30.01 et seq. $25.00
Caterer's permit 31.01 et seq. Exempt
Private club registration permit 32.01 et seq. $375.00
Private club late hours permit 33.01 et seq. $375.00
Carrier permit 41.01 et seq. $15.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/334
Private carrier permit 42.01 et seq. $15.00
Local cartage permit 43.01 et seq. Exempt
Beverage cartage permit 44.01 et seq. $10.00
Storage permit 45.01 et seq. $50.00
Bonded warehouse permit 46.01 et seq. $75.00
Manufacturer's license 62.01 et seq. $375.00
General distributor's license 64.01 et seq. $150.00***
Local distributor's license 65.01 et seq. $37.50***
Branch distributor's license 66.01 et seq. $37.50***
Importer's license 67.01 et seq. $10.00
Importer's carrier's license 68.01 et seq. $10.00
Retail dealer's on-premises
license
69.01 et seq. $75.00***
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/334
Retail dealer's on-premises late
hours license
70.01 et seq. $125.00
Retail dealer's off-premises
license
71.01 et seq. $30.00***
Temporary licenses 72.01 et seq. $15.00
Agent's beer license 73.01 et seq. $5.00
* Applicable to all alcoholic beverages except beer.
** Applicable to all alcoholic beverages except beer and distilled spirits.
*** Applicable to beer only.
**** No fee required for first three years of operation.
(1995 Code, app. A, sec. 6.300; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE A4.07 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Sec. A4.07.008 Noncharitable solicitations permit
(c) Annual fee: $50.00. (1995 Code, app. A, art. 1.000(b))
Sec. A4.07.018 Outdoor retail sales and commercial promotion
(c) Annual fee: $50.00. (1995 Code, app. A, art. 1.000(b))
ARTICLE A4.10 MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
Sec. A4.10.002 License
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/334
(b) Annual license fee: $100.00 per year or fraction thereof. Fee for transfer of such license: $25.00. (1995
Code, app. A, art. 9.000)
ARTICLE A4.11 WRECKER BUSINESSES
Sec. A4.11.007 License number and permit fee
Nonrefundable application fee: $25.00.
Annual permit fee: $500.00.
Annual inspection/reinspection fee: $100.00.
Court filing fee pursuant to Texas Occupations Code section 2308.451: $20.00.
Sec. A4.11.012 Maximum charges
Service charge for light-duty vehicle nonconsent tow (vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of less than 10,000
pounds): $150.00.
Service charge for medium-duty vehicle nonconsent tow (vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of 10,000–25,000
pounds): $500.00.
Service charge for heavy-duty vehicle nonconsent tow (vehicles weighing more than 26,000 pounds): $750.00.
Storage fee: A maximum daily storage fee of $10.00 may be imposed for each day or part of a day that a vehicle
remains stored. The time shall be computed as provided in section 14(c) of the Vehicle Storage Facility Act. The
above fee shall not apply to the storage of vehicles that are longer than 25 feet, which shall instead be subject to
the fee provided for such vehicles in section 14(c) of the Vehicles Storage Facility Act.
Each nonconsent tow charge listed above includes 100 miles relating to the round-trip mileage to the vehicle
location and back to the wrecker service yard or towing destination.
(Ordinance 2009-08 adopted 7/14/09)
ARTICLE A4.12 REFUSE TRANSFER STATIONS
Sec. A4.12.001 Application fees, inspection fees, and host fee
Nonrefundable specific use permit application fee: $1,000.00.
Annual inspection/reinspection fee: $500.00.
Fee to the city: Applicant understands and agrees that it will pay a fee in the amount of $0.15 per ton (base rate)
of waste material that is transported from the transfer station located on the referenced property, to the city.
The payments shall be made within 45 days after the end month in which they were transported from the
property. The $0.15 base rate per ton, for all tons transferred out in the payment period, shall be increased per
the following sliding scale:
Per Ton Base Rate Daily Average of Tons Per Day
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/334
$0.00 0–1,000
$0.05 1,001–1,250
$0.10 1,251–1,500
$0.15 1,501–1,750
$0.20 1,751–2,000
$0.25 2,001–2,250
$0.35 2,251–Unlimited
The payment period shall be the calendar days calculated as Monday through Friday as whole days and Saturday
as one half-day and will deduct observed holidays. A typical month will have 22 days. For example only: in a
given month that has 22.5 days and which 30,000 tons of waste is transported from the transfer station, the rate
would be 30,000 tons divided by 22.5 days, equals 1,333 tons per day. The rate for all 30,000 tons would be
$0.15 plus $0.10 equals $0.25 multiplied by 30,000 tons which will result in a $7,500.00 payment for that
payment period.
The base rates listed above will increase 3% every five (5) years beginning five (5) years after the transfer
station commences receiving waste and continuing thereafter until the specific use permit is terminated or
revoked.
(Ordinance 2009-17 adopted 12/1/09)
CHAPTER 11 TAXATION
ARTICLE A11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. A11.01.001 Fee for tax certificates
Fee for each tax certificate prepared by city tax collector: $10.00. (1995 Code, app. A, art. 2.000)
CHAPTER 12 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/334
ARTICLE A12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. A12.01.001 Special fee for defensive driving course completion
(a) Court cost fee: $20.00. (1995 Code, app. A, art. 7.000; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. A12.01.002 Special fee for administration of enforcement of Chapter 702 of the Texas
Transportation Code
(a) Special “scofflaw” fee: $20.00. (Ordinance 2011-23 adopted 12/6/11)
CHAPTER 13 UTILITIES
ARTICLE A13.03 WATER AND SEWERS
Division 2. Rates, Charges and Billing
Sec. A13.03.036 Water rates
Monthly charge for water:
(1) Residential rates. Residential customer rates shall be based on the number of units serviced by
the customer's water meter.
(A) For residential customers inside the city limits the rates shall be:
(i) For volume of water up to 3,000 gallons times the number of units: $19.25.
(ii) All water over 3,000 gallons times the number of units: $3.00 per 1,000 gallons.
(B) For residential customers outside the city limits the rates shall be:
(i) For volume of water up to 3,000 gallons times the number of units: $24.06.
(ii) All water over 3,000 gallons times the number of units: $3.75 per 1,000 gallons.
(C) For residential customers inside the city limits which are serviced by a single meter for
not more than one unit and have submitted a vacation plan application which has been approved
by the city, for each billing month billed under the vacation plan, the rates shall be:
(i) For volume of water up to 1,500 gallons: $10.00.
(ii) All water over 1,500 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $9.50.
(2) Commercial rates.
(A) Commercial category NC-1.
(i) For commercial customers in this category and inside the city limits the rates shall
be:
a. First 3,000 gallons: $22.50.
b. All water over 3,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $4.90.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/334
(ii) For commercial customers in this category and outside the city limits the rates shall
be:
a. First 3,000 gallons: $29.25.
b. All water over 3,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $6.13.
(B) Commercial category NC-2.
(i) For commercial customers in this category and inside the city limits the rates shall
be:
a. First 10,000 gallons: $53.45.
b. All water over 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $4.90.
(ii) For commercial customers in this category and outside the city limits the rates shall
be:
a. First 10,000 gallons: $69.48.
b. All water over 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $6.13.
(C) Commercial category NC-3.
(i) For commercial customers in this category and inside the city limits the rates shall
be:
a. First 40,000 gallons: $198.25.
b. All water over 40,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $4.90.
(ii) For commercial customers in this category and outside the city limits the rates shall
be:
a. First 40,000 gallons: $247.84.
b. All water over 40,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $6.13.
(3) Master meter/retail rates. Master meter/retail rates shall be based on the total number of
occupancy spaces contained within the parcel of land serviced by the retail customer's meter. A 1,100
gallon minimum consumption per space is assumed. A volume/peak demand and fire protection
demand (fire protection cost) increase is included.
(A) For master meter/retail customers inside the city limits, the rates shall be calculated using
the following formula:
(i) For volume of water up to 1,100 gallons times the number of occupancy spaces:
$8.75 per occupancy space.
(ii) For all water over 1,100 gallons times the number of occupancy spaces: $4.80 per
1,000 gallons.
(B) For master meter/retail customers outside the city limits, the rates shall be calculated
using the following formula:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/334
(i) For volume of water up to 1,100 gallons times the number of occupancy spaces:
$10.94 per occupancy space.
(ii) For all water over 1,100 gallons times the number of occupancy spaces: $5.99 per
1,000 gallons.
(C) A master meter/retail customer which is a mobile home park shall, for billing purposes,
be considered to have 80% of its total occupancy spaces, rounded up to the next whole
occupancy space, during the billing months of January, February, November, and December.
(D) For the months of March, April, May, June, July, August, September and October, a
master meter/retail customer that is a mobile home park may, for billing purposes, be
considered to have a number of occupancy spaces equal to the number occupancy spaces
actually occupied on September 15th of the prior year. A retail customer must submit not later
than September 30th a statement showing the number of spaces actually occupied on September
15th. The adjustment to the number of spaces considered for billing purposes provided by this
section shall only apply in the year following the submission of such a statement. If a master
meter/retail customer fails to provide this statement, the city will assume full occupancy and the
retail customer will be billed accordingly. A master meter/retail customer that is a mobile home
park shall not, under any circumstances, be considered to have fewer than 10 occupancy spaces.
(4) Institutional rates. Institutional rates are based on the number of students enrolled and the
number of faculty and staff employed. A 100-gallon minimum consumption per person is assumed. A
volume/peak demand and fire protection demand (fire protection cost) increase is included. A
minimum of 75 persons per campus is incorporated. For institutional customers, the rates shall be
calculated using the following formula:
(A) For volume of water up to 100 gallons times the number of persons: $2.00 per person.
(B) For all water over 100 gallons times the number of persons: $4.80 per 1,000 gallons.
Sec. A13.03.037 Sewer rates
Monthly sewer charges:
(1) Residential rates. Residential customer rates shall be based on the number of units serviced by
the customer's water meter.
(A) For residential customers inside the city limits, the rates shall be:
(i) For volume of water up to 3,000 gallons of water usage times the number of units:
$17.25.
(ii) For volume of water over 3,000 gallons times the number of units: $3.55 per 1,000
gallons.
(B) For residential customers outside the city limits, the rates shall be:
(i) For volume of water up to 3,000 gallons of water usage times the number of units:
$21.56.
(ii) For volume of water over 3,000 gallons times the number of units: $4.44 per 1,000
gallons.
(C) For residential customers inside the city limits, which are serviced by a single meter for
not more than one unit and have submitted a vacation plan application which has been approved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/334
by the city, for each billing month billed under the vacation plan, the rates shall be:
(i) First 1,500 gallons of water usage: $12.00.
(ii) All over 1,500 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $8.50.
(2) Commercial rates.
(A) Commercial category NC-1.
(i) For commercial customers in this category and inside the city limits, the rates shall
be:
a. First 3,000 gallons of water usage: $20.50.
b. All water usage over 3,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $3.60.
(ii) For commercial customers in this category and outside the city limits, the rates shall
be:
a. First 3,000 gallons of water usage: $26.65.
b. All water usage over 3,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $4.68.
(B) Commercial category NC-2.
(i) For commercial customers in this category and inside the city limits, the rates shall
be:
a. First 10,000 gallons of water usage: $46.80.
b. All water usage over 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $3.60.
(ii) For commercial customers in this category and outside the city limits, the rates shall
be:
a. First 10,000 gallons of water usage: $60.84.
b. All water usage over 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $4.68.
(C) Commercial category NC-3.
(i) For commercial customers in this category and inside the city limits, the rates shall
be:
a. First 40,000 gallons of water usage: $163.25.
b. All water usage over 40,000 gallons of water usage, per 1,000 gallons: $3.60.
(ii) For commercial customers in this category and outside the city limits, the rates shall
be:
a. First 40,000 gallons of water usage: $212.07.
b. All water usage over 40,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons: $4.68.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/334
(3) Master meter/retail rates. Master meter/retail rates shall be based on the total number of
occupancy spaces contained within the parcel of land serviced by the retail customer's meter. A 900-
gallon minimum consumption per space is assumed.
(A) For master meter/retail customers inside the city limits the rates shall be:
(i) For volume of water up to 900 gallons times the number of occupancy spaces:
$10.00 per occupancy space.
(ii) For all water over 900 gallons times the number of occupancy spaces: $3.45 per
1,000 gallons.
(B) For master meter/retail customers outside the city limits the rates shall be:
(i) For volume of water up to 900 gallons times the number of occupancy spaces:
$11.00 per occupancy space.
(ii) For all water over 900 gallons times the number of occupancy spaces: $4.31 per
1,000 gallons.
(C) A master meter/retail customer which is a mobile home park shall, for billing purposes,
be considered to have 80% of its total occupancy spaces, rounded up to the next whole
occupancy space, during the billing months of January, February, November, and December.
(D) For the months of March, April, May, June, July, August, September, and October, a
master meter/retail customer that is a mobile home park may, for billing purposes, be
considered to have a number of occupancy spaces equal to the number occupancy spaces
actually occupied on September 15th of the prior year. A retail customer must submit not later
than September 30th a statement showing the number of spaces actually occupied on September
15th. The adjustment to the number of spaces considered for billing purposes provided by this
section shall only apply in the year following the submission of such a statement. If a master
meter/retail customer fails to provide this statement, the city will assume full occupancy and the
retail customer will be billed accordingly. A master meter/retail customer that is a mobile home
park shall not, under any circumstances, be considered to have fewer than 10 occupancy spaces.
(4) Institutional rates. Institutional rates are based on the number of students enrolled and the
number of faculty and staff employed. A 100-gallon minimum consumption per person is assumed. A
minimum of 75 persons per campus is incorporated.
(A) For volume of water up to 100 gallons times the number of persons: $3.00 per person.
(B) For all water over 100 gallons times the number of persons: $3.45 per 1,000 gallons.
Sec. A13.03.038 Water connection fees
(a) Fee for 5/8" and 1" connections:
(1) Inside the city limits: $300.00.
(2) Outside the city limits: $600.00.
(b) Fee for 2", 3", 4" and 6" connections:
(1) Inside the city limits: 110% of the cost of connection.
(2) Outside the city limits: 200% of the cost of connection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/334
Sec. A13.03.039 Sanitary sewer connection fees
(a) Fee for a 4" connection:
(1) Inside the city limits: $300.00.
(2) Outside the city limits: $600.00.
(b) Fee for 6", 8", and 10" connections:
(1) Inside the city limits: 110% of the cost of connection.
(2) Outside the city limits: 200% of the cost of connection.
Sec. A13.03.040 Deposits and activation fees
(a) Water meter deposit required. The amount of the deposit is based on the size of the meter as follows:
(1) 5/8" meter (residential customers): $75.00.
(2) 5/8" meter (all other customers): $100.00.
(3) 1" meter deposit fee (residential customers): $100.00.
(4) 1" meter deposit fee (all other customers): $150.00.
(5) 2" meter deposit fee: $200.00.
(6) 2" turbo meter deposit fee: $205.00.
(7) 2" comp meter deposit fee: $225.00.
(8) 3" turbo meter deposit fee: $225.00.
(9) 3" comp meter deposit fee: $300.00.
(10) 4" turbo meter deposit fee: $350.00.
(11) 4" comp meter deposit fee: $400.00.
(12) 6" turbo meter deposit fee: $600.00.
(13) 6" comp meter deposit fee: $850.00.
(b) Activation fee. $20.00.
Sec. A13.03.041 Payment of bills
(c) Termination of service.
(1) Delinquent account reconnect fee: $10.00.
(2) Reconnection of service completed after regular working hours: $25.00.
(Ordinance 2012-11 adopted 9/11/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/334
Sec. A13.03.043 Extra charge on water accounts for emergency services, firefighting and public safety
equipment
(a) Schedule of charges which the city shall bill to the holder of each of its water accounts:
(1) Residential accounts (single-family, duplex, triplex and fourplex): $1.00/month per unit.
(2) Multifamily accounts (five or more units): $0.50/month per unit.
(3) Commercial accounts: $2.00/month.
(4) Churches: $2.00/month.
(5) Schools: $15.00/month per campus.
(6) Mobile home/RV parks:
(A) 1–25 unit park:
(i) $15.00/month (October–March).
(ii) $7.00/month (April–September).
(B) 26–100 unit park:
(i) $20.00/month (October–March).
(ii) $10.00/month (April–September).
(C) Above 100 unit park:
(i) $75.00/Month (October–March).
(ii) $35.00/Month (April–September).
(Ordinance 97-08, sec. 1, adopted 11/20/97)
Sec. A13.03.044 Utility expansion fee
(a) Utility expansion fee per water and/or wastewater connection: $300.00. (1995 Code, app. A, sec. 8.200;
Ordinance adopting code)
ARTICLE A13.05 SOLID WASTE
Sec. A13.05.003 Garbage collection
(h) Additional fee for collection of garbage placed outside container: $3.35 per minute. (Ordinance 2006-13
adopted 9/7/06)
Sec. A13.05.005 Charges assessed
(a) Charges for collection, removal and disposal of garbage and brush within the city limits
Type of Account *Type of
Container
# of
Containers
Frequency
of Pickups
Solid
Waste Fee
Brush
Fee**
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/334
Per Week
RESIDENTIAL:
Residential 1 1 1 $12.50 $8.00**
Extra container 1 1 1 $5.00 N/A
Housing authority 1 1 1 $12.50 $8.00**
Vacation plan 1 1 1 $6.00 $5.00
Duplex 1 2 1 $25.00 $16.00**
Triplex 1 3 1 $37.50 $16.00**
Fourplex 1 4 1 $50.00 $24.00**
Outside city limits 1 1 1 $16.50 N/A
Duplex - outside 1 2 1 $33.00 N/A
Triplex - outside 1 3 1 $49.50 N/A
Fourplex - outside 1 4 1 $70.00 N/A
Type of Account *Type of
Container
# of
Containers
Frequency
of Pickups
Per Week
Solid
Waste Fee
Brush
Fee**
CHURCHES:
Very low volume 1 1 1 $14.50 $7.00**
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/334
Extra container 1 1 1 $5.00 N/A
Low volume 1 2 1 $23.50 $7.00**
High volume 2 1 1 $38.00 $7.00**
COMMERCIAL:
Low to medium volume 1 1 1 $14.50 ***
1 1 2 $29.00 ***
1 1 3 $43.50 ***
1 1 4 $58.00 ***
1 1 5 $72.50 ***
Extra container 1 1 1 $6.00 ***
Dumpsters
$65.00
COMMERCIAL:
High volume
commercial
2 1 1 $38.00 ***
2 2 1 $76.00 ***
2 $152.00 ***
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/334
3 $228.00 ***
4 $304.00 ***
5 $380.00 ***
2 3 1 $114.00 ***
2 $228.00 ***
3 $342.00 ***
4 $456.00 ***
5 $570.00 ***
2 4 1 $152.00 N/A
2 $304.00 N/A
3 $456.00 N/A
4 $608.00 N/A
5 $760.00 N/A
2 5 1 $190.00 N/A
2 $380.00 N/A
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/334
3 $570.00 N/A
4 $760.00 N/A
5 $950.00 N/A
Type of Account *Type of
Container
# of
Containers
Frequency
of Pickups
Per Week
Solid
Waste Fee
Brush
Fee**
High volume
commercial 2 6 1 $228.00 N/A
2 $456.00 N/A
3 $684.00 N/A
4 $912.00 N/A
5 $1,140.00 N/A
2 7 1 $266.00
2 $532.00
3 $798.00
4 $1,064.00
5 $1,330.00
2 8 1 $304.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/334
2 $608.00
3 $912.00
4 $1,216.00
5 $1,520.00
2 9 1 $342.00
2 $684.00
3 $1,026.00
4 $1,368.00
5 $1,710.00
2 10 1 $380.00
2 $760.00
3 $1,140.00
4 $1,520.00
5 $1,900.00
* Container classifications:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/334
1 = Sixty-four/ninety-six-gallon trash receptacle provided by city.
2 = 300-gallon container provided by city.
** Brush pickup is offered to customers inside city limits. Fees listed are for low
volume brush up to 1/16 volume of the brush per unit that can be deposited in
brush truck bed.
*** Minimum brush pickup fee ranging from $7.00 to $40.00 depending on the volume
of brush. Customer will be billed extra fees for any brush picked up based on cost
plus ten percent.
Container value = For police report purposes if a container is reported as stolen the value
is $65.00.
(Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 9/13/11)
(c) Deposit when garbage and brush collection services are available but no water service is available:
Residential customers: $35.00.
Commercial customers: $75.00.
Account activation fee for accounts receiving garbage and brush pickup services only at time of setup: $10.00.
(Ordinance 2006-13 adopted 9/7/06)
CHAPTER 14 ZONING
ARTICLE A14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. A14.01.001 Zoning fees and charges
(a) Schedule of fees:
Zoning change request: $150.00.
Specific use permit application (other than sexually oriented business or game hall with level 1
gaming device): $150.00.
Specific use permit application sexually oriented business or game hall with level 1 gaming device:
$3,000.00.
Zoning board of adjustment appeal: $150.00.
(Ordinance 2011-10, sec. 7, adopted 7/12/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/334